Autobiography of Peter Cartwright

Peter Cartwright, William Peter Strickland

 

iéarbatb Eihinitp fitbool

1|E.!|t

 

ANDOVER-HARVARD THEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY

MDCCCCX

CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS

Gift of
William Wallace Faun
19 February 1945

Digitized by GOOSE

Digitized by GOOSE

Digitized by GOOSE

Digitized by GOOSE

g‘~\.~AI;

3?

Digitized by GOOSE

AUTOBIOGRAPHY

0]'

PETER QABTWRIGHT,
' THE BACKWOODS PREACHER.

EDITED BY

W. P. STRICKLAND.

int-zvz-:.\"rn Tll0L'SA1\'D.

Nun»-flark:
PUBLISHED BY CARLTON dz PORTER,

200 xunnsnnt-srnnnr.
1857.

 

 

ANDOVER-HARVARD
in Ex 2 5,: :a1CAL LIBRARY
C.~'..;.:.E:1< LDGE. MASS.

\-IL/\".a-5.4-I\.a\.a-t

 

.-.-{‘}u/'\f\.r'\,t‘-../‘~J‘-./\/'\l'K_‘\.1‘\/\.l\/‘\_a‘\F\.l'NJ‘J'\- \.l'&r'

 

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856, by

CARLTON & PORTER,
in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the Southern District of New-York.

J\PJNf‘ 

   

 

r-cou~rO'

PREFACE.

 

For: many years past, and especially during
the last ten or twelve, I have been almost unceasingly importuned to Write out a history of
my life, as one among the oldest Methodist traveling preachers West of the mountains. This
would necessarily connect with it a history of
the rise and progress of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the great valley of the Mississippi. And surely a Work of this kind, Written
by a competent historiographer, who had kept
himself posted, or had kept a journal of his life,
and the many thrilling incidents connected
with the history of the Church, or the life of
a pioneer traveling preacher, could not fail to
interest the Church and many of her friends,
and would rescue from oblivion many, very

many incidents that are now lost, and gone
forever beyond the reach of the historian's pen.

4 rnnracn.

I have regretted through life that some of
my cotemporaries, who were much better qualified for the task than I am, did not Write out
such a Work as is contemplated in this imperfect sketch. Had -I seriously thought of
sending such a Work into the World, I I should
have tried hard to have beenlbetter prepared.
But it must be remembered that many of us
early traveling preachers, Who entered the vast
wilderness of the West at an early day, had

little or no education; no books, and no time

to read or study them if We could have had
them. We had no colleges, nor even a respectable common school, Within hundreds of miles
of us. Old Dyke or Diiworth Was our spelling book; and What little We did learn, as We
grew up, and the means of education increased
among us, We found, to our hearts' content, that
we had to unlearn, and this was the hardest

work of all.

And now that I am old and Well stricken in
years, it has been, and is, my abiding conviction that I cannot Write a book that will be
respectable, or one that will be Worth reading;
but I have reluctantly yielded to the many
solicitations of my friends, and I am conscious
that there must be many imperfections and

rlunaucn. 5

inaccuracies in the work. I have no books to
guide me; my memory is greatly at fault; ten
thousand interesting -facts have escaped my
recollection; names and places have passed

, from me which cannot be recalled; and I fear

that many scenes and incidents, as they now
occur to my recollection, will be added to, or
diminished from.

Moreover, as I Well understand that I have
been considered constitutionally an eccentric
minister, thousands of the thrilling incidents
that have gained publicity, and have been attributed to me, when they are not found in my
book will create disappointment. But I trust
their place will be supplied by a true version,
and though some of them may not be as marvelous, may nevertheless be quite as interesting.
I have many to record that have not seen the
light, which will be quite as thrilling as any
that have been narrated, and their truthfulness
will make them more so. V

Some of our beloved bishops, book agents,
editors, and old men, preachers and private
members, as Well as a host of our young, strong
men and ministers, who are now actively engaged in building up the Church, have urged
rne to undertake this sketch of my life, and I

3 PREFACE;

have not felt at liberty to decline', but send it
out with all its imperfections, hoping that it
may in some way, and to some extent, conduce
to the interests of the Redeemer's kingdom,
and do more than merely gratify an, idle curi-'
osity, or offend the fastidious .taste of some of
our present more highly favored and better educated ministers, Who enjoy the many glorious
advantages of books, a better education, and
improved state of society, from which We as
early pioneers were almost Wholly excluded.
Right here I wish to say, (I hope Without
the charge of egotism,) when I consider the
insurmountable‘ disadvantages and difficulties
that the early pioneer Methodist preachers
labored under in spreading the Gospel in these
Western wilds in the great valley of the Mississippi, and contrast the disabilities which surrounded them on every hand, with the glorious
human advantages that are enjoyed by their
present successors, it is confoundingly miraculous to me that our modern preachers cannot
preach better, and do more good than they do.Many nights, in early times, the itinerant had
to camp out, Without fire or food for man or
beast.' 0111f pocket Bible, Hymn Book, and
Discipline constituted our library. It is true

rnmrncm. '1‘

we could not, many of us, conjugate a verb or
parse a' sentence, and murdered the king's
English almost every" lick. But I there was a
Divine unction attended the Word preached,
and thousands' fell under' the "mighty ‘power of
God, and thus the Methodist Episcopal Church
was planted firmly in this Western Wilderness,
and many glorious signs have followed, and
will follow, to the end of time.

i I will here state, that, at an early period of
my ministry, I commenced keeping a' journal,
and kept it up for several years, till at length
several of our early missionaries to the Natchez
country returned, and many of them, I found,
were keeping a journal of their lives and
labors, and it seemed to me We were outdoing
the thing, and under this conviction I threw
my manuscript journals to the moles and bats.
This act of my life I have deeply regretted, for
if‘ I had persisted in journalizing, I could now
avail myself ‘of ‘many interesting facts, dates,
names, and circumstances that would greatly
aid me in_ my sketch.

I know it is impossible for my friends to
realize the embarrassments I labor under, for
the want of some safe guide to my failing and
treacherous memory. I therefore ask great in8 ~ PREFACE.dulgence from any and all who may chance to
read this imperfect sketch, and pray that our
kind Saviour may forgive any inaccuracies or
errors that it may contain. If I had my ministerial life to live over again, my present conviction is that I would scrupulously keep a
journal. But this cannot be; therefore I must
submit. A _
And now, in the conclusion of this introduction, I will say, I ask forgiveness of God for
all the errors of this Work, and all the errors
of my Whole life, especially of my ministerial
life. I also ask for the forgiveness of the
Methodist Episcopal Church, as one of her
unworthy ministers, for any .wrongs I may
have done to her, or to the World. I also most
sincerely ask the prayers of the Church, that
while my sun is fast declining, and must soon
set to rise on earth no more, I may have a
peaceful and happy end, and that I may meet
any that I may have been the instrument of
doing good to, with all my dear brethren, safe

in heaven, to praise God together forever.

Amen.
PETER CARTWRIGHT.

PLEASANT Puma, Iu.., 1856.

CONTENTS.

 

OHAPTER I.

His Birth —Parents remove to Kentucky—Dsngers and Difliculties of the
Journe —Halt at Camp Defeat—His Father shoots an Indian — Escape
of a 'te Man from the Indians—His Com ions shot—Arrival at
Crab 0rchard—Massacre of seven Families— ursuit of the IndiansTheir Slaughter—Perils of the Early Settlers —Fertility and Resource
Of   o o o e ssseessessssosassseseeossssesosesossosseeoosssoaeseesseoseosoe  10

CHAPTER H.

Settlement in Lincoln 's Conn , Kentucky — Methodist Ministers —Parents
remove to Logan County, entucky — Rogue's Harbor— The " Regulators" - Native Luxuries -- Saltpeter Caves — Advantages of Navigation
— Falls into Bad Habits — Is sent to School — Makes little Progress —
Fm   TemherIOOIIOOOOOOOIIO«lOIOOOOOOOCOIOOIOOOOOIIIIIUOOOOOOO O O O I O I O I O 00000000 23

CHAPTER HI.

Increase of Popu1ation—Danger of Extremes in Docti-ine— Sacramental
Meeting —Great Revival—First Camp-meeting—Presb terians censured for engagirlig in it— Origin of the " New Lights" — heir Leaders

an

—" Republic thodists"—The Shakers—Waut of Ministers severely £eltOIOIOO I O O I O O IOOOOO I O O O 0IOOIOOOrllIOOOIOOIOIOOIIOOOOI00OOOOOOIOIOOOOOIOOIIOOOIOOOOIOO 29
U CHAPTER Iv.

Goes to a Dance —Is convicted —Obliged to leave his Business—Thought
to be Insane—His Convictions are Strengthened—Attends a Sacramental Meeting, and is Converted—Joins the Methodist Episcopal
Church—Organization of the Western Conference b Bishop Asbury—
Early Western Itinerants — First Secession - Wilson ee — The Pet Lamb
—'I'aking up the Cross—Happy Conversion—Mr. Lee's Death...... 34

CHAPTER V.

Wide-s read Revival in the West—Rise of Camp-meetings—Methodists
and byterians unite in the Work -Cam_p-ground AccommodationsGreat Extravagances ong the Presbyterian:--'I‘he Presbytery gr-mt
Licenses contrary to t e " Confession of Faith"— Some are censured,

some suspended, and others expelled--They propose to join» the Meth10 CONTENTS

odist Episcogal Church—Pro osal declined—Formation of the " Cumberland Pres yterian Church' —S littin the Difi'ereiice —The Jerks-—
Horsewhip in escaped—Dreadfu Deat —Fatal Delusions—Trouble
with the h ers—Debates with them— Numbers received into the
Church —Organizes a Circuit .......  .......  ..................... .. Page 45

CHAPTER VI.

Attends numerous Cam meetings — Opposers overcome — Meets Bishop
Asbury —Receives an xhorter s License —Removes to Lewiston County,
Illinois —Enters an Academy — Exhorts large Congregations and athers
a Class — Suffers Persecution — Ducks his Tormentors — Leaves Sc ool —
Forms a Circuit — Good Success — Gives up the World — Travels Red
River Circuit — First Sermon — Its Effect — Transferred to Waynesville
Circuit — Revival at Stockton Valley — Baptist Proselyters -— They entice
his Converts —His Scheme to recover them — Is crowned with Success
— Or anizes a Society — Increase in the Western Conference — Is receive into the Traveling Connection.... ......  ......  ......  56

CHAPTER ‘VII.

Conference of 1804—Travels Salt River and Shelbyville Circuits-— Simlicity in Dress of early Methodists—Studies with Mr. M'Kendree —
Profits much by his Instructions —- Duties of Presiding Elders— Pioneer
Methodist Preachers—An educated Ministry—Meets one of the " Regular Graduates" —Confounds him — A striking Illustration —— Dan er of
Congregationalism in the Church —Secular Ofices should be fil ed by
La en — Evil Effects of the present System—Conference of 1805W' liam M'Kendree elected President.......................................... 74

CHAPTER VIII.

Appointment to Scioto Circuit—Favored with good Superintendents — A
runken Minister — Strangle Apoliigy — Powerful Awakenings — Aflicting Dispensation—Father eel— is Eccentricity cured—Large Cam
meetin£r— The Rowdies troublesome — A drunken Magistrate —A knoc down umeiit — The Meeting pro esses — Cheering Results —— James
Axley — cene at the Governor s Ta le — A useful Preacher......  84

CHAPTER IX.

Starts for the Conference of 1806—Increase of Membership —A new District — Meager Salary — Is ordained Deacon b Bishop Asbury— Sent
to Marietta Circuit — A Colony of Yankees — ard Appointment — The
Halcyon Church — Brimstone Angels — A vile Impostor — Deluded
Fanatics — Want of an Outfit — Goes Home — Timely Assistance — A
Friend in Need — A Generous Landlord — Singular Conversion — Arrives
at Home — New Outfit — Starts afresh — Conference of 1807 — A pointed to Barren Circuit — Dyinv Convert -— A knotty Case — A ectin
Scene—Methodism obtains a ooting....... .......  ....  ........ .. 9

CHAPTER X.

Poverty of Preachers —Enters into Matrimony—Conference of 1808Ordained Elder_by Bishop M'Kendree—Father's Death-Hasleave of
Absence for a Time —Returns to the Regular Work at the Conference
of 1809—Appointed to Livingston Circuit—Holds a Camp-meeting-..

CONTENTS. 11

Good Results—A bigoted "Dunker"--'1‘urns Methodist—Bonght by
the Baptists—Tries the Shakers—Objects to hard Work ——Resorts to
the New ° hts-Last Session of the Western Conference in 1811Increase of embership—First delegated General Conferenee—Division of the Western Conference—Goes to Christian Circuit, Tennessee
Conference—Glorious Revivals —g-Overcomes PreEdice—New Appointment—Another Cam meeting—A Methodist 't—Preaches at Red
River —%posed by agresbyterian Minister—Results of Opposition —
Forms a ciety... .....  ...........  ........  Page 111

CHAPTER XI.

First Session of Tennessee Conference in 1812 — Made Presiding Elder by
Bisho Asbury — Objects to taking the Oflice — Travels Wabash District
— Ho ds several Camp-meetings -- Agitation on the Slavery Question —
Testimony of the Church against it — Harm done by Rabid Abolitiouists
— Breckenridge Camp-meeting — An impudent Dandy — Threat of a
Horsewhipping — Dand escapes with a Duckin — Decrease of Membership at Conference of 1 13 — Causes thereof — eturned to Green River,
formerly Wabash District —New Fields of Labor — A Baptist GoliathSlander on the Methodists — Vulgar Comparisons — Goliath Defeated —
Ir; blown to Never-— A Whisky-drinking Preacher — Charging 

ceesoaeeooeeoeoooeeeeesonesoeooeeesseeeeseeeseeueaeeeeeee e e e e seeeseeeeeeeee e e o o eeeeeoes

do

CHAPTER XII.

fennessee Conference of 1814 —Bishops Asbury and M'Kendree —Their
Ministerial Labors — Privations of the Preachers —A Fatted Calf —
Camp-meeting at Christian Circnit—Disturbance from Rowdies — A
stroke of Policy—A Disturber roached — Another soused, and afterward
converted--T a String of Frogs—An enraged Father—Evil Surmisinfi—His Conviction and Conversion—A singular Dream—Its Fulent—Baptist Proselyter — Extended Argument—An unanswerable
Question ..............  ............................  .....  ......  139

CHAPTER XIII.

Bishop Asb attends the Tennessee Conference of 1815—His feeble
Health-— ection of Delegates to General Conference -—The Bisho 's
Advice to them —His Endeavors to reach the General Conference-- creasing Weakness —Death and Burial — Reinterment—E itaph —
The Bishop's Talents—His Knowledge of Character—-Gener Conference of 1816- Difficulties of Travel—Election of Bisho s George and
Roberts—A Year of Prosperity —Introduction of Pro-s avery "Feeling
into the Church— Injurious Effects —Clamors for Lay Re resentation
first heard—They increase at the Conference of 1820—0t er Radical
Measures then brou ht forward —-Presiding Elders to be Elected —An
enterin Wed e——Bgishop Soule's O position—Suspension of the Elective Rn e — armon destroyed in t e Church —Expulsion of the Radix
cals — Peace restore — Formation of the Methodist Protestant Church
—Schisms ori inate among the Ministers —Examples cited —Wretched
Policy of the hurch South on Slavery........................................ 152

CHAPTER XIV.

Sessions of Western Conferences for 'I816—Is appointed to Christian
Circuit-—New Conference formed-Introduction of Methodism into
Indiana‘ and Illinois-—Increase of Members and Mxmsters-Glorious

12 oo1v'rmr'rs.

RevivaIs—Preaches to Slsves—Nuinbers converted -'--Want of faithful
Preachers among them —— Quarterage not twenty-five Cents — Hospitable
Farmer — Nothing lost by entertaining Ministers— Meets with a
Wealthy Wesleyan — He builds a Church —Dedicated b a Protracted
Meeting— A great‘ Concourse attends -— Several converte — Scarcity of
Bibles--Organization of Bible Society ............  ....  .. Page 166

~ CHAPTER Xv; S

Earth uake of 1812 — Consequent Excitement -— Numbers join the Church,
of w om many fall away— Is stationed on Red River Circuit at Conference of 1817 —Preaches to a single Hearer— His Fame is spread abroad-V-:
Draws erowded Congre ations — Dram-drinkin — Reasons for and
against — Deals summari y with Breakers of t e Rules — A Revival
sprin s up—C1ass-meetings with closed Doors — A New-Light Tormentor— ow she is got rid of—Young America—Sermon on Worldliness—
Dr. Bascom reproved — Is kept in the Shade -—" Who is General Jackson ?"-—I-Iis Independence approved - Need of a Hell—Conference of
1819 — Complains of Violators of the Discipline -They are obliged to conform— General Conference of 1820 — Plan of the Pro-slave ' Part —
Formation of Kentucky Conference — The Church in the Wzst — gonference of 1820—Publishes two Anti-Calvinistic Pamphlets —A Satanic
 1Tb-B Rej0ind€1'...-.u.u.......................u......cnu.....u.n.u.... 

‘ CHAPTER XVI.

Sets out with Father Walker for the General Conference—Lodges with a

shouting Local Preacher —Resumes his Journey — Finds a loaded Pistol
—— Met by a Robber —Pistol becomes useful —A Universalist Landlord —Praying off a Bill — Return from Conference — Effects of "New Cider" —
A surly Host-Refuses Pa ment in Bills — Second Thoughts the bestDance at a Tavern —Is as ed to join — First offers a Prayer — The Dancing ceases — Pra s and exhorts — Many converted— Being instant in and
out of Season — Preacher up to the Times — Dumb Devil — Evil of Dramdrinking—— Makes an Enemy b his Temperance — Use of Liquor defended by Methodists — Appointe Presiding Elder of Cumberland District
at Conference of 1821-—First round of Quarterl Meetings_— Prayerless
Professors — Roaring River Camp-meetin —A isorderly Congregation
-- Arrests their Attention — Defends the ivinity of Christ-— Vanquishes
its Dispntants-—Out}I>£>uring of the Spirit —An Arian Devil cast outSimon Carlisle —He eproves a youn Profl-igate—His Revenge — Carlisle arrested for Robbery— Re uests is Conference to suspend him -—
Restored _to his Standing in the hurch—His Innocence proved...... 199

CHAPTER XVII.

Po lar Grove Cam meeting— Spunky Widow — A Proselyting Baptist—Inucedto hear . Cartwright preach — Hears part of the Sermon and then
runs—Promise of Immortality scouted-PubIicl¥;eproves a youn Lawyer
—Is challenged in conse uence—Chooses his eapons —His p onent
is Conscience-stricken —— e uests his Prayers-—Fxnds Peace in Believing—Revival at Quarterly eeting—Regu1ates the Altar Exercises-—
Sanctified Wealth a Blessing to the Church —Needless Church Expenditures —Might be better applied—Rowdies at a Camp-meeting—They
determine to break it up—Essay to carry out their Plans— I‘hey are
dispersed—Conversion and Reconciliation of bitter Enemies—Un entlemanly Infidel—Sessions of Kentucky Conference for 1822 and, 823
--Delegated to General Conference of 1824 —Close of his twentieth Year
in the tinerancy-- Retrospective View.. .................  .............. .. 226

conrnxrs. 13

CHAPTER XVIII.

Determines to remove to Illinois — Reasons for so doing -— Makes the
Journey on Horseback — Selects a Location — Returns throu h Springfield

A —Is transferred to Illinois Conference--Parting with o (1 FriendsFatal Accident to one of his Daughters — Kindness from Strangers —
Settles in Sangamon County ——V1cinage of Indians — Extent of Sangqamon Circuit — A points a Sacramental Meeting — " Cartwright':
ood " — A close rother — A Word in Season — Its good Effect Scarcity of Money -— J antes Dixon -—Hunters' Expedients — Their Privations—Dixon loses his Eyesio-ht—— Sin lar Dream—His Sight restored
—Good Luck--‘Voyage to St. ouis — scapes from the Indians — A successful Trip —Becomes a Methodist-— His peaceful Death—Increase on
Sangamou Circuit — Conference of 1825 — Violent Bilious Attack —
Journey homeward --- An unkind Com anion — His Dismissal — Stops
to reeruit—Proceeds on his Way — Is ick on the Road — Lies down to
Die — Good Samaritans —Is met by his Wife -—Partial Recovery —
Crossing the Grand Prairie.. .....  ....  .........  .... .. Page 244

CHAPTER XIX.

Sent to Illinois Circuit by Conference of 1826 —Is a Candidate for the
Legislature — Hears himself defamed —- Faces his Reviler —He apologizes — Another Calumniator -- Proves his Assertions to be false — An
aspiring Law er — He is taken down —Becomes friendl -- Dangers in
the Use of iquor — Preaches to a highly expectant ngregation —Anno ance at Camp-meeting from a Drunken Crew — They are disperse b an Artifice —An Insane Euthusiast—-Various Delus1ons— Expulsion om the Church of an Impostor—A good Investment—Value
of Useful Books—Appointed Superintendent of Pottawattomie District
—.—-Meeting with Indian Chiefs—Expenses of this Mission— Conference
of 1827 — Voyage to General Conference at Pittsburgh — Immoral Fellow-Passengers — An exciting Debate — Comes ofi‘ Victorious — Preaches
on the Steamboat ......  ....... .. ................  .............  ............. .. 261

CHAPTER XX.

Absent from Conference of 1828 —— Sickness of Mrs. Cartwri ht — Formation
' of Oneida Conference — Organization of Canada Met odist E iscopal
Church — Attends the General Conference of 1828 — Gets t e Cold
Shoulder — Hearty Reception — Spiritual Darkness — Obtains Relief —
Dan ers of New (grcuits — A Rou h Pul it —— Death of Bishop George
—‘Il inois Confer nee of 1829 — A en-pee ed Husband—- He is relieved
—Written Sermons not liked — A Union Church — Unfair Dealing —
A Methodist Church built — Great Sacrifice — Sangamon Cam -meeting
—Groundless Stories — Tormented b Mockers —They stic in the
Mud —'I‘he Tables turned —A bigote Mother — Her impotent Rage —A Proridential 

O00000000000IIOOOOOOIOCOOIIOOOOOOO0000000000 

CHAPTER XXI.

Elected to the General Conference of 1832 —Prevented from attending by
Family Sickness—-Annoyed at Camp-meeting by a Huckster— Prosecutes
him—He refuses to pay his Fine—His Stores seized, and himself taken
to Prison — Pays, an is released— His Companions desire to retake his
L' uor —Their Ringleader quieted -I-Revival among the Persecutors
-"Division of Illinois Conference — Is Superannuated for ten Hours

14 coxmnfira

—-Quincy District formed — None willinw to go to it — Takes the Ap
pointment— Character of the District-I-A long Shower — An encouraging Motto -—Watery Journey — A High-strung Predestinarian — Hater
of the Methodists — The Eternal Decrees — Barton Randle —His Privations and Usefulness — Visit to Rock Island Mission — A rascall y
Ferryman— Former Site of an Indian Town-— Fording Rock RiverAn unexpected Wetting — Galena Mission —- Dangerous Ride with his
Daughter — Contrast between Traveling then and now — D. B. Carter
-— A beloved Minister— His Death — Fort Edwards Mission... Page 320

CHAP'1‘ER XXII.

Rise of the Mormons under Joe Smith — Their Expulsion from Missouri,
and Establishment at N auvoo — Acquaintance with Joe Smith -— His
Ignorance and Cunning — Controversy concerning his Doctrines — Relates to him an Encounter with Mormons at a Camp-meeting, and how
they were silenced — Smith grows Restive under this Recital — Curses
him in the Name of his God — Mormons driven from Illinois — Illinois
Conference of 1833 — Bishop Soule's Western Tour -—-Travels with him to
a Quarterly Meeting —Visitation of the Cholera — The Bishop attacked
with Fever — Preacher stationed at Jacksonville — First Quarterly Conference there —Rapid Growth of the Town— Illinois Conference of 1834
— Religious Excitement in Rushville Circuit —A Papist Convert..... 3&1

CHAPTER XXIII.

Knox County Cam meeting‘-—A Yankee Family —Parents' Dislike of the
Methodists — E orts to eep their Children from the Meeting —- The
Dau hters seek Religion — Opposition of their Mother — La hable
Inci ents —Whole Family becomes Religious -—Uuhealthiness ofufiuincy
— A Dying Stranger— Takes Charge of his Aifairs —A Campbellite Debater— He resists the Spirit — Becomes Insane — Commits Suicide... 352

CHAPTER XXIV.

Missionaries sent to the West—They make Evil Reports of the Land—Their Preaching productive of no Good -Election to General Conference
of 1836- Church Paper at Cincinnati— Morris, Wau h, and Fisk elected
Bishops — Slave pronounced a Blessing — Ultra A olitionists — Plan
of Sepgation —- pmions of Southern Members in re ard to Slavery -4
The e Wesleyans —Wilbur Fisk — Confidence of t e Church reposed
in him — Declines being ordained Bishop — Six new Conferences formed
—Funeral Sermon of Bisho M'Kendree — Sketch of his Life -— Unha
Delay in the Publication 0 is Memoirs .............  

CHAPTER XXV.

Extent of Illinois Conference— Session of l837—Revival in Jacksonville
Station — A New-School Minister — Change of Purpose not Conversion 4Gracious Revival — A live Yankee Minister— Abortive Attempt to Preach
-—A powerful Exhortation —Anxious Inquirers —Easy Wa of becoming
a Christian—Elected Delegate to General Conference of 840—Agitation on Slavery revived — bolitionists led by O. Scott—Op oses the
Election of new Bisho s —- Several new Conferences organize —Abolitionists op sed to Co onization—They refuse to assist or Churches
in the Sout —- Winchester Camp-meeting—A large Atten ance —Numbers of Renegades — Determines to maintain Good Order —Rising of the
Mob—— Their Leader taken—-A mock Cam meeting—-Rowdies put to
Flight— Their Captain converted - Trial o the Disturbers ....  368

conrnnms 15

0 CHAPTER XXVI.

‘Growth of the Country —Its State in 1824 — Determines to build a Church
-—A Union Church pro osed—He strongly objects to it-—Success of
his Enterprise —First- liurch in Sangamon Circuit—Waters's Campground '——Quarter1.y. Meeting at Alton —- A. Methodist Ball—_-Crowded
Attendance-—Christ rejects none—Answering a Fool according to his
Folly—Universalism a conscience-soothin Doctrine —Quarterl Meeting at Exeter —A Company of Mockers— appy Conversion — noted
Gambler—-He burns his Cards —Obtains Re igion —- Goes to UtahBecomes a Mormon — A‘ des airing Sinner — Dies without Hope —
Revival at Winchester—The ampbellites present in full Force— hey
ovoke Controversy —Their Preacher nonplused —Advice to Public
peakers — Conference of  — B . Andrew presides -7 General Conference of 1844 —Church Statistics — uccess of early Ministers....Page 385

CHAPTER XXVII.

Attends the General Conference of 184-i—Government of the Church —The Bishops have no Legislative Power—They do not Hold the Church
Property—-The Methodist Episcopal Church essentially Anti-slaveryGround taken by the Northern and Southern Delegates respectivelyBishop Andi-ew's Connection with Slavery—Course which the Conference should have pursued—Course of Bishop Soule—The Conference
had no Power to divide the Church —Dr. Elliott's History of the Secession—Abolitionists have done nothing for the Slave—Course to be
Eirsued toward Slaveholders—Is clear of Guilt in the Action of this

nferenceICC.CC.OOII. I O O O O I O O I O O U O D II. I C I O I I O I O I COO D I O I I I I I CO. I O O O I O I I I I I QOOCIIIOICOOIO 

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Illinois Conference of 1844—Non-concurrence in the Measures of the General Conference—Statement of Facts in the Case— Slaveholding never
a Test of Church Membership—Conservatism the true Ground-—Its
Benefits to the Slave — Attends a nameless Meeting at Cincinnati —Talren ill on his Way to Conference—Reaches Alton City—Has Medical
Assistance and Proceeds —Arrives at the Conference-— A gloomy Year
— Southern ‘ Delegates call a Convention—Renounce the Methodist

iscopal Church —Form a separate Organization—— Foul Means resort- to-Bishop Soule chiefly to be Blamed—Bishop Andrew not without Fault in the Matter —Fate of Extremes— Fearful Results of
S¢h.i8lI1B..o............‘.. I o o o o o o n n o o o o n o o o o o u o s o - o c u c o s o o u o o o o o o ouocuooowooooouoncno 

CHAPTER XXIX.

Session of Illinois Conference for 1845 — Returned to Bloomington District
—Traveling hazardous in Winter and Sprin —Commences his Round
of Quarterly Meetings—-An intensely col Storm—Dreary Ride -Reaches a Local Preacher's Cabin—One of his Sons converted at Prayers-—Pursues his Journey— Crosses Sangamon River—Reaches the
Meeting—The Church‘triumphs over her Foes—A Week at Waynesville
—Nightly Meetings—Frightful Death—A fair Conclusion—Paying
Universalist's Bills—E1ected to the General Conference of 1848-An
exciting Session——Southern Delegates come resolved on Secession-_The Louisville Convention —Measures of the General Conference ‘of
1844 null and void - A peaceful Settlement evaded—German Mission

16 courrxra

—Its Formation b Dr. Nast—Death of Charles Hollida -—Election
to the General Con erence of 1852 — Feebleness of Bishops edding and
Hamline—Afi‘ecting Address of Bishop Waugh— Superintends the Mission to the Pottawattomies—— Change in the Country —Increase in
Wealth and Population-—Methodism (1 ing out -—Prejndice of the
Minister at Warsaw against him-Oifere the Use of the Presbyterian
Church-Power of God on the Congne tion-—Notified to vacate the
Church—Sup sed Reasons therefor— uilding of a Methodist Church
—-Numerous ccessions to the Society -— Revivals the Net of the Church
—Quincy Station— A Time of B.efreshing—— Sugar Grove Cam meeting
—A rosperous Year—Failing Strength—Conference of 185 —Pleasant P ains District formed—Is appointed to it at Conference of 1853Incidents at the Boston General nference—His Sermons pronounced
Failures -—The Charm broken —Characterlstics of the Yankees -- Their
IIospitality—New-England  .....  ......  441

CHAPTER XXX.

General Conference of 1852—Death of Bishop Hedding-—Election of four
new Bishops—A Yankee Triumph— Evil of Pewed Churches— Parting
with kind Friends—Pioneer Preachers—Their Labors and SuccessJesse Walker — Abundant in Labors — Becomes Superann uated — Final

Triumph—Samuel H. Thomson—His Early Conversion—Great Use-.

fulness-Sinks under Privations —His Ardent Zeal—Last Messa e—
Victory over Death——John Dew-—-Talents as a Preacher—Has uls
for his Hire—Is greatly Beloved—Goes to his  480

CHAPTER XXXI.

Illinois Conferences of 1854 and 1855- Election to the General Conference
of 1856—Slavery Agitation—Multi%lcying of Stations tends to Con gationalism —Changes in Church onomy -Longer Term of inisterial Appointment.-—New Rule on Ordination. .......  .......  501

onavnfiaxxxn.

A Wealtlfi Physician --Avowed Infidelity — Moral Benefit of Christianity

ex licable Mystery—Breach in the Wal1s—Evidences of the
8enses—T e Doctor convinced — His Wife's Conversion—Fervent
Pra er—A Peaceful Answer—Glorious Reviva1—Preaches the Go 1
— als -to his Ministry—Taken to Abraham's 

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Plainness of Early Methodists—Extrsvagance of the present Day-— Dut
of Family Prayer—Results of its Faithful Performance —Neglect 0
many on this Score --Benefits of Prayer-meetings — They are the Seed of
Revivals — Class-meetiprgs owned of God —The1r Attendance should be a
Test of Membership— alue of faithful Leaders. . .........  515

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Review of the Past—Entrance into the Itinerant Ranks-—Children and
Grandchildren —All striving to reach Heaven — Amount lost on Allowan_ce_ — Yalue of Books sold - Collected for Benevolent Purposes Mimstenal Labors —Decrease of Camp-meetings -Plan for their Revival-— Growth of the West —- Thanks for Me:-cies—Prayers implored 521

AUTOBIOGRAPHY

01

PETER CARTWRIGHT.

 

CHAPTER I.

PARENTAGE.

I was born September 1st, 1785, in Amherst County, on James River, in the State of Virginia. My
parents were poor. My father was a soldier in the
great struggle for liberty, in the Revolutionary war
with Great Britain. He served over two years.
My mother was an orphan. Shortly after the united
colonies gained their independence, my parents
moved to Kentucky, which was a new country. It
was an almost unbroken wilderness from Virginia to
Kentucky at that early day, and this wilderness was
filled with thousands of hostile Indians, and many
thousands of the emigrants to Kentucky lost their
lives by these savages. There were no roads for
carriages at that time, and although the emigrants
moved by thousands, they had to move on pack
horses. Many adventurous young men went to this
new country. The fall my father moved, there were
a great many families who joined together for mutual
safety, and started for Kentucky. Besides the two

18 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

hundred families thus united, there were one. hundred young men, well armed, -who agreed to guard
these families through, and, as a compensation, they
were to be supported for their services. After we
struck the wilderness We rarely traveled a day but
we passed some white persons, murdered and scalped
by the Indians while going to or ‘returning from
Kentucky. We traveled on till Sunday, and, instead
of resting that day, the voice of the company was to
move on. It was a dark, cloudy day, misty with rain. Many
Indians were seen through the day skulking round
by our guards. Late in the evening We came to
what was called " Camp Defeat," where a number of
emigrant families had been all murdered by the savages a short time before. Here the company called
a halt to camp for the night. It was a solemn,
gloomy time; every heart quaked with fear.

Soon the captain of our young men's company
placed his men as sentinels all round the encampment. The stock and the women and children were
placed in the center of the encampment. Most of
the men that were heads of families, were placed
around outside of the women and children. Those

who were not placed in this position, were ordered to i

take their stand outside still, in the edge of the brush.
It was a dark, dismal night, and all expected an attack from the Indians.

That night my father was placed as a sentinel,
with a good rifle, in the edge of the brush. Shortly
after he took his stand, and all was quiet in the camp,
he thought he heard something moving toward him,
and grunting like a swine. He knew there was no
swine with the moving company, but it was so dark
he could not see what it was. Presently he perceived

rmrnn omvrwnrenr. 19

a. dark object in the distance, but nearer him than at
first, and believing it to be an Indian, aiming to
spring upon him and murder him in the dark, he
leveled his rifle, and aimed at the dark lump as well
as he could, and fired. He soon found he had hit
the object, for it flounced about at a terrible rate, and
my father gathered himself up and ran into camp. _
When his gun fired, there was an awful screaming
throughout the encampment by the women and children. My father was soon inquired of as to what

-was the matter. He told them the circumstances of

_ the case, but some said he was scared and wanted an
excuse to come in; but he affirmed that there was no
mistake, that there was something, and he had shot
it; and if they would get a light and go with him, if
he did not show them something, then they might
call him a coward forever. They got a light and
went to the place, and there they found an Indian,
with a rifle in one hand and a tomahawk in the other,
dead. My father's rifle-ball had struck the Indian
nearly central in the head.

There was but little sleeping in the camp that
night. However, the night passed away without
any further alarms, and many glad hearts hailed the
dawn of a new day. The next morning, as soon
as the company could pack up, they started on their
journey.

In a few days after this, we met a lone man, who
said his name was Baker, with his mouth bleeding at
a desperate rate, having been shot by an Indian.
Several of his teeth and his jaw bone were broken by
a ball from the Indian's gun. His account of a battle
with the Indians. was substantially as follows :

There were seven young white men returning to
Virginia from Kentucky, all well armed; one of

20 anronroennrnr or

them, a Frenchman, had a considerable sum of
money with him. All seven were mounted on fine
horses, and they were waylaid by seven Indians.

When the white men approached near the ambush, they were fired on by the Indians, and three
shot down; the other four dismounted and shot
down three of the Indians. At the second fire of the
Indians, two more of the white men fell, and at the
second fire of the white men, two more of the Indians
fell. Then there were two and two. At the third
fire of. the Indians, Baker's only remaining companion fell, and he received the wound in the mouth.
Thinking his chance a bad one, he wheeled and ran,
loading his gun as he went. Finding a large, hollow
tree, he crept into it, feet foremost, holding his rifle
ready cocked, expecting them to look in, when he
intended to fire. He heard the Indians cross and
recross the log twice, but they did not look in.

At this perilous moment, he heard the large cowbell that was on one of the drove of cattle of our company, and shortly after he crawled out of the log, and
made his way to us, the happiest man I think I ever
saw. Our company of yoimg men rushed to the
battle-ground, and found the dead white men and
Indians, and dug two separate graves, and buried
them where they fell. They got all the horses and
clothes of the white men slain, and the Frenchman's
money, for the surviving Indians had not time to

scalp or strip them.

When we came within seven miles of the Crab
Orchard, where there were a fort and the first white
settlement, it was nearly night. We halted, and a
vote was taken whether we should go on to the fort,
or camp there for the night. Indians had been seen
in our rear through the day. All wanted to go

I

rnrmln cxnrwm ear. in

through except seven families, who refused to go any
further that. night. The main body went on, but
they, the seven families, carelessly stripped off their
clothes, laid down without any guards, and went to
sleep. ‘

Some time in the night, about twenty-five Indians
rushed on them, and every one, men, women, and
children, was slain, except one man, who sprang from
his bed and ran into the fort, barefooted and in his
night clothes. He brought the melancholy news of
the slaughter.

The captain of the fort was an old, experienced
ranger and Indian warrior. These murderous bands
of savages lived north of the Ohio River, and would
cross over into Kentucky, kill and steal, and then
recross the Ohio into their own country. The old
captain knew the country well, and the places of their
crossing the river. Early next morning he called for
volunteers, mounted men, and said he could get ahead
of them. A goodly company turned out, and, sure
enough, they got ahead of the Indians, and formed an
ambush for them. Soon they saw the Indians com-.
ing, and, at a given signal, the whites fired on them.
At the first shot all were killed but three; these
were pursued, two of them killed, and but one made
his escape to tell the sad news. All the plunder of
the murdered families was retaken.

Thus you see what perilous times the first settlers
had to reach that new and beautiful country of " canes
and turkeys." , ‘

Kentucky was claimed by no particular tribe of
Indians, but was regarded as a common huntingground by the various tribes, east, west, north, and
south. It abounded in various valuable game, such as
buffalo, elk, bear, deer, turkeys, and many other

22 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

smaller game, and hence the Indians struggled hard
to keep the white people from taking possession of it.
Many hard and bloody battles were fought, and thousands killed on both sides; and rightly was it named
the " land of blood." But finally the Indians were
overpowered and driven off, and the white man obtained a peaceable and quiet possession.

It was chiefly settled by Virginians, as noble and
brave a race of men and women as ever drew the
breath of life. But Kentucky was far in the interior,
and very distant from the Atlantic shores ; and though
a part of the great Mississippi Valley, the mouth of the
Mississippi and thousands of miles up this " father of
waters " belonged to foreign, and, in some sense, hostile nations, that were not very friendly to the new
republic. l s

' The Kentuckians labored under many, very many,
disadvantages and privations; and had it not been for
the fertility of the soil and the abundance of wild
meat, they must have suffered beyond endurance.
But the country soon filled up, and entered into the
enjoyment of improved and civilized life.

PETER GARTWRIGHT. Q 28

CHAPTER II.

EARLY LIFE.

AFTER my father reached Kentucky he rented a farm
for two years in Lincoln County, on What was called

the " Hanging fork of Dicks River," near Lancaster,the county seat.

My mother, being a member of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, sought and obtained an acquaintance with two Methodist traveling preachers, namely,
John Page and Benjamin Northcut, men of precious
memory—men that are to be numbered as early pioneers in the West, who labored hard and suffered
much to build up the infant Methodist Church in the
wilderness; and those two men are to be numbered
among the oldest Methodist preachers on this continent that are now living. (Northcut has since died.)

In the fall of 1793 my father determined to move
to what was then called the Green River country, in
the southern part of the State of Kentucky. He did
so, and settled in Logan County, nine miles south of
Russellville, the county seat, and Within one mile of
the state line of Tennessee. .

Shortly after our removal from Lincoln to Logan
County my father's family Was visited by Jacob Lurton, a traveling preacher of the Methodist Episcopal
Church. Though my father was not a professor of
religion, yet he was not an opposer of it, and when
Jacob Lurton asked the liberty of preaching in his
cabin, he readily assented.

24 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

I was then in my ninth year, and was sent out to
invite the neighbors to come and hear preaching.
Accordingly they crowded out, and filled the cabin to
overflowing. Jacob Lurton was a real son of thunder.
He preached with tremendous power, and the congregation were almost all melted to tears; some cried
aloud for mercy, and my mother shouted aloud for joy.

Jacob Lurton traveled several years, married, and
located in Kentucky, from whence he removed to
Illinois, and settled near Alton, where he died many
years ago. His end was peaceful and happy.

Shortly after J abob Lurton preached at my father's
cabin, he or his successor organized a small class,
about four miles from my father's, where my mother
attached herself again to the Church. I think there
were thirteen members, one local preacher, one exhorter, and a class-leader. Here my mother regularly
walked every Sabbath to class-meeting, for a number
of years, and seldom missed this means of grace.
This little society ebbed and flowed for years, until
about 1799, when a mighty revival of religion broke
out, and scores joined the society. We built a little
church, and called it Ebenezer. This was in what was
then called Cumberland Circuit, and Kentucky District, in the Western Conference, the seventh conference in the United States.

Logan County, when my father moved to it, was
called " Rogues' Harbor." Here many refugees, from
almost all parts of the Union, fled to escape justice or
punishment; for although there was law, yet it could
not be executed, and it was a desperate state of society. Murderers, horse thieves, highway robbers,
and counterfeiters fled here until they combined and
actually formed a majority. The honest and civil
part of the citizens would prosecute these wretched

PETER CARTWBIGHT. 

banditti, but they would swear each other clear; and
they really put all law at. defiance, and carried on
such desperate violence and outrage that the honest
part of the citizens seemed to be driven to the necessity of uniting and combining together, and taking.

the law into their own hands, under the name of
Regulators. This was a very desperate state of
things.

Shortly after the Regulators had formed themselves
into a society, and established their code of by-laws, on
a court day at Russellville, the two bands met in town.
Soon a quarrel commenced, and a general battle ensued between the rogues and Regulators, and they
fought with guns, pistols, dirks, knives, and clubs.
Some were actually killed, many wounded, the rogues
proved victors, kept the ground, and drove the Regulators out of town. The Regulators rallied again,
hunted, killed, and lynched many of the rogues, until
several of them fled, and left. for parts unknown.
Many lives were lost on both sides, to the great scandal of civilized people. This is but a partial view
of frontier life.

When my father settled in Logan County, there
was not a newspaper printed south of Green River,
no mill short of forty miles, and no schools worth the
name. Sunday was a day set apart for hunting, fishing, horse-racing, card-playing, balls, dances, and all
kinds of jollity and mirth. We killed our meat out
of the woods, wild; and beat our meal and hominy
with a pestle and mortar. We stretched a deer skin
over a hoop, burned holes in it with the prongs of a
fork, sifted our meal, baked our bread, eat it, and it
was first-rate eating too. We raised, or gathered out
of the woods, our own tea. We had sage, bohea,
cross-vine, spice, and sassafras teas, in abundance. As

26 . AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

for cofl'ee, I am not sure that I ever smelled it for ten
years. We made our sugar out of the water of the
maple-tree, and our molasses too. These were great
luxuries in those days.

We raised our own cotton and flax. We water-rotted our flax, broke it by hand, scutched it; picked the
seed out of the cotton with our fingers; our mothers
and sisters carded, spun, and wove it into cloth, and
they cut and made our garments and bed-clothes, &c.
And when we got on a new suit thus manufactured,
and sallied out into company, we thought ourselves
" so big as wn/ybody." c

There were two large caves on my father's farm,
and another about half a mile off, where was a great
quantity of material for making saltpeter. We soon
learned the art of making it, and our class-leader was
a great powder-maker.

Let it be remembered, these were days when we
had no stores of dry goods or groceries; but the

United States had a military post at Fort Messick, on '

the north bank of the Ohio River and south end of
the State of Illinois. Here the government kept
stores of . these things. After we had made a great
quantity of saltpeter, and had manufactured it into
powder, really number one, strange to say, it came into
the mind of our class-leader to go to Fort Messick on a
trading expedition. Then the question arose, what sort
of a vessel should be made ready for the voyage.
This difiiculty was soon solved; for he cut down a
large poplar-tree, and dug out a large and neat canoe,
and launched it into Red River, to go out -into Cumberland River, and at the mouth of said river to ascend
the Ohio River to the fort.

Then proclamation was made to the neighborhood
to come in with their money or marketing, but powPETER CARTWRIG-HT. 27

der was the staple of the trading voyage. They were
also notified to bring in their bills, duly signed, stating the articles they wanted. Some sent for a quarter
of a pound of coffee, some one yard of ribbon, some a
butcher-knife, some for a tin cup, &c., &c. I really
wish I had thebill; I wouldgive it as a literary curiosity of early days. I ‘

Our leader went and returned, safe and sound, made
a good exchange, to the satisfaction of nearly all concerned; and for weeks it was a great time of rejoicing, that we, even in Kentucky, had found out the
glorious advantages of navigation. '

I was naturally a wild, wicked boy, and delighted
in horse-racing, card-playing, and dancing. My
father restrained me but little, though my mother
often talked to me, wept over me, and prayed for me,
and often drew tears from my eyes; and though I
often wept under preaching, and resolved to do better and seek religion, yet I broke my vows, went into
young company, rode races, played cards, and danced.

At length my father gave me a young race-horse,
which well-nigh proved my everlasting min; and he
bought me a pack of cards, and I was a very successful young gambler; and though I was not initiated
into the tricks of regular gamblers, yet I was very successful in winning money. This practice was very
fascinating, and became a special besetting sin to me,
so that, for a boy, I was very much captivated by it.
My mother remonstrated almost daily with me, and I
had to keep my cards hid from her; for if she could
have found them, she would have burned them, or
destroyed them _in some way. 0, the sad delusions
of gambling! How fascinating, and how hard to re
claim a practiced gambler! Nothing but the power
of Divine grace saved me from this wretched sin.

28 A.-UTOBIOGRAPHY or

My father sent me to school, boarding me at Dr..
Beverly A11en's; but my teacher was not well-quali
fied to teach correctly, and I made but small progress.
I, however, learned to read, write, and cipher a little,

but very imperfectly. Dr. Allen, with whom I

boarded, had, in an early day, been a traveling
preacher in the Methodist Episcopal Church. He
was sent South to Georgia, as a very gentlemanly
and popular preacher, and did much good. He married in that country a fine, pious woman, a member
of the Church; but he, like David, in an evil hour,
fell into sin, violated the laws of the country, and a
writ was issued for his apprehension. He warned the
sheriff not to enter his room, and assured him if he
did he would kill him. The sheriff rushed upon
him, and Allen shot him dead. He fled from that
country to escape justice, and settled in Logan
County, then called " Rogues' Harbor." His family
followed him, and here he practiced medicine. To
ease a troubled conscience he drank in the doctrine
of Universalism; but he lived and died a great friend
to the Methodist Church.

It fell to my lot, after I had been a preacher several
years, to visit the doctor on his dying bed. I talked
to, and prayed with him. Just before he died I
asked him if he was willing to die and meet his final
Judge with his Universalist sentiments. He frankly
said he was not. He said he could make the mercy
of God cover every case in his mind but his own, but
he thought there was no mercy for him; and in this
state of mind he left the World, bidding his family and
friends an eternal farewell, warning them not to come
to that place of torment to which he felt himself eternally doomed.

rmrmz cnnrwmenr. 29

CHAPTER IH.

CANE RIDGE CAMP-MEETING.

Tum rolled‘ on, population increased fast around us
the country improved, horse-thieves and murderers
were driven away, and civilization advanced considerably. Ministers of different denominations came
in, and preached through the country; but the Methodist preachers were the pioneer messengers of salvation in these ends of the earth. Even in Rogues'
Harbor there was a Baptist Church, a few miles west

of my father's, and a Presbyterian congregation a few miles north, and the Methodist Ebenezer, a few miles
south.

There were two.Baptist ministers, one an old man
of strong mind and good, very good, natural abilities,
having been brought up a rigid Calvinist, and having
been taught to preach the doctrine of particular election and reprobation. At length his good sense revolted at the horrid idea, and, having no correct
books on theology, he plunged into the opposite extreme, namely, universal redemption. He lived in a
very wicked settlement. He appointed a day to publish his recantation of his old Calvinism, and his views
on universal and unconditional salvation to all mankind. The whole country, for many miles around,
crowded to hear the  news. When he had
finished his discourse, the vilest of the vile multitude
raised the shout, expressing great joy that there was
no hell or eternal punishment.

30 . AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

I will here state a circumstance that occurred
to the old gentleman and myself. He was a great
smoker, and as he passed my father's one day, to

marry a couple, he came to the fence and called to .

me, and said, " Peter, if you will bring me a coal of
fire to light my pipe, I will tell you how to get out
of hell, if you‘ ever get there." Although I. was
very wicked, the expression exceedingly shocked me,
and neither the devil nor any of his preachers have
ever been able, from that day to this, seriously to
tempt me to believe the blaap/zemous doomme.

The other Baptist minister soon took to open drunk
enness, and with him his salvation by water expired;
but if ever there was a jubileein hell, it was then and
there held, over these apostate and fallen ministers
B. A. and Dr. Allen.

Somewhere between 1800 and 1801, in the upper
part of Kentucky, at a memorable place called " Cane
Ridge," there was appointed a sacramental meeting
by some of the Presbyterian ministers, at which meeting, seemingly unexpected by ministers or people, the
mighty power of God was displayed in a very extraordinary manner; many were moved to tears, and
bitter and loud crying for mercy. The meeting was
protracted for weeks. Ministers of almost all denominations flocked in from far and near. The meeting
was kept up by night and day. _ Thousands heard of themighty work, and came on foot, on horseback, in carriages and wagons. It was supposed that there were
in attendance at times during the meeting from
twelve to twenty-five thousand people. Hundreds
fell prostrate under the mighty power of God, as men
slain in battle. Stands were erected in the woods
from which preachers of different Churches proclaimed repentance toward God and faith in our Lord

PETER CARTWBIGHT. 81

Jesus Christ, and it was supposed, by eye and ear witnesses, that between one and two thousand souls were
happily and powerfully converted to God during the
meeting. It was not unusual for one, two, three, and
four to seven preachers to be addressing the listening
thousands at the same time from the different stands
erected for the purpose. The heavenly fire spread in
almost every direction. It was said, by truthful witnesses, that at times more than one thousand persons
broke out into loud shouting all at once, and that the
shouts could be heard for miles around.

From this camp-meeting, for so it ought to be called,
the news spread through all the Churches, and through
all the land, and it excited great wonder and surprise;

.but it kindled a religious flame that spread all over

Kentucky and through many other states. And I
may here be permitted to say, that this was the first
camp-meeting ever held in the United States, and
here our camp-meetings took their rise.

a As Presbyterian, Methodist, and Baptist ministers
all united in the blessed work at this meeting, when
they returned home to their different congregations,
and carried the news of this mighty work, the revival
spread rapidly throughout the land ;' but many of the
ministers and members of the synod of Kentucky
thought it all disorder, and tried to stop the work.
They called their preachers who were engaged in the
revival to account, and censured and silenced them.
These ministers then rose up and unitedly renounced
the jun-isdiction of the Presbyterian Church, organized
a Church of their own, and dubbed it with the name
of Ohristian. Here was the origin of what was called
the New Lights. They renounced the Westminster
Confession of Faith, and all Church discipline, and
professed to take the New Testament for their Church

88 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

discipline. They established no standard of doctrine;
every one was to take the New Testament, read it,
and abide his own construction of it. Marshall,
M'Namar, Dunlevy, Stone, Huston, and others, were
the chief leaders in this 2‘/ms/L I/rap. Soon a diversity of opinion sprang up, and they got into a Babel confusion. Some preached Arian, some Socinian, and some Universalist doctrines; so that in a
few years you could not tell what was limped or what
was damced. They adopted the mode of immersion,
the water-god of all exclusive errorists; and directly
there was a mighty controversy about the way to
heaven, whether it was by water or by dry land.

In the meantime a remnant of preachers that broke
oil‘ from the Methodist Episcopal Church in 1792,
headed by James O'Kelly, who had formed a party
because he could not be a bishop in said Church,
which party he called the Republican Methodist
Church, came out to Kentucky, and formed a union
with these New Lights. Then the Methodist Episcopal Church had war, and rumors of war, almost on
every side. The dreadful diversity of opinion among
these New Lights, their want of any standard of dodtrines, or regular Church discipline, made them and

easy prey to prowling wolves of any description.
Soon the Shaker priests came along, and off went
M'Namar, Dunlevy, and Huston, into that foolish
error. Marshall and others retraced their steps. B.
W. Stone stuck to his New Lightism, and fought
many bloodless battles, till he grew old and feeble, and
the mighty Alexander Campbell, the great, arose and
poured such floods of regenerating water about the
old man's cranium, that he formed a union with this
giant errorist, and finally died, not much lamented
out of the circle of a few friends. And this is the

PETER.CARTWBIGH'l‘. 88

way with all the New Lights, in the government,
morals, and discipline of the Church.

This Christian, or New Light Church, is 9. feeble and
scattered people, though t.here are some good Christians among them. I suppose since the day of Pentecost, there vvas hardly ever a greater revival of religion
than at Cane Ridge; and if there had been steady,
Christian ministers, settled in Gospel doctrine and
Church discipline, thousands might have been saved
to the Church that wandered off in the mazes of vain,
speculative divinity, and finally made shipwreck of
the faith, fell back, turned infidel, and lost their religion and their souls forever. But evidently a new
impetus was given to the work of God, and many,
very many, will have cause to bless God forever for
this revival of religion throughout the length and

breadth of our Zion.
3

84 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

. CHAPTER IV.

CONVERSION.

IN 1801, when I was in my sixteenth year, my father,
my eldest half brother, and myself, attended a wedding about five miles from home, where there was. a
great deal of drinking and dancing, which was very
common at marriages in those days. I drank little
or nothing; my delight was in dancing, After a late
hour in the night, we mounted our horses and started
for home. I was riding my race-horse.

A few minutes after we had put up the horses, and
were sitting by the fire, I began to reflect on the
manner in which I had spent the day and evening. I
felt guilty and condemned. I rose and walked the
floor. My mother was in bed. It seemed to me, all
of a sudden, my blood rushed to my head, my heart
palpitated, in a few minutes I turned blind; an awful
impression rested on my mind that death had come
and I was unprepared to die. I fell on my knees and
began to ask God to have mercy on me.

My mother sprang from her bed, and was soon on
her knees by my side, praying for me, and exhorting
me to look to'Chr,ist for mercy, and then and there
I promised the Lord that if he would spare me, I
would seek and serve him; and I never fully broke
that promise. My mother prayed for me a long time.
At length we lay down, but there was little sleep for
me. Next morning I rose, feeling wretched beyond
expression. I tried to read in the Testament, and re

PETER caarwnrenr. A 85

tired many times to secret prayer through the day,
but found no relief‘. I gave up my race-horse to my
father, and requested him to sell him. I went and
brought my pack of cards, and gave them to mother,
who threw them into the fire, and they were consumed.
I fasted, watched, and prayed, and engaged in regular
reading of the Testament. I was so distressed and miserable, that I was incapable of any regular business.

My father was greatly distressed' on my account,

‘ thinking I must die, and he would lose his only son.

He bade me retire altogether from business, and take
‘care of myself. '

Soon it was noised abroad that I was distracted,
and many of my associates in wickedness came to
see me, to try and divert my mind fi-om those gloomy
thoughts of my wretchedness; but all in vain. I exhorted them to desist from the course of wickedness
which we had been guilty of together. The c1ass-leader and local preacher were sent for. They tried to
point me to the bleeding Lamb, they prayed for me
most fervently. Still I found no comfort, and although
I had never believed in the doctrine of unconditional election and reprobation,I was sorely tempted to
believe I was ac reprobate, and doomed, and lost
eternally, without any chance of salvation.

At length one day I retired to the horse-lot, and
was walking and wringing my hands in great anguish,
trying to pray, on the borders of utter despair. It
appeared to me that I heard a voice from heaven,
saying, "Peter, look at me." A feeling of relief
flashed over me as quick as an electric shock. It
gave me hopeful feelings, and some encouragement
to seek mercy, but still my load‘ of guilt remained.
I repaired to the house, and told my mother what
had happened to me in the horse-lot. Instantly she

86 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

seemed to understand it, and told me the Lord had
done this to encourage me to hope for mercy, and
exhorted me to take encouragement, and seek on,
and God would bless me with the pardon of my sins
at another time. o

Some days after this, I retired to a cave on my
father's farm to pray in secret. My soul was in an
agony; I wept, I prayed, and said, " Now, Lord, if
there is mercy for me, let me find it," and it really
seemed to me that I could almost lay hold of the
Saviour, and realize a reconciled God. All of a sudden, such a fear of the devil fell upon me that it
really appeared to me that he was surely personally
there, to seize and drag me down to hell, soul and
body, and such a horror fell on me that I sprang to
my feet and ran to my mother at the house. My
mother told me this was a device of Satan to prevent
me from finding the blessing then. Three months
rolled away, and still I did not find the blessing of
the pardon of my sins.

This year, 1801, the Western Conference existed,
and I think there was but one presiding elder's district in it, called the Kentucky District. William
M'Kendree (afterward bishop) was appointed-to the
Kentucky District. Cumberland Circuit, which, perhaps, was six hundred miles round, and lying partly
in Kentucky and partly in Tennessee, was one of the
circuits of this district. John Page and Thomas
Wilkerson were appointed to this circuit.

In the spring of this year, Mr. M'Grady, a minister
of the Presbyterian Church, who had a congregation
and meeting-house, as we then called them, about
three miles north of my father's house, appointed a
sacramental meeting in this congregation, and invited
the Methodist preachers to attend with them, and

PETER GABTWRIGHT. 87

especially John Page, who was a powerful Gospel
minister, and was very popular among the Presbyterians. Accordingly he came, and preached with
great power and success.

There were no camp-meetings in regular form at this
time, but as there was a great waking up among the
Churches, from the revival that had broken out at
Cane Ridge, before mentioned, many flocked to those
sacramental meetings. The church would not hold
the tenth part of the congregation. Accordingly, the
oficers of the Church erected a stand in a contiguous shady grove, and prepared seats for a large congregation.

The people crowded to this meeting from far and
near. They came in their large wagons, with victuals
mostly prepared. The women slept in the ‘wagons,
and the men under them. Many stayed on the
ground night and day for a number of nights and
days together. Others were provided for among the
neighbors around. The power of God was wonderfully displayed; scores of sinners fell under the
preaching, like men slain in mighty battle; Christians shouted aloud for joy.

To this meeting I repaired, a guilty, wretched sinner. On the Saturday evening of said meeting, I
went, with weepin g multitudes, and bowed before
the stand, and earnestly prayed for mercy. In the
midst of a solemn struggle of soul, an impression was
made on my mind, as though a voice said to me,
"Thy sins are all forgiven thee." Divine light
flashed all round me, unspeakable joy sprung up in
my soul. I rose to my feet, opened my eyes, and it
really seemed as if I was in heaven; the trees, the
leaves on them, and everything seemed, and I really
thought were, praising God. My mother raised the

88 . AUTOBIGGRAPHY or

shout, my Christian friends crowded around me and
joined me in praising God; and though I have been

since then, in many instances, unfaithful, yet I have A

never, for one moment, doubted that the Lord did,
then and there, forgive my sins and give me religion;

Our meeting lasted without intermission all night,
and it was believed by those who had a very good
right to know, that over eighty souls were converted
to God during its continuance. I went on my way
rejoicing for many days. This meeting was in the
month of May. In June our preacher, John Page, attended at our little church, E'6enezer, and there in
June, 1801, I joined the Methodist Episcopal Church,
which I have never for one moment regretted. I have
never for a moment been tempted to leave the Methodist Episcopal Church, and if they were to turn me
out, I would knock at the door till taken in again. I
suppose, from the year 1786 Methodist preachers had
been sent to the West, and we find among these very
early pioneers, F. Poythress, presiding elder, T. Williamson, I. Brooks, Wilson Lee, James Haw, P.
Nancie, B. M'Henry, B. Snelling, J. Hartly, J. Talv
man, J. Lillard, Kobler, and others.

Perhaps the first conference holden in the West
was held in Kentucky, in April, 1789, and then at
different points till 1800, when the Western Conference was regularly organized, and reached from Red
stone and Greenbrier to Natchez, covering almost
the entire Mississippi valley. I can find at this time
a record of but ninety members in 1787, and five
traveling preachers. From 1787 up to 1800, Bishop
Ashury visited the Western world, called together
the preachers in conferences, changed them from
time to time, and regulated the affairs of the infant
Church in the wilderness as best he could.

raren canrwmenr. B

Several times the' Western preaches had to arm
themselves in crossing the mountains to the East,
and guard Bishop Asbury through the wilderness,
which was infested with bloody, hostile savages, at
the imminent risk of all their lives. Notwithstanding the great hazard of life, that eminent apostle of
American Methodism, Bishop Asbury, showed that
he did not count his life dear, so that he could provide for the sheep in the wilderness of the West.

' At the time I joined the Church in 1801, according to the best accounts that I can gather, there were
in the entire bounds of the Western Conference, of
members, probationers, colored and all, two thousand, four hundred and eighty-four, and about fifteen
traveling preachers. In the‘ United States and territories, East and West, North and South, and Canada,
seventy-two thousand, eight hundred and seventyfour. Total, in Europe and America, one hundred
and ninety-six thousand, five hundred and two. The
number of traveling preachels this year, for all
America and Canada, was three hundred and seven;
and during the same year there were eight thousand
members added to the Methodist Episcopal Church.

I believe, to say nothing of some local. preachers
who emigrated to the West at a very early day, that
James Haw and Benjamin Ogden were the finst two
regular itinerant preachers sent out in 1786. After
traveling and preaching for several years, they
both became disafiected to the Methodist Episcopal
Church and withdrew, with the secession of James
O'Ke1ly, elsewhere named in my sketches. O'Kelly
left the Church in 1792. He was a popular and
powerful preacher, and drew off many preachers and
thousands of members with him. He formed what
he called the Republican Methodist Church,' flourish40 AUTOBIOGRAPHY 01''

ed. for a few years, and then divisions and subdivisions entered among his followers. Some of his
preachers turned Arians, some Universalists, and
some joined the so-called New Lights, and some returned to the Methodist Episcopal Church, and the _

last authentic account I had of O'Kelly he was left
alone in his old age, and desired to return to the
Methodist Episcopal Church again ; but whether he
was ever received I am not informed. And here was
an end of the first grand secession from our beloved
Church.

James Haw and Benjamin Ogden, we have said,
became disaffected and left the Church with O'Kelly's
party. They soon found that they could not succeed
to any considerable extent in these Western wilds.
Haw veered about and joined the Presbyterians, became a pastor in one of their congregations with a
fixed salary, but lived and died in comparative
obscurity.

Ogden backslid, quit preaching, kept a groggery,
and became wicked, and raised his family to hate the
Methodists. In the year 1813, when I was on the
Wabash District, Tennessee Conference, Breckenridge
Circuit, at a camp-meeting in said circuit, B. Ogden
attended. There was a glorious revival of religion,

and Ogden got under strong conviction, and profess- '

ed to be reclaimed, joined the Church again, was
licensed to preach, was soon recommended and received into the traveling connection again, and lived
and died a good Methodist preacher. He was saved
by mercy, as all seceders from the Methodist Episcopal Church will be, if saved at all.

To show the ignorance the early Methodist preachers had to contend with in the Western wilds, I
will relate an incident or two that occured to Wilson

PETER GARTWRIGHT. 41

- Lee in Kentucky. He was one of the early pioneer

Methodist preachers sent to the West. He was a
very solemn and grave minister. At one of his
appointments, at a private house on a certain day,
they had a motherless pet lamb. The boys of the
family had mischievously learned this lamb to butt.
They would go near it, and make motions with their
heads, and the lamb would back and then dart forward at them, and they would jump out of the way,
so that the sheep would miss them.

A man came into the congregation who had been
drinking and frolicking all the night before. He
came in late, and took his seat on the end of a bench
nearly in the door, and, having slept none the night
before, presently he began to nod; and as he nodded
and bent forward, the pet lamb came along by the
door, and seeing this man nodding and bending forward, he took it as a banter, and straightway backed
and then sprang forward, and gave the sleeper a severe
jolt right on the head, and over he tilted him, to the
no small amusement of the congregation, who all
burst out into laughter; and grave as the preacher,
Mr. Lee, was, it so excited his risibilities that
he almost lost his ' balance. But recovering himself a little, he went on in a most solemn and impressive strain. His subject was the words of our
Lord: " Except a man deny himself, and take up his
cross, he cannot be my disciple." He urged on his
congregation, with melting voice and tearful eyes, to
take up the cross, no matter what it was, take it up.

There were in the congregation a very wicked
Dutchman and his wife, both of whom were profoundly ignorant of the Scriptures and the plan of
salvation. His wife was a notorious scold, and so
much was she given to this practice, that she made

42 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

her husband unhappy, and kept him almost always in
a perfect fret, so that he led a most miserable and
uncomfortable life. It pleased God that day to
cause the~preaching of Mr. Lee to reach their guilty
souls and break up the great deep of their hearts.
They wept aloud, seeing their lost condition, and
they, then and there, resolved to do better, and from
that time forward to take up the cross and bear it, be

.it What it might.

The congregation were generally deeply affected.
Mr. Lee exhorted them and prayed for them as long
as he consistently could, and, having another appointment some distance off that evening, he dismissed the
congregation, got a little refreshment, saddled his
horse, mounted, and started for his evening appointment. After riding some distance, he saw, a little
ahead of him, a man trudging along, carrying a woman on his back. This greatly surprised Mr. Lee.
He very naturally supposed that the woman was a
cripple, or had hurt herself in some way, so that‘ she
could not walk. The traveler was a small man, and
the woman large and heavy.

Before he overtook them Mr. Lee began to cast
about in his mind how he could render them assistance. When. he came up to them, lo and behold, who
should it be but the Dutchman and his wife that had
been so affected under his sermon at meeting. Mr.
Lee rode up and spoke to them, and inquired of the
man what had happened, or what was the matter,
that he was carrying his wife.

The Dutchman turned to Mr. Lee and said, "Besure you did tell us in your sarmon dat we must take
up de cross and follow de Saviour, or dat we could
not be saved or go to heaven, and I does desire to go
to heaven so much as any pody; and dish vife is so

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 4.3

pad, she scold and scold all de time, and dish woman
is de createst cross I have in de whole world, and I
does take her up and pare her, for I must save my
soul."

You may be sure that Mr. Lee was posed for once,
but afiaer a few moments' reflection he told the Dutch-.,
man to put his wife down, and he dismounted from
his horse. He directed them to sit down on a log by
the road side. He held the reins of his horse's bridle
and sat down by them, took out his Bible, read to
them several passages of Scripture, and explained and
expounded to them the way of the Lord more perfectly. He opened to them the nature of the cross of
Christ, what it is, how it is to be taken up, and how
they were to bear that cross; and after teaching and
advising them some time, he prayed for them by the
road side, left them deeply affected, mounted his horse,
and rode on to his evening appointment.

Long before Mr. Lee came around his circuit to his
next appointment the Dutchman and his scolding
wife were both powerfully converted to God, and
when he came round he took them into the Church.
The Dutchman's wife was cured of her scolding. Of
course he got clear of this cross. They lived together
long and happily, adorning their profession, and giving ample evidence that religion could cure a scolding wife, and that God could and did convert poor
ignorant Dutch people.

This Dutchman often told his experience in lovefeasts, with thrilling effect, and hardly ever failed to
melt the whole congregation into a flood of tears;
and on one particular occasion which is vividly printed
on my recollection, I believe the whole congregation
in the love-feast, which lasted beyond the time allotted for such meetings, broke out into a loud shout.

44 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Thus Brother Lee was the honored instrument in the ‘
hand of God of planting Methodism, amid clouds of ,
ignorance and opposition, among the early settlers of _
the far West. Brother Lee witnessed a good confession to the end. lit an early period of his ministry
he fell from the Walls of Zion with the trump of God
in his hand, and has gone to his reward in heaven.
Peace to his memory. ‘

PETER GARTWBIGHT. 45

CHAPTER V.
THE GREAT REVIVAL.

FROM 1801 for years a blessed revival of religion
spread through almost the entire inhabited parts of
the West, Kentucky, Tennessee, the Carolinas, and
many other parts, especially through the Cumberland
country, which was so called from the Cumberland
River, which headed and mouthed in Kentucky, but
in its great bend circled south through Tennessee,
near Nashville. The Presbyterians and Methodists
in a great measure united in this work, met together,
prayed together, and preached together.

In this revival originated .our camp-meetings, and
in both these denominations they were held every year,

and, indeed, have been ever since, more or less. They

would erect their camps with logs or frame them, and
cover them with clapboards or shingles. They would
also erect a shed, sufliciently large to protect five tl1ousand people from wind and rain, and cover it with
boards or shingles; build a large stand, seat the shed,
and here they would collect together from forty to fifty
miles ‘around, sometimes further than that. Ten,
twenty, and sometimes thirty ministers, of different
denominations, would come together and preach night
and day, four or five days together; and, indeed, I
have known these camp-meetings to last three or four
weeks, and great good resulted from them. I have
seen more than a hundred sinners fall like dead
men under one powerful sermon, and I have seen and

46 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

heard more than five hundred Christians all shouting
aloud the high praises of God at once; and I will venture to assert that many happy thousands were awakened and converted to God at these camp-meetings.
Some sinners mocked, some of the old dry professors
opposed, some of the old starched Presbyterian
preachers preached against these exercises, but still
the work went on and spread almost in every direction, gathering additional force, until our country

_ seemed all coming home toGod.

In this great revival the Methodists kept moderately balanced; for we had excellent preachers to
steer the ship or guide the flock. But some of our
members ran wild, and indulged in some extrava‘ gancies that were hard to control.

The Presbyterian preachers and members, not being
accustomed to much noise or shouting, when they
yielded to it went into great extremes and downright
wildness, to the great injury of the cause of God.
Their old preachers licensed a great many young men
to preach, contrary to their Confession of Faith.
That Confession of Faith required their ministers to
believe in unconditional election and reprobation, and
the unconditional and final perseverance of the saints.
But in this revival they, almost to a man, gave up
these points of high Calvinism, and preached a free
salvation to all mankind. The Westminster Confession required every man, before he could be licensed
to preach, to have a liberal education; but this qualification was dispensed with, and a great many fine
men were licensed to preach without this literary
qualification or subscribing to those high-toned doctrines of Calvinism.

This state of things produced great dissatisfaction
in the Synod of Kentucky, and messenger after mesPETER CARTWRIGHT. 47

senger was sent to wait on the Presbytery to get
them to desist from their erratic course, but without success. Finally they were cited to trial before
the constituted authorities of the Church. Some
were censured, some were suspended, some retraced
their steps, while others surrendered their credentials
of ordination, and the rest were cut off from the
Church. ,

While in this amputated condition, they called a
general meeting of all their licentiates. They met
our presiding elder, J. Page, and a number of Methodist ministers at a quarterly meeting in Logan
County, and proposed to join the Methodist Episcopal Church as a body; but our aged ministers declined
this offer, and persuaded them to rise up and embody
themselves together, and constitute a Church. They
reluctantly yielded to this advice, and, in due time
and form, constituted what they denominated the
" Cumberland Presbyterian Church ;" and in their
confession of faith split, as they supposed, the difference between the Predestinarians and the Methodists,
rejecting a partial atonement or special election and
reprobation, but retaining the doctrine of the final
unconditional perseverance of the saints.

What an absurdity! While a man remains a sinner he may come, as a free agent, to Christ, if he will,
and if he does not come his damnation will be just,
because he refused offered mercy; but as soon as
he gets converted his free agency is destroyed, the
best boon of Heaven is then lost, and although he may
baokslide, wander away from Christ, yet he shall
be brought in. He cannot finally be lost if he has
ever been really converted to God.

They make a very sorry show in their attempt to
support this left -foot of Calvinism. But be it spoken

48 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

to their credit, they do not often preach this doctrine. They generally preach Methodist doctrine,
and have been the means of doing a great deal of
good, and would have done much more if they had
left this relic of John Calvin behind.

In this revival, usually termed in the West the Cum-'
berland revival, many joined the different Churches,

especially the Methodist and Cumberland Presbyte-'

rians. The Baptists also came in for a share of the
converts, but not to any great extent. Infidelity
quailed before the mighty power of God, which was
displayed among the people. Universalism was almost driven from the land. The Predestinarians of
almost all sorts put forth a mighty effort to stop the
work of God.

Just in the midst of our controversies on the subject
of the powerful exercises among the people under
preaching, a new exercise broke out among us, called
the jerks, which was overwhelming in its effects upon
the bodies and minds of the people. No‘matter
whether they were saints or sinners, they would be
taken under a warm song or serrnon, and seized with
a convulsive jerking all over, which they could not
by any possibility avoid, and the more theyiresisted
the more they jerked. ' If they would not strive
against it and pray in good earnest, the jerking would
usually abate. I have seen more than five hundred
persons jerking at one time in my large congregations.
Most usually persons taken with the jerks, to obtain
relief, as they said, would rise up and dance. Some
would run, but could not get away. Some would resist‘; on such the erks were generally very severe.

To see those proud young gentlemen andyoung
ladies, dressed in their silks, jewelry, and prunella,
from top to toe, take the je7"]c‘8, would often excite my

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 49

risibilities. The first jerk or so, you would see their
fine bonnets, caps, and combs fly; and so sudden
would be the jerking of the head that their long
loose hair would crack almost as loud as a wagoner's
whip.

At one of my appointments in 1804 there was a
very large congregation turned out to hear the Kentucky boy, as they called me. Among the rest there
were two very finely-dressed, fashionable young
ladies, attended by two brothers with loaded horsewhips. Although the house was large, it was crowded.
The two young ladies, coming in late, took their seats
near where I stood, and their two brothers stood in the
door. I was a little unwell, and I had a phial of peppermint in my pocket. Before I commenced preaching I took out my phial and swallowed a little of the
peppermint. While I was preaching, the congregation was melted into tears. The -two young gentlemen moved off to the yard fence, and both the young
ladies took the jerks, and they were greatly mortified
about it. There was a great stir in the congregation.
Some wept, some shouted, and before our meeting
closed several were converted.

As I dismissed the assembly a man stepped up to
me, and warned me to be on my guard, for he had
heard the two brothers swear they would horsewhip
me when meeting was out, for giving their sisters the
jerks. "Well," said I, " I'll see to that."

I went out and said to the young men that I understood they intended to horsewhip me for giving their
sisters the jerks. One replied that he did. I undertook to expostulate with him on the absurdity of the
charge against me, but he swore I need not deny it;
for he had seen me take out a phial, in which I carried some truck that gave his sisters the jerks. As
.1

5

50 A AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

quick as thought it came into my mind how I would

‘get clear of my whipping, and, jerking out the peppermint phial, said I, "Yes; if I gave your sisters the
jerks I'll give them to you." In a moment I saw he
was scared. I moved toward him, he backed, I advanced, and he wheeled and ran, warning me not to
come near him, or he would kill me. It raised the
laugh on him, and I escaped my whipping. I had
the pleasure, before the year was out, of seeing all
four soundly converted to God, and I took them into
the Church.

While I am on this subject I will relate a very serious circumstance which I knew to take place with a
man who had the jerks at a camp-meeting, on what was
called the Ridge, in William Magee's congregation.
There was a great work of religion in the encampment. The jerks were very prevalent. There was
a company of drunken rowdies who came to interrupt
the meeting. These rowdies were headed by a very
large drinking man. They came with their bottles
of whisky in their pockets. This large man cursed
the jerks, and all religion. Shortly afterward he took
the jerks, and he started to run, but he jerked so
powerfully he could not get away. He halted among
some saplings, and, although he was violently agitated,
he took out his bottle of whisky, and swore he would
drink the damned jerks to death; but he jerked at
such a rate he could not_get the bottle to his mouth,
though he tried hard. At length he fetched a sudden
jerk, and the bottle struck a sapling and was broken
to pieces, and spilled his whisky on the ground. There
was a great crowd gathered round him, and when he
lost his whisky he became very much enraged, and
cursed and swore very profanely, his jerks still in~
creasing. At length he fetched a very violent jerk,

PETER cxmrwarenr. 51

snapped his neck, fell, and soon expired, with his

mouth full of cursing and bitterness.

I always looked upon the jerks as a judgment sent
from God,‘ ‘first, to bring sinners to repentance; and,
secondly, to show professors that God could work with
or without means, and that he could work over and
above means, and do whatsoever seemeth him good,
to the glory of his grace and the salvation of the
world.

There is no doubt in my mind that, with weakminded, ignorant, and superstitious persons, there
was a great deal of sympathetic feeling with many
that claimed to be under the influence of this jerking exercise; and yet, with many, it was perfectly
involuntary. It was, on all occasions, my practice
to recommend fervent prayer as a remedy, and it
almost universally proved an effectual antidote.

There were many other strange and wild exercises
into which the subjects of this revival fell; such, for
instance, as what was called the running, jumping,
barking exercise. The Methodist preachers generally preached against this extravagant wildness. I
did it uniformly in my little ministrations, and
sometimes gave great offense; but I feared no consequences when I felt my awful responsibilities to
God. ~ From these wild exercises, another great evil
arose from the heated and wild imaginations of some.
They professed to fall into trances and see visions;
they would fall at meetings and sometimes at home,
and lay apparently powerless and motionless for days,
sometimes for a week at a time, without food or
drink; and when they came to, they professed to
have seen heaven and hell, to have seen God,
angels, the devil and the damned; they would prophesy, and, under the pretense of Divine inspiration,

52 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or .

predict the time of the end of the world, and the
ushering in of the great millennium.

This was the most troublesome delusion of all;
it made such an appeal to the ignorance, superstition, and credulity of the people, even saint as well
as sinner. I watched this matter with a vigilant eye.
If I opposed it, I would have to meet the clamor
of the multitude; and if any one opposed it, these
very visionists would single him out, and denounce
the dreadful judgments of God against him. They
would even set the very day that God was to burn
the world, like the self-deceived modern Millerites.
They would prophesy, that if any one did oppose
them, God would send fire down from heaven
and consume him, like the blasphemous Shakers.
They would proclaim that they could heal all manner
of diseases, and raise the dead, just like the diabolical Mormons. They professed to have converse with
spirits of the dead in heaven and hell, like the modern
spirit rappers. Such a state of things I never saw
before, and I hope in God I shall neversee again.

I pondered Well the Whole matter in view of my
/responsibilities, searched the Bible for the true fulfillment of promise and prophecy, prayed to God for
light and Divine aid, and proclaimed open war against
these delusions. In the midst of them along came
the Shakers, and Mr. Rankin, one of the Presbyterian revival preachers, joined them; Mr. G. Wall,
a visionary local preacher among the Methodists,
joined them; all the country was in commotion.

I made public appointments and drew multitudes
together, and openly showed from the Scriptures that
these delusions were false. Some of these visionary
men and women prophesied that God would kill
me. The Shakers soon pretended to seal my damnaPETER CABTWBIG-HT. 58

tion. But nothing daunted, for I knew Him in whom
I had believed, I threw my appointments in the midst
of them, and proclaimed to listening: thousands the
more sure word of prophecy. This mode of attack
threw a damper on these visionary, self-deluded, false
prophets, sobered some, reclaimed others, and stayed
the fearful. tide of delusion that was sweeping over
the country.

I will here state a case which occurred at an early
day in the State of Indiana, in a settlement called
Busroe. Many of the early emigrants to that settlement were Methodists, Baptists, and Cumberland
Presbyterians. The Shaker priests, all apostates
from the Baptist and the Cumberland Presbyterians,
went over among them. Many of them I was personally acquainted with, and had given them letters
when they moved from Kentucky to that new country.
There were then no Methodist circuit preachers in
that region.

There was an old Brother Collins, a local preacher,
who withstood these Shakers, and in private combat
he was a full match for any of them, but he was not
eloquent in public debate, and hence the Shaker
priests overcame my old brother, and by scores
swept members of different Churches away from
their steadfastness into the muddy pool of Shakerism.

The few who remained steadfast sent to Kentucky
for me, praying me to come and help them. I sent
an appointment, with an invitation to meet any or

- all of the Shaker priests in public debate; but instead

of meeting me, they appointed a meeting in opposition, and warned the believers, as they called them,
to keep away from my meeting; but from our former acquaintance and intimate friendship, many of
them came to hear me. I preached to a vast crowd

54 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

for about three hours, and I verily believe God helped
me. The very foundations of evelgy Shaker present
were shaken from under him. They then besought
me to go to the Shaker meeting that night. I went,
and when I got there we had a great crowd. I proposed to them to have a debate, and they dared not A

refuse. The terms were these: A local preacher I
had with me was to open the debate; then one or all
of their preachers, if they chose, were to follow, and
I was to bring up the rear. My preacher opened
the debate by merely stating the points of difference.
Mr. Brayelton followed, and, instead of argument, he
turned everything into abuse and insulting slander.
Then he closed, and Mr. Gill rose, but, instead of argument, he uttered a few words of personal abuse,
and then called on all the Shakers to meet him a few
minutes in the yard, talk a little, and then disperse.

Our debate was out in the open air, at the end of
a cabin. I rose, called them to order, and stated
that it was fairly agreed by these Shaker priests that
I should bring up the rear, or close the argument.
I stated that it was cowardly to run; that if I was
the devil himself, and they were right, I could not
hurt them. I got the most of them to take their
seats and hear me. Mr. Gill gathered a little band,
and he and they left. They had told the people in
the day that if I continued to oppose them, God
would make an example of me, and send fire from
heaven and consume me. When I rose to reply I
felt a Divine sense of the approbation of God, and
that he would give me success.

I addressed the multitude about three hours, and
when I closed my argument I opened the door of the
Church, and invited all that would renounce Shakerism to come and give me their hand. Forty-seven

PETER cnvrwarenr. 55

ca.me forward, and then and there openly renounced
the dreadful delusion. The next day I followed those
that fled; and the next day I went from cabin to cabin,
taking the names of those that returned to the solid
foundation of truth, and my number rose to eightyeeven. I then organized them into a regular society,
and the next fall had a preacher sent to them. And
perhaps this victory may be considered among the
first-fruits of Methodism in that part of this new
country. This was in 1808.

At this meeting I collected, A as well as I could,
the names and places where it was supposed they
wanted Methodist preaching. I made out and re
turned a kind of plan for a circuit, carried it to Conference, and they were temporarily supplied by the
presiding elder in 1809 and 1810. In 1811 the circuit was called St. Vincennes, and was attached to the
Cumberland District, and Thomas Stilwell appointed
the preacher in charge.

5.6 AUTQRIOGBAPHY or

CHAPTER VI.

EXHORTING AND FIRST PREACHIN G.

I WILL now resume my personal narrative. I went
on enjoying great comfort and peace. I attended
several camp-meetings among the Methodists and
Presbyterians. At all of them there were many
souls converted to God. At one of these camp' meetings something like the following incident occurred:
There was a great stir of religion in the crowded

congregation that attended. Many opposed the work,
and among the rest a Mr. D—, who called himself
a Jew. He was tolerably smart, and seemed to take
great delight in opposing the Christian religion. In
the intermissions, the young men and boys of us, who
professed religion, would retire to the woods and hold
prayer-meetings; and if we knew of any boys that
were seeking religion, we would take them along and
pray for them. Many of them obtained religion in
these praying circles, and raise loud shouts of praise
to God, in which those of us that were religious would
Join.

One evening a large company of us retired for
prayer. In the midst of our little meeting this
Jew appeared, and he desired to know what we
were about. Well, I told him. He said it was all
wrong, that it was idolatry to pray to J esus Christ,
and that God did not nor would he answer such
prayers. I soon saw his object was to get us into dePETER caarwnren-r. 57

bate and break up our prayer-meeting. I asked him,
" Do you really believe there is a God ?"

" Yes, I do," said he.

"Do you believe that God will hear your prayers 3"

" Yes," said he.

" Do you really believe that this work among us is
Wrong 3"

He answered, " Yes." _

"Well now, my dear sir," said I, "let us test this
matter. If you are in earnest, get down here and
pray to God to stop this work, and if it is wrong he
will answer your petition and stop it; if it is not
wrong, all hell cannot stop it."

The rest of our company seeing me so bold took
courage. The Jew hesitated. I said, "Get down instantly and pray, for if we are wrong we want to know
it." After still lingering and showing unmistakable
signs of his unwillingness, I rallied him again. Slowly
he kneeled, cleared his throat, and coughed. I said,
" Now, boys, pray with all your might that God may
answer by fire." '

Our Jew began and said, tremblingly, " O Lord
God Almighty," and coughed again, cleared his throat,
and started again, repeating the same words. We
saw his evident confusion, and we simultaneously
prayed out aloud at the top of our voices. The Jew
leaped up and started off, and we raised the shout
and had a glorious time. Several of our mourners
were converted, and we all rose and started into camp
at the top of our speed, shouting, having, as we firmly
believed, obtained a signal victory over the devil and
the Jew.

In 1 802 William M'Kendree was presiding elder
of Kentucky District. John Page and Thomas Wilkerson were appointed to the Cumberland Circuit.

58 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

The Conference this fall was held at Strother's Meeting-house, Tennessee. This was the first time I saw
Bishop Asbury, that great, devoted man of God.
Here the Cumberland District was formed, and John
Page appointed presiding elder. The name of Cumberland Circuit was changed into Red River Circuit,
and Jesse Walkerpwas appointed to ride it. This was
the circuit on which I lived. _

The membership of the Western Conference this
year numbered seven thousand two hundred and one,
the traveling preachers numbered twenty-seven, probationers and all.

At a quarterly meeting held in the spring of this
year, 1802, Jesse Walker, our preacher in charge,
came to me and handed me a small slip of paper, with
these words written on it:

‘-‘ Peter Cartwright is hereby permitted to exercise
his gifts as an exhorter in the Methodist Episcopal
Church, so long as his practice is agreeable to the
Gospel. Signed in behalf of the society at Ebenezer.

"Jnssn WALKER, A. P.
"May, 1802,"

I was very much surprised. I had not been talked
to by the preacher, nor had I formally attempted to
exhort. It is true, in class and other meetings, when
my soul was filled with the love of God, I would mount
a bench and exhort with all the power I had; and it
is also true that my mind had been deeply exercised
about exhorting and preaching too. I told Brother
Walker I did not want license to exhort; that if I did
not feel happy I could not exhort, but if my soul got
happy I felt that I had license enough. He urged
me to keep the license, alleging that it was the more
orderly way, and I yielded to his advice. _

To show how matters ‘were done up in those early

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 59

days of Methodism, I will here state that this permit
to exhort was all the license I ever received from the
Church to preach until I received my parchment of
ordination.

The fall of this year my father moved from Logan
County down toward the mouth of the Cumberland
River, into what was called Lewiston County. This
was a new country, and at least eighty miles from any
circuit. There was no regular circuit, and no organized classes; but there were a good many scattering
members of the Methodist Episcopal Church through
that region of country. I applied to Brother Page,
our presiding elder, for a letter for myself, my mother,
and one sister, which he gave us. On examination
I found that mine contained a "Benjamin's mess." It
not only stated my membership and authority to exhort, but it gave me authority to travel through all

that destitute region, hold meetings, organize classes,
and, in a word, to form a circuit, and meet him the

next fall at the fourth quarterly meeting of the Red
River Circuit, with a plan of a new circuit, number
of members, names of preachers, if any, exhorters,
class-leaders, &c., &c., &c. I am son'y I did not preserve the document; for surely, all things considered,
it would be a curiosity to educated and refined Methodists at this day.

I felt bad on the reception of this paper, and told
Brother Page I did not want to take it, for I saw
through the solemn responsibilities it rolled upon me.
I told him just to give me a simple letter of membership; that, although I did think at times that it was
my duty to preach, I had little education, and that it
was my intention to go to school the next year. He
then told me that this was the very best school or
college that I could find between heaven and earth,

& AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

but advised me, when my father got settled down'

there, if I could find a good moral school with a good
teacher, to go to it through the winter; then, in the

spring and summer, form the circuit and do the best
I could.

Shortly after my father settled‘ himself I inquired
for a good teacher and school, and found that there
was one a few miles off, taught by a well-educated
teacher, a Seceder minister, who had finished his
education in Lexington, Ky., under a Mr. Rankin.
I went and entered as a scholar, and boarded with a
fine old Methodist man, close by. This school was
called Brown's Academy. He taught all the branches
of a common English education, also the dead languages. I now thought Providence had opened my
way to obtain a good education, which I had so long

_desired, and of which I had been deprived without
remedy. I entered the school, and was making very
rapid progress. The brother with whom I boarded, being a zealous
man of God, insisted that we should hold meetings on
Sundays and in the evenings. To this I consented.
We held prayer-meetings on evenings, and Sundays I
attempted to exhort the large congregations that attended. We soon collected a small class from the
scattered Methodists around, had a few conversions,
and I began to think that God had wonderfully opened
my way before me. But soon a storm of persecution
arose. My teacher was a very bigoted Seceder, and
I believe he hated the Methodists more than he hated
the devil. I know he hated them worse than the bottle, for he would get drunk at times.

There was a large class of young men in school
about my age, and they were very wicked and profane. I saw my perilous condition, and put myself

I

PETER cnnrwnrenr. 61

under strong restraints, so that I should give no one
any just offense. My teacher would try to draw me
into debate, but this I avoided. The young men set
themselves to play tricks and start false reports on
me, by Way of diversion calling me the Methodist
preacher. Teacher and all would do this. I told Mr.
Brown and all the rest that I was no preacher, but
that I wished I was a good one. At -length two of
these young students fixed a plan to duck me in the
creek that ran hard by. There was a very beautiful
grassy plat of ground right on the bank of the creek,
in a retired spot. The bank was about seven feet perpendicular, and there was a deep hole of water right
opposite, in which the water was ten feet deep. They
decoyed me to this place under the pretense that they
wanted me to pray for them, pretending to be in great
distress on account of their sins. I was suspicious,
but thought if they were sincere it would be wrong to
refuse them. So, putting myself on my guard as best
I could, I went with them, not knowing their plan.
When we came to the bank of the creek they both
seized me, intending to throw me over the perpendicular bank into the deep water. As quick as
thought I erked loose from one, and gave the other a
sudden flirt over the bank into the stream. The other
and I clinched, and, being nearly equal in strength, a
hard tussle ensued. In the scufile we fell to the
ground, and I rolled over toward the precipice, holding him fast, until at length into the deep hole We
both Went, and then had to swim out.

Although this to me was an unpleasant affair, yet
there was no shouting over me ; for if I had got wet,
I had ducked both of them. I bore all these things
for some time patiently, but, my difliculties increasing, I complained to Mr. Brown, the teacher. He

62 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

would do nothing to bring things right. I then lefi
the school, deeply regretting that I was thereby deprived of the privilege of finishing my education. I
then prepared myself, and started out to form a kind
of circuit, and gather up scattered members and organize classes. I had much opposition insome places, but
in others was kindly received. We had some very
powerful displays of Divine grace, a goodly number
obtained religion, and I received about seventy into
society, appointed leaders, met classes, sung, prayed,
and exhorted, and, under the circumstances, did the
best I knew how. _

Here I found the celebrated James Axley, and took
him into the Church. Peace to his memory. He
was in after years favorably known as a powerful and
successful traveling preacher. He was a great and
good man of God. He married, located, and long

since went to his reward. a

In the fall of this year, 1803, I met Brothers Page
and Walker, reported my success, and the plan of the
circuit. It was called Livingston Circuit, and Jesse
Walker was appointed to it, and traveled it in 1804
and 1805. The increase of members this year was
over nine thousand throughout the connection. In
the Western Conference the increase was fifteen hundred. The number of traveling preachers was about
thirty-five. There were four presiding-elder districts
in the Western Conference: Holston, Cumberland,
Kentucky, and Ohio. Brother Page located, and
Lewis Garrett succeeded him on the Cumberland District. The Red River Circuit, in this district, was a
very large one. It had but one preacher appointed
to it, namely, Ralph Lotspeich.

Brother Garrett, the new elder, called on me at my
father‘s, and urged me to go on this circuit with Brother

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 68

Imtspeich. ‘ My father was unwilling, but my mother
urged' me to go, and finally prevailed. This was in
October, 1803, when I was a little over eighteen years
of age. I had a hard struggle to give my consent,
and although I thought it my duty' to preach, yet I
thought I could do this and not throw myself into
the ranks as a circuit preacher, when I was liable to
be sent from Greenbrier to Natchez; no members
hardly to support a preacher, the discipline only
allowing a single man eiglity dollars, and in nine
cases out of ten‘ he. could not get half of that amount.
These were times that tried men's souls and bodies
too.

At last I literally gave up the world, and started,
bidding farewell to father and mother, brothers and
sisters, and met Brother Lotspeich at an appointment
in Logan County. He told me I must preach that
night. This I had never done; mine was an exhorter's dispensation. I tried to beg off, but he urged
me to make the effort. I went out and prayed fervently for aid from heaven. Al at once it seemed to
me as if I could never preach at all, but I struggled
in prayer. At length I asked God, if he had called
me to preach, to give me aid that night, and give me
one soul, that is, convert one soul under my preaching,
as evidence that I was called to this work. ‘

I went into the house, took my stand, gave out a
hymn, sang, and prayed. I then rose, gave them for a
text Isaiah xxvi, 4: "Trust ye in the Lord forever: for
in theLord Jehovah is everlasting strength." The Lord
gave light, liberty, and.power; the congregation Was
melted into tears. There was present a professed infidel. The word reached his heart by the Eternal
Spirit. He was powerfully convicted, and, as I believe, soundly converted to God that night, and joined

64 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

the Church, and afterward became a useful member
of the same.

I traveled on this circuit one quarter, took twentyfive into the Church, and at the end of three months
received six dollars. The health of Brother Crutchfield, who was on the Waynesville Circuit, having
failed, he retired from labor, and Brother Garret
placed me on that circuit in his place, and put on
the circuit with me Thomas Lasley, a fine young
man, the son of an old local preacher who lived in
Green County.

Our circuit was very large, reaching from the
north of Green River to the Cumberland River, and
south of said river into the State of Tennessee. Here
was a vast field to work in; our rides were long, our
appointments few and far between. There were a
great many Baptists in the bounds of the circuit, and
among them were over thirty preachers, some of
whom were said to be very talented. In the four
weeks that it took us to go round the circuit, we had
but two days' rest, and often we preached every day
and every night, and although in my nineteenth year,
I was nearly beardless, and out two of my back jaw
teeth this year. Hence they called me the boy
preacher, and a great many flocked out to hear the
boy. ‘A revival broke out in many neighborhoods,
and scores of souls were converted to God and joined
the Methodist Episcopal Church ; but there was also
considerable persecution.

We had a preaching place in what, at that early
day, was called Stockton Valley. There were several members of the Methodist Episcopal Church
scattered around in the neighborhood, butno organized class. The Baptists, some years before, had a
society here, and had built a log meeting-house,

PETER cnnrwnrenr. 65

which was very common at an early day in the
West.‘ It was covered with boards. The Baptists
flourished here for a considerable time, and they had
enjoyed regular monthly preaching; but the society
had nearly died out, and the preaching had been
withdrawn for several years. The house was old and
out of repair. As I passed round my circuit, I was
requested to preach a funeral sermon at this old
church. Accordingly, I left an appointment on a
Sabbath. When I came there was a very large congregation. While I was preaching, the power of
God fell on the assembly, and there was an awful
shaking among the dry bones. Several fell to the
floor and cried for mercy.

The people besought me to preach again at night.
I gave out an appointment accordingly, and having
several days' rest, owing to a new arrangement in
the circuit, I kept up the meeting night and day
for some time, and at every coming together we had
a gracious work. Many obtained religion, and great
was the joy of the people. There were twenty—three
very clear and sound conversions. As a matter of
course they felt a. great love to me, whom they all

claimed as the instrument, in the hand of God, of ‘

their conversion. I was young and inexperienced in
doctrine, and especially was I unacquainted with the
proselyting tricks of those that held to exclusive immersion as the mode, and the only mode, of baptism.
I believe if I had opened the doors of the Church then,
all of them would have joined the Methodist Church,
but I thought I would give them time to inform

themselves. Accordingly, I told them that when I
came again, I would explain our rules and open the.

doors of the Church, and then they could join us if

they liked our rules and doctrines. In the mean-'

5

66 AUTOBIOGRAPHY, or

time I left them some copies of our Discipline to
read.

After doing this I started on my circuit round, and
although the Baptist preachers had left this place,
without preaching in it for years, yet, in a fewdays
after I was gone, there were sent on appointments
for the next Sabbath three of the Baptist, preachers, and they came on, anddallwthree preached as
their custom was, and they all opened with the cry

« of "Water, water; you must follow your Lord down

79

into the water. They then appointed what they
called a union meeting there, to commence the next
Friday and hold over Sabbath, and although I have
lived long and studied hard, I have never to this day
found out what a Baptist means by a union meeting.
But to return. The few scattered Methodists in the
neighborhood took the alarm, for fear these preachers
would run my converts into the Water before I would
come round, and they dispatched an old exhorter
after me, saying I must come immediately, or my
converts would all be ducked. I had appointments
out ahead, and I told the old exhorter if I went,
he must go on and fill my appointments, to which
he readily agreed. So back I came on Friday
to the commencement of their union meeting. Two
of them preached, but they paid no attention to
me at all. As they had no meeting at night, I gave
out an appointment for night at S 's, Esq. V He
and his wife were two of my converts, and kind
of leaders in the neighborhood. The people flocked
out, and we had a good meeting and two conversions.

 

Next day we repaired to the old log meeting-hpouse, ‘

and heard two more water sermons. When they
were done preaching, they opened the way for persons to join the Church by giving in their experiPETER cuvrwnrenr. 67

ence. One old lady rose, and gave in something for s
an experience that had happened about ten years
before. Then an old man rose, and told a remarkable
dream he had in North Carolina twenty years before.
They were both accordingly received by giving them
the right hand of fellowship. There was then a
seeming pause. The preachers urged the people to
come forward and give in their experience. 0, how
I felt! I was afraid that some one of my young converts would break the way, and the rest would then
follow, and so I would lose all my converts. At
length one of those young converts rose, and gave in
his experience, claiming me, under God, as the instrument of his conviction and conversion; then another and another, till twenty-three of them told their
experience; every one of them claiming me, under
God, as the instrument of their salvation.

Their experiences were pronounced good, and the
right hand of fellowship was freely given, and there
was great joy in the camp, but it was death in the
pot to. me. I thought I could not bear up under it.
I was sitting thinking what I would do. I am bereft
of my children, and what have I left? Just behind
me sat a very intelligent lady, who had long been a
member of the Methodist Episcopal Church. About
the time they were done giving the right hand of fellowship and rejoicing over my stolen children, a
thought struck my mind very forcibly to give in my '
experience, and act as though I intended to join the
Baptist Church. It may be that I can yet save them.
I rose up, and gave in my experience; they gave
me the right hand of fellowship, and then there was
great rejoicing over the Methodist preaching boy.

Just as I sat down I felt some one touch me on the
shoulder. I turned, and as I looked round I met the

@ AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

1 eyes of my intelligent Methodist sister, and the large
tears [were coursing down her cheeks and dropping
off her chin.

"O, brother," said she, in a subdued tone, "are
you going to leave us ?"

I replied to her, "Dear sister, fear not; I know
what I am about. Pray hard. I hope to retake my
children yet." And though she did not understand
my plan, yet my reply seemed to quiet her fears.

There was a fine creek running near the old church.
The preachers directed us all to appear next morning at nine o'clock, with a change of apparel, to be
baptized.

I held meeting again that night, and had a good
time. My situation was a critical one. I had no
one to advise with. I dared not tell any one what I
was going to do, for fear my plan would out and my
object be defeated. I rose early next morning, retired to the woods, and if ever I asked God in good
earnest for help it was then.

Brother and Sister S , with whom I stayed,
prepared a change of apparel, in order to baptism.
At the appointed hour we all met at the creek, but I
took no change of apparel. I had been baptized,
and I did not intend to abjure my baptism. But I
kept this all to myself. There was a great crowd out
to see us immersed. My twenty-three young converts and the two old, dry dreamers that first gave in
their experience, were all dressed and ready for the
performance of what they considered to be their
Christian duty. The preachers appeared. One of
them sang and prayed, then gave us an exhortation,
and bade us come forward. I knew all the time that
it was all important to my success that I should present
myself first. Accordingly I stepped forward, and said,

PETER CARTWRIGHT; 69

" Brother M "——who was the preacher and adm.inistrator—" I wish to join the Baptist Church if I
can come in with a good conscience. I have been
baptized, and my conscience is perfectly satisfied
with it, and I cannot submit to be re-baptized. Can
I come into your Church on these terms ?"

The position I occupied startled the preacher.

" When were you baptized?" he asked.

" Years gone by," I replied.

" But how was it done? Who baptized you ?"
was the next inquiry. '

" One of the best preachers the Lord ever made."

" Was it done by sprinkling?"

"Yes, sir."

" That is no baptism at all."

I replied, "The Scriptures say that baptism is not
the putting away the filth of the flesh, but.the answer of a good conscience, and my conscience is perfectly satisfied with my baptism, and your conscience
has nothing to do with it."

" Well," said be, "it is contrary to our faith and
order to let you come into the Baptist Church in that
way. We cannot do it."

"Brother M———," said I, "your faith and order

must be wrong. The Church has heard my experi- ‘

ence, and pronounced it good; and you believe that
I am a Christian, and cannot fall away so as to be
finally lost. What am I to do? Are you going to
keep me out of the Church, bleating round the walls
.ike a lost sheep in a gang by myself? Brother
M , you must receive me into the Church. I
have fully made up my mind to join you on these
terms; now, will you let me into the Church?"

Our preacher by this time had evidently lost his
patience, and he very sharply bid me stand away, and

70 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or \

not detain others. It was an intensely thrilling moment with me. I cast a look around on the crowd,

and saw they were enlisted in my favor. I cast a ,

wistful eye on the young converts; their eyes met
mine most sympathetically, and many of them were
weeping, they were so deeply affected. They all involuntarily seemed to move toward me, and their looks
plainly spoke in my favor. It was an awful moment.
0, how I felt! who can describe my feelings?

I stepped aside. Brother S——- stood next to the
preacher, dressed ready for baptism; his wife was also
dressed, and leaning on her husband's arm. Brother
S—— said:

" Brother M , are you going to reject Brother
Cartwright, and not receive him into the Church?"

" I cannot receive him," said Brother M .

"Well," said Brother S——, "if Brother Cartwright, who has been the means, in the hand of God,
of my conversion, and the saving of so many precious
souls, cannot come into the Church, I cannot and will
not join it." " Nor I," said his wife; " Nor I,"
" Nor I ;" and thus it went round, until every one of
my twenty-three young converts filed off, and gathered around me. " That's right, brethren," said I,
." stand by me, and don't leave me; the Lord will
bring all right!"

Well, the two old dreamers were baptized, and then
the preachers urged the rest to come; but all in vain.
Now, my dear reader, just imagine if you can, how I
felt. I had a great mind to shout right out, and should
have done so, but forbearance, at that time at least,
was a virtue.

From the creek we repaired to the old log-church.
Three of their ministers preached ; and you may depend on it, I got a large share of abuse. They comPETER CARTWRIGHT. 71

pared me to the Pharisees of old, for they said I would
not go in myself, and those that would go in I had
prevented; but I bore it as best Icould. They stated
that in all probability these souls that I had hindered
would be lost, and if so, their damnation would be
laid to me; but this did not alarm me much, for they
had pronounced us all Christians good and true, and
had often in their sermons there said that if a person
were really converted, he never could lose his religion.
How, then, could we be lost? and what was there to
alarm us? The congregation saw the absurdity, and
more and more were interested in my favor.

Next came on their communion. There were some
loose planks laid across the benches, and all the members of their particular faith, that had been immersed,
were invited to seat themselves on these planks. I
was determined to give them another downward tilt,
so I took my seat with the communicants; and some
of the young converts, seeing me do so, seated themselves there also. But when the deacons came with
the bread and wine, they passed us by. When they
had got round, I rose and asked for the bread and
wine for myself and the young converts. This threw
a difficulty in the way of the deacons; however, they
asked the preacher if they might give us the elements.
The preachers peremptorily forbade it.

I then said, " My brethren, you, after hearing our
experience, pronounced us Christians; and you say a
Christian never can be lost; and our Saviour pronounced a solemn woe on those that offend one of
his little ones; now do, therefore, give us the bread
and wine !"

One of the preachers gave me a sharp reproof, and
told me to be silent. This treatment enlisted the
sympathies of almost the entire assembly, and they

72 auronroenarnr or

cried out, " Shame! shame 1" Just as fie preacher
was about to dismiss the congregation, I rose, and
asked of them the privilege of speaking to the people
fifteen or twenty minutes, to explain myself. This
they refused. I said, "Very well; I am in a free
country, and know my rights." He then dismissed
them, and I sprang on a bench, and said to the people
that if they would meet me a few rods from the church,
and hear me, I would make my defense.

The people flocked out; I mounted an old log, and
the crowd gathered around me. I showed them the
inconsistency of the Baptist preachers, and laid it to
them as well as my inexperience would permit; and

closed by saying that, as I and my children in the V

Gospel could not, in any consistent way, be admitted
into the Baptist Church, I was now determined to
organize a Methodist Church. I explained our rules,
and invited all that were willing to join us, to come
forward, and give me their hands and names. Twentyseven came forward; all of my twenty-three young
converts, and four others; and before the year ended,
we 'took into the Church there seventy-seven members, but my Baptist friends blowed almost entirely

out. I was greatly encouraged to go on, and do the
best I could.

This year, (1804,) in the Western Conference there
were 9,600 members; our increase was -2,400. The
number of traveling preachers was thirty-six. Our
Annual Conference this fall was held in October, at
Mount Gerizim, in Kentucky. Our Annual Conferences in those days were universally held with closed
doors, none but members of the conference, or visiting
members from other annual conferences, being per
mitted to occupy seats in the body. At this confer
ence Bishop Asbury presided.

nrnx canrwamnr. 18

At the close of my labors on Waynesville Circuit,
I was recommended to the Annual Conference by
the quarterly meeting as a proper person to be received into the traveling connection. There were
eighteen preachers recommended and received at
this Conference, and, perhaps, of this number, I am
the only surviving one left. One by one, these

early pioneers in the traveling ranks have fallen ~

victims to death; most of them, as far as I am informed, witnessed a good confession, and have gone
to heaven to swell the triumphant shouts of the redeemed, and meet their spiritual children in a better
country than the "far West." There was one of this
number that made shipwreck, and proved the truth
of God's word, which says, " One sinner destroyeth
much good ;" and perhaps of all the men that then
composed the Western Conference when we joined,
there are but two now living, namely, William
Burke and Jacob Young. Since writing the above,
William Burke has gone to his everlasting home.

74 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

CHAPTER VII.

PRIMITIVE METHODISM.

I Ar this conference, in October, 1804, I was sent as
the junior preacher to Salt River and Shelbyville
Circuits, which were joined together, Benjamin Lakin in charge, and William M'Kendree presiding I

elder.
The circuit was in the Kentucky District. It was
a large six weeks' circuit, and extended from the
rolling fork of Green River south, to the Ohio River
north, and even crossed the Ohio into what was then
called Clark's or the Illinois Grant, now in the eastern portion of Indiana State. We had a little Book
Concern then in its infancy, struggling hard for existence. We had no Missionary Society; no Sundayschool Society; no Church papers; no Bible or Tract
Societies; no colleges, seminaries, academies, or universities; all the efforts to get up colleges under the
patronage of the Methodist Episcopal Church in these
United States and Territories, were signal failures.
We had no pewed churches, no choirs, no organs; in
a word, we had no instrumental music in our churches
anywhere. The Methodists in that early day dressed
plain; attended their meetings faithfully, especially
preaching, prayer and class meetings; they wore no
_ jewelry, no rufiles; they would frequently walk three
or four miles to class-meetings and home again, on
' Sundays; they would go thirty or forty miles to their
quarterly meetings, and think it a glorious privilege

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 75

to meet their presiding elder, and the rest of the
preachers. They could, nearly every soul of them,
sing our hymns and spiritual songs. They religiously
kept the Sabbath day: many of them abstained from
dram-drinking, not because the temperance reformation was ever heard of in that day, but because it
was interdicted in the General Rules of our-Discipline.
The Methodists of that day stood up and faced their
preacher when they sung; they kneeled down in the
public congregation as well as elsewhere, when the
preacher said, "Let us pray." There was no standing
among the members in time of prayer, especially the
abominable practice of sitting down during that exercise was unknown among early Methodists. Parents did not allow their children to go to balls or
plays; they did not send them to dancing-schools;
they generally fasted once a week, and almost universally on the Friday before each quarterly meeting.
If the Methodists had dressed in the same "superfluity
of naughtiness" then as they do now, there were very
few even out of the Church that would have any
confidence in their religion. But 0, how have
things changed for the worse in this educational age
of the world! I do declare there was little or no
necessity for preachers to say anything against fashionable and superfluous dressing in those primitive
times of early Methodism; the very wicked themselves knew it was wrong, and spoke out against it in
the members of the Church. The moment we saw
members begin to trim in dress after the fashionable
world, we all knew they would not hold out. Permit
me here to give a few cases in confirmation of some
things I have said.
This year, in my circuit, there lived a very wealthy,
fashionable family. The good lady governess of this

76 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

family attended a two days' meeting I held in the
neighborhood. On Saturday, under preaching, the
Lord reached her proud heart, and although, perhaps,
she was the finest dressed lady in the congregation,
when I invited mourners, she was the first that came
and fell on her knees, praying aloud for mercy. It
pleased God, before our meeting closed, to bless her
with a sense of pardoning mercy, and she rose and
shouted aloud for joy; she also joined the Church.
When we closed the meeting, I gave out our
love-feast for next morning at eight o'clock; not a
word was said about dress. She went home, intending to come to love-feast next morning, but it occurred to her that all her superfluities ought to be laid
aside now, and that she, as a Christian, for example's
sake, ought to go in plain attire; but, alas! for her,
she had not a plain dress in‘ the World. Said she to

' herself, What shall I do? She immediately hunted

up the plainest and most easily altered dress she had.
To work at it she went; trimmed it and fixed it tolera
bly plain. To love-feast she came; and when she
rose to speak, she told all about her trouble to get
plainly attired to appear in love-feast as she thought
.she ought to. Take another case:

I traveled in the State of Ohio in 1806, and at a
largely attended camp—meeting near New Lancaster,
there was a great work of God going on; many were
pleading for mercy; many were getting religion;
and the wicked looked solemn and awful. The pulpit in the Woods was a large stand; it would hold a
dozen people, and I would not let the lookers-on
crowd into it, but kept it clear that at any time I
might occupy it for the purpose of giving directions
to the congregation.

There were two young ladies, sisters, lately from

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 77

Baltimore, or somewhere down east. They had been
provided for on the ground in the tent of a very religious sister of theirs. They were very fashionably
dressed; I think they must have had, in rings, earrings, bracelets, gold chains, lockets, etc., at least one
or two hundred dollars' Worth of jewelry about their
persons. The altar was crowded to overflowing with
mourners; and these young ladies were very solemn.
They met me at the stand, and asked permission to
sit down inside it. I told them that if they would
promise me to pray to God for religion, they might
take a seat there. They were too deeply affected to
be idle lookers-on; and when I got them seated in the
stand, I called them, and urged them to pray; and I
called others to my aid. They became deeply engaged; and about midnight they were both powerfully converted. They rose to their feet, and gave
some very triumphant shouts; and then very deliberately took off their gold chains, ear-rings, lockets,

etc., and handed them to me, saying, _"We have no ‘

more use for these idols. If religion is the glorious,
good thing you have represented it to be, it throws
these idols into eternal shade." «

Take still another case in point. In 1810, when I
was traveling in West Tennessee, at a camp-meeting
I was holding there was a great revival in progress.
At that time, it was customary for gentlemen of
fashion to wear ruffled shirts. There was a Wealthy
gentleman thus attired at our meeting, and he was
brought under strong conviction. I led him to the
altar with the mourners; and he was much engaged.
But it seemed there was something he would not give
up. I Was praying by his side, and talking to him,
when all on a sudden he stood erect on his knees, and

with his hands he deliberately opened his-shirt boi 9m,

78 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

took hold of his ruflles, tore them off, and threw them
down in the straw; and in less than two minutes God
blessed his soul, and he sprang to his feet, loudly
praising God. I state these cases to show that unless the heart is
desperately hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
there is a solemn conviction on all minds that fashionable frivolities are all contrary to the humble spirit
of our Saviour; but idolatry is dreadfully deceptive,
and we must remember that no idolater hath any
inheritance in the kingdom of God. Let the Methodists take care. A.

We had at this early day no course of study prescribed, as at present; but William M'Kendree, afterward bishop, but then my presiding elder, directed
me to a proper course of reading and study. He
selected books for me, both literary and theological;
and every quarterly visit he made, he examined into
my progress, and corrected my errors, if I had fallen
into any. He delighted to instruct me in English
grammar.

Brother Lakin had charge of the circuit. My business was to preach, meet the classes, visit the society
and the sick, and then to my books and study; and I
say that I am more indebted to Bishop M'Kendree for my little attainments in literature and
divinity, than to any other man on earth. And .I
believe that if presiding elders would do their duty
by young men. in this way, it would be more advan_tageous than all the colleges and Biblical institutes

in the land; for they then could learn and practice
every day.

Suppose, now, Mr. Wesley had been obliged to
wait for a literary and theologically trained band of
preachers before he moved in the glorious work of his

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 79

day, what would Methodism have been in the Wesleyan connection to-day? Suppose the Methodist
Episcopal Church in these United States had been
under the necessity of waiting for men thus qualified,
what would her condition have been at this time? In
despite of all John Wesley's prejudices, he providentially saw that to accomplish" the glorious work for
which God had raised him up, he must yield to the
superior wisdom of Jehovah, and send out his "lay
preachers" to wake up a slumbering world. If Bishop
Asbury had waited for this choice literary band of
preachers, infidelity would have swept these United
States from one end to the other.

Methodism invEurope this day would have been as
a thousand to one, if the Wesleyans had stood by the
old land-marks of John Wesley: but no; they must
introduce pews, literary institutions and theological
institutes, till a plain, old-fashioned preacher, such
as one of Mr. Wesley's "lay preachers," would be
scouted, and not allowed to occupy one of their pulpits. Some of the best and most useful men that were
ever called of God to plant Methodism in this happy
republic were among the early pioneer preachers,
east, west, north, and south; and especially in our
mighty West. VVe have no such preachers now as
some of the first ones who were sent out to Kentucky and Tennessee.

.The Presbyterians, and other Calvinistic branches
of the Protestant Church, used to contend for an educated ministry, for pews, for instrumental music, for
a congregational or stated salaried ministry. The
Methodists universally opposed these ideas; and the

illiterate Methodist preachers actually set the world 1

on fire, (the American world at least,) while they were
lighting their matches!

80 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Methodist preachers were called by literary gentlemen illiterate, ignorant babblers. I recollect once to
have come across one of these Latin and Greek scholars, a regular graduate in theology. In order to bring
me into contempt in a public company he addressed
me in Greek. In 1ny younger days I had learned
considerable of German. I listened to him as if I
understood it all, and then replied in Dutch. This he
knew nothing about, neither did he understand Hebrew. He concluded that I had answered him in
Hebrew, and immediately caved in, and stated to the
company that I was the first educated Methodist
preacher he ever saw.

I do not wish to undervalue education, but really I
have seen so many of these educated preachers who
forcibly reminded me of lettuce growing under the
shade of a peach-tree, or like a gosling that had got
the straddles by wading in the dew, that I turn away
sick and faint. Now this educated ministry and theological training are no longer an experiment. Other
denominations have tried them, and they have proved
a perfect failure; and is it not strange that Methodist
preachers will try to gather up these antiquated systems, when enlightened Presbyterians and Congregationalists have acknowledged that the Methodist plan
is the best in the world, and try to improve, as they
say, our system, alleging that our educational institutions have created a necessity for theological institutes? Verily we have fallen on evil times. Is it
possible that now, when we abound in education, that
we need Biblical instruction more than when we had
no education, or very little? Surely if we ever needed
Bible instruction, it was when we could derive no
benefit from literary institutions. This is my common-sense view of the subject.

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 81

I awfully fear for our beloved Metbodism. Multiply colleges, universities, seminaries, and academies;
multiply our agencies, and editorships, and fill them
all with our best and most eflicient preachers, and you
localize the ministry and secularize them too; then
farewell to itinerancy; and when this fails we plunge
right into Congregationalism, and stop precisely where
all other denominations started. I greatly desire to
see all the interests of the Methodist Church promoted,
and when all our presidents, professors, editors, and
agents shall be laymen, and our ministers follow
their appropriate calling, namely, preach the Gospel
to a dying World; and if they will not fall into the
traveling ranks and be men of one work, let them
locate, for it is certain as long as they fill these oflices
and agencies, it is like a man undertaking to ride a
race with the reins of his horse's bridle tied to a stump.
Every man who fills these oflices and agencies, and
retains a membership in the traveling connection, is a
clog to the itinerant wheels, and must, ere long, stop
the traveling car; and when that takes place farewell
to Methodism.

Is it not manifest that the employing so many of
our preachers in these agencies and professorships is
one of the great causes why We have such a scarcity
of preachers to fill the regular work? Moreover,
these presidents, professors, agents, and editors get a
greater amount of pay, and get it more certainly too,
than a traveling preacher, who has to breast every
storm, and often falls very far short of his disciplinary
allowance. Here is a great temptation to those who
are qualified to fill those high ofiices to seek them, and
give up the regular Work of preaching and trying to
save souls. And is it not manifest to every candid

observer that very few of those young men who be6

82 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

lieve they are called of God to preach the Gospel, and
are persuaded to go to a college or a Biblical institute,
the better to qualify them for the great work of the ministry, ever go into the regular traveling ministry 3 The
reason is plainlythis: having quieted their consciences
with the flattering unction of obtaining a sanctified
education, while they have neglected the duty of regularly preaching Jesus to dying sinners, their moral
sensibilities are blunted, and they see an opening
prospect of getting better pay as teachers in high
schools or other institutions of learning, and from the
prospect of gain they are easily persuaded that they
can meet their moral obligations in disseminating
sanctified learning. Thus, as sure as a leaden ball tends
to the earth in obedience to the laws of gravity, just
so sure our present mochw operamhl tends to a congre‘ gational ministry. And if this course is pursued a

little longer, the Methodist Church will bid a long,
long farewell to her beloved itinerancy, to which we,
under God, owe almost everything that is intrinsically
valuable in Methodism. A

It is said that the young men who are studying
in the Biblical Institute at Concord, which is patronized by all the New-England Conferences, spend their
evenings, and especially their Sabbaths, in the surrounding villages, lecturing and preaching, to the
great satisfaction and edification of the Churches, and
their brethren give them something to aid in their
support While they are prosecuting their studies. But
who is so hoodwinked or cable towed by prejudice as
not to see that this very course is well calculated to
sap the foundation of the itinerancy and supplant the
regularly appointed pastor, or supersede his labors,
and will finally end in a settled ministry. But I must
resume the narrative.

rE'rn_n CABTWRIGHT. 88

Our conference this fall, 1805, was held at Cole's
Meeting-house, Scott County, Kentucky. Bishop
Asbury, in consequence of aflliction, failed to be with
us, and the Conference elected William M'Kendree
president. Six more preachers were admitted on trial.
l‘he number of traveling preachers was thirty-eight.
Our membership numbered 11,877 ; and our increase
in members was 2,277.

84 ‘ ‘AUTOBIOGRAPHY o'r

CHAPTER VIII.

SCIOTO CIRCUIT.

MY appointment, during 1805-6, was on the Scioto
Circuit, Ohio State and District. John Sale was presiding elder, and James Quinn was senior preacher, or
preacher in charge. The reader will see how greatly I
was favored the first two years of my regular itinerant
life, to be placed under two such men as Benjamin

Lakin and James Quinn, and more, two such presiding'

elders as William M'Kendree and John Sale. These
four men were able ministers of Jesus Christ, lived
long, did much good, witnessed a good confession,
died happy, and are all now safely housed in heaven.
Peace to their memory forever!

Scioto Circuit extended from the Ohio River to
Chillicothe, situated on that river; and crossed it
near the mouth, at what ‘is now called Portsmouth.
It was a four-weeks' circuit, and there were four hundred and seventy-four members on it. Dr. Tifiin,
who was governor of the state, was a. local preacher;
and both he and his wife were worthy members of
our Church. He lived at Chillicothe, then the seat
of government for the state.

There were two incidents happened while I was
on the east end of this circuit, which I will relate.

We had an appointment near Eagle Creek. Here
the Shakers broke in Mr. Dunlevy, whom we have
mentioned elsewhere as having been a regular I'res~
byterian minister, who had left that Church and joined

PE']2EB_GA.RTWBIGHT. 85.

the New Lights. His New Light increased so fast,
that he lost what little sense he had, and was now a
ranting Shaker. He came up here, and roared and
fulminated a while, led many astray, flo1u'ished for
some time, and then his influence died away, and he
left forparts unknown.

On the southeastern part of the circuit, we took in
a new preaching-place, at a Mr. Moor's. We gave
them Sunday preaching. Mr. Moor had built a large
hewn log-house, two stories high. There was no partition in the second story; but it was seated, and he gave
it to us to preach in. Not far from this place lived a
regularly educated Presbyterian preacher, who had a
fine family, and was in many respects a fine man, but,
nnhappily, he had contracted a love for strong drink.
He had preached in this neighborhood, and was much
beloved, for he‘ was withal a very good preacher.

In making my way on one occasion to Mr. Moor's,
to my Sunday appointment, I got lost and was belated,
and when I arrived, there was a large assembly collected, and this minister was preaching to them, and he
preached well, and I was quite pleased with the sermon
sofar as I heard it. When he was done, he undertook
to make a public apology for a drunken spree he had
got into a few days before. "Well," thought I, "this
is right; all right, I suppose I", But to excuse himself
for his unaccountable love of whisky, he stated that
he had been informed by his mother that before he
was born she longed for whisky ; and he supposed
that this was the cause of his appetite for strong drink,
for he had loved it from his earliest recollection. This
was the substance of his apology.

I felt somewhat indignant at this; and when I rose
to close after him, I stated to the congregation that I
thought the preacher's apology for drunkenness was

86 A_IlTOBIOGRA‘PHY or 7

infinitely worse than the act of drunkenness itself;
that I looked upon it as a lie, and a downright slander
on his mother; and that I believed his love of whisky
was the result of the intemperate use of it, in which he
had indulged until he formed the habit; and that I,
for one, was not willing to accept or believe the truth
of his apology; that I feared the preacher would live
and die a drunkard, and be damned at last; and that
I hoped the people there would not receive him as a
preacher until he gave ample evidence that he was
entirely cured of drunkenness.

After I made these statements, "I felt that God was
willing to bless the people there and then; and, raising my voice, gave them as warm an exhortation as
I could command. Suddenly an awful power fell on
the congregation, and they instantly fell right and
left, and cried aloud for mercy. I suppose there were
not less than thirty persons smitten down; the young,
the old, and middle-aged indiscriminately, were operated on in this way. My voice at that day was
strong and clear; and I could sing, exhort, pray, and
preach almost all the time, day and night. I went
through the assembly, singing, exhorting, praying,
and directing poor sinners to Christ. While I was
thus engaged, the Presbyterian ministerleft.

There were a few scattered members of the Church

' around this place, who got happy and shouted aloud
A for joy, and joined in and exhorted sinners, and they

helped me very much. Indeed, our meeting lasted

~ all night, and the greater part of next day. Between

twenty and thirty professed religion, and joined the
Church; and fully as many more went home under
strong conviction and in deep distress. Many of them
afterward obtained religion, and joined the Church.

There was a very remarkable case that I will menrnrnn oanrwnrenr. 87

tion here. There was one lady about forty-five years
old, who was a member of the Presbyterian Church,
and a very rigid predestinarian. Her husband was
a" Methodist, and several of their children had obtained religion among the young ‘ converts. This lady
got powerfully convicted, and concluded that she
never had any religion. She had fallen to the floor
under the mighty power of God. She prayed and
agonized hard for days. At length the devil tempted
her to believe that she was a reprobate, and that
there was no mercy for her. She went into black
despair under this temptation of the devil, and such
was the desperate state of her mind that at length
she conceived that she was Jesus Christ, and took it

upon her, in this assumed character, to bless and curse '

any and all that came to_see her.

The family were, of course, greatly afflicted, and
the whole neighborhood were in great trouble at this
afllictive dispensation. Her friends and all of us
used every argument in our power, but all in vain.
She at length utterly refused to eat, or drink, or
sleep. In this condition she lingered for thirteen
days and nights, and then died without ever returning to her right mind. A few persecutors and opposers of the Methodists tried to make a great fuss about
this affair, but they were afraid to go far with it, for
fear the Lord would send the same affliction on them.

The Hockhocking River lay immediately north of
us, the Scioto River between us. John Meek and
James Axley were appointed to that circuit. The
circuit reached from the Scioto to Zanesville, on the
Mnskingum River. It was a hard and laborious
circuit. Brother Meeks's health failed, and Brother
Sale, our presiding elder, moved me from Scioto,
and placed me on this circuit with Brother Axley. I

88 AUf.roB1oeBAPH_v_ or.

was sorry to leave the brethren in Scioto Circuit, and
especially Brother Quinn, whom I dearly loved; but
Brother Sale was still my presiding elder, and
Brother Quinn's family lived in -Hockhocking Circuit, and a precious family it Was.

I got to see Brother Quinn every round. Brother
Axley and myself were like Jonathan and David.
There were no parsonages in those days, and Brother
Quinn lived in a little cabin on his father-in-laW's

land. He had several children, and his cabin was

small. When the preachers Would come to see him,
they would eat and converse with Brother Quinn and
family, but would sleep at old Father Teel's, Brother
Qninn's father-in-law. The first time I came round, I

, spent the afternoon with Brother Quinn. He made

some apologies, and told me I could sleep better at
Father Teel's. "But," said he, "I Will tell you how
you must do. You will sleep, at Father Teel's, in one
part of his double cabin; he and his family will sleep
in the other. His custom is to rise early. As soon as
ever he dresses himself he commences giving out a
hymn, sings, and then goes to prayer; he does not
even wait for his family to get up. He serves the
preachers the same Way. He never was known to
Wait a minute for any preacher except Bishop Asbury.
You must rise early, dress quickly, and go right into
the other room if you Want to be at morning prayer.
I thought I would tell you beforehand, that you
might not be taken by surprise."

I thanked him. " But," said I, " why don't the

preachers cure the old man of this disorderly way ?"

" 0, he is old and set in his way," said Brother
Quinn.
"You may rest assured I will cure him," said I.
" O,_ no," said he, " you cannot."

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 89

So I retired to old Father Teel's to sleep. We had
family prayer, and I retired to rest. I had no fear
about the matter, for I was a constant early riser, and
always thought it very Wrong for preachers to sleep
late and keep the families Waiting on them. Just as
day broke I awoke, rose up, and began to dress,
but had not nigh accomplished it‘ when I distinctly
heard Teel give out his hymn and commence singing,
and about the time I had got dressed I heard him
commence praying. He gave thanks to God that
they had been spared through the night, and were all
permitted to see the light of a new day, and at the
same time I suppose every one of his family was fast
asleep. I deliberately opened the door and Walked
out to the Well, washed myself, and then Walked
back to my cabin. Just as I got to the door, the old
brother opened his door, and seeing me, said:

"Good morning, sir. Why, I did not know you
were up."

"Yes," said I; "I have been up some time."

" Well, brother," said he, " why did you not come
in to prayers?"

" Because," said I, "it is wrong to pray of a moming in the family before We Wash."

The old brother passed on, and no more was said at
that time. That evening, just before we were about
to retire to rest, the old brother set out the book
and said to me: ' .

" Brother, hold prayers with us."

" No, sir," said I.

Said he: "Come, brother, take the book and pray
with us."

"No, sir," said I; "you love to pray so Wellyou
may do it yourself." I

He insisted, but I persistently refused, saying,

90‘ AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

" You are so fond of praying yourself, that you
even thanked God this morning that he had spared
you all to see the light of a new day, when your
family had not yet ‘opened their eyes, but were all
fast asleep. And you have such an absurd way of
holding prayers in your family, that I do not wish to
have anything to do with it."

He then took up the book, read and said prayers,

but you may rely on it the next morning things were .

much changed. He waited for me, and had all his
family up in order. He acknowledged his error, and
told me it was one of the best reproofs he ever got.
I then prayed with the family, and after that all
went on well.

Our last quarterly-meeting was a camp-meeting.
We had a great many tents, and a large turn-out for
a new country, and, perhaps, there never was a
greater collection of rabble and rowdies. They came
drunk, and armed with dirks, clubs, knives, and
horse-whips, and swore they would break up the
meeting. After interrupting us very much on Saturday night, they collected early on Sunday morning,
determined on a general riot. At eight o'clock I was
appointed to preach. About the time I was half
through my discourse, two very fine-dressed young
men marched into the congregation with loaded
whips, and hats on, and rose up and stood in the midst
of the ladies, and began to laugh and talk. They were
near the stand, and I requested them to desist and get
off the seats; but they cursed me, and told me to
mind my own business, and said they would not get
down. I stopped trying to preach, and called for a
magistrate. There were two at hand, but I saw they
were both afraid. I ordered them to take these men
into custody, but they said they could not do it. I

PETER ouurwnrenr. 91

told them, as I left the stand, to command me to take
them, and I would do it at the risk of my life. I advanced toward them. They ordered me to stand off,
but I advanced. One of them made a pass at my head
with his whip, but I closed in with him, and jerked
him off the seat. A regular scuflle ensued. The
congregation by this time were all in commotion. I
heard the magistrates give general orders, commanding
all friends of order to aid in suppressing the riot. In
the scufile I threw my prisoner down, and held him
fast; he tried his best to get loose; I told him to be
quiet, or I would pound his chest well. The mob rose,
and rushed to the rescue of the two prisoners, for
they had taken the other young man also. An old
and drunken magistrate came up to me, and ordered
me to let my prisoner go. I told him I should not.
He swore if I did not, he would knock me down.
I told him‘ to crack away. Then one of my friends, at
my request, took hold of my prisoner, and the drunken
justice made a pass at me; but I parried the stroke,
and seized him by the collar and the hair of the head,
and fetching him a sudden jerk forward, brought him
to the ground, and jumped on him. I told him to be
quiet, or I would pound him well. The mob then
rushed to the scene; they knocked down seven
magistrates, and several preachers and others. I gave
up my drunken prisoner to another, and threw myself
in front of the friends of order. Just at this moment
the ringleader of the mob and I met; he made three
passes at me, intending to knock me down. The last
time he struck at me, by the force of his own effort he
threw the side of his face toward me. It seemed at
that moment I had not power to resist temptation,
and I struck a sudden blow in the burr of the ear and
dropped, him to the earth. Just at that moment the

92 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

friends of order rushed by hundreds on the mob, knocking them down in every direction. In a . few
minutes, the place became too strait for the mob,
and they wheeled and fled in every direction; but we
secured about thirty prisoners, marched them off to a.
vacant tent, and put them under guard till Monday
morning, when they were tried, and every man was
fined to the utmost, limits of the law. The aggregate
amount of fines and costs was near three hundred
dollars. They fined my [old drunken magistrate
twenty dollars, and returned him to court, and he was
cashiered of his oflice. On Sunday, when we had
vanquished the mob, the whole encampment was
filled with mourning; and although there' was no
attempt to resume preaching till evening, yet, such
was our confused state, that there was not then a.
single preacher on the ground willing to preach,
from the presiding elder, John Sale, down. Seeing
we had fallen on evil times, my spirit was stirred
within me. I said to the elder, "I feel a clear conscience, for under the necessity of the circumstances
We have done right, and now I ask to let me preach."

" Do," said the elder, "for there is no other man
on the ground can do it."

The encampment was lighted up, the trumpet
blown, I rose in the stand, and required every soul
to leave the tents and come into the congregation.
There was a general rush to the stand. I requested
the brethren, if ever they prayed in all their lives, to
pray now. My voice was strong and clear, and my
preaching was more of an exhortation and encouragement than anything else. My text was, "The gates
of hell shall not prevail." In about thirty minutes
the power of God fell on the congregation in such a
manner as is seldom seen; the people fell in every

"PETER CARTWRIGHT. 98

direction, right and left, front and rear. It was supposed that not less than three hundred fell like dead
men in mighty battle; and there was no need of
calling mourners, for they were strewed all over the
camp-ground; loud wailings went up to heaven from
sinners for mercy, 31nd 9. general shout from Christians,
so that the noise was heard afar ofi‘. Our meeting
lasted all night, and Monday and Monday night; and
when we closed on Tuesday, there were two hundred
who had professed religion, and about that number

, joined the Church.

Brother Axley and myself pulled together like true
yoke-fellows. We were both raised in the backwoods, and well understood frontier life. Brother
Axley was truly a child of nature; a. great deal of
sternness and firmness about him as well as oddity.
He knew nothing about polished life. I will here
relate a little circumstance that took place with him

"and myself at Governor Tifiin's, in Chillicothe.

This year, Brother Axley, while I was on the Scioto Circuit, came over to see_ me, and he preached for
me in Chillicothe. The governor and his amiable
wife°were much delighted with Brother Axley. The
governor's house was the preacher's home, and we
went there. The governor was easily excited, and
he had not entire command of his risibilities. Sister
Tiffin had great command of herself. She could
control the muscles of her face, and look stern
when she pleased. They had no children; but they
had a very nice little lap-dog. We were called from
the parlor to supper, and among other eatables, they
had fried chicken, and tea and coffee. Sister Tiffin
asked Brother Axley if he would have some of the
chicken. He said, yes, he was very fond of it. She
helped him to some; it was a leg unjointed. Brother

94 _AU'l‘OBIOGBAPHY or

Axley never offered to cut the flesh off of it, but took
it in his fingers, and ate it in that way; and when he
had got the flesh from the bone, he turned round and
whistled for the little lap-dog, and threw the bone
down on the carpet. I saw the governor was excited
to laughter, but he suppressed it. I cast an eye at
Sister Tiflin; she frowned, and shook her head at me,
as much as to say, " Do not laugh." This passed ofi'
tolerably well.

It was the custom in those days to eat a while before the tea and coffee were dished out. Said Sister Tiffin to Brother Axley, "Will you have a cup of tea or
coffee?" He asked her if she had any milk. She answered, "Yes." "Well, sister," said he, "give me some
milk, for they have nearly scalded my stomach with

tea and coffee, and I don't like it." I really thought u

the governor would burst out into loud laughter, but
he suppressed it; and I thought ‘I must leave the
table to laugh 3 but casting my eye again at Sister
Tiffin, she frowned, and shook her head at me, which
helped me very much.

When we went up to bed, said I: "Brother Axley,
you surely are the most uncultivated creature I ever

saw. Will you never learn any manners?"

Said be, "What have I done ?"
"Done!" said I; "you gnawed the meat off of your

chicken, holding it in your fingers; then whistled up
the dog, and threw your bone down on the carpet;
and more than this, you talked right at the governor's
table, and in the presence of Sister Tiflin, about
scalding your stomach with tea and coffee." He burst
into tears, and said, "Why did you not tell me better?
I didn't know any better." ‘

Next morning when we awoke, he looked up and
saw the plastering of the room all round. "Well," said

PETER cnnrxvmenr. 36

be, "when I go home I will tell my people that I slept
in the governor's house, and it was a stone house too,
and plastered at that."

Having been raised almost in a cane brake, and
never been accustomed to see anything but log-cabins,
it was a great thing for him to behold a good house
and sleep in a plastered room. But I tell you, my
readers, he was a great and good minister of Jesus
Christ. He often said, a preacher that was good and
true, had a trinity of devils to fight, namely: superfluous dress, Whisky, and slavery; and he seldom
ever preached but he shared it to all three of these
evils like a man of God. ,

V Brother Axley entered the traveling connection in
1804, traveled nineteen years, and in 1823 located.
‘He was remarkably useful as a local preacher. He
was industrious and economical; lived neat and comfortable, but by going security for a friend, he lost
nearly all his property. The Church helped him

some; but he never recovered his former easy and ,

comfortable circumstances, and died in comparative
poverty.

96 . AUTOBIOGRAPHY 01'

CHAPTER IX.
ITINEBANT LIFE.

AT the close of this conference year, 1806, I met
the Kentucky preachers at Lexington, and headed
by William Burke, about twenty of us started for
conference, which was held in East Tennessee, at
Ebenezer Church, Nollichuckie, September 15th.
Our membership had increased to twelve thousand
six hundred and seventy; our net increase Was about
eight hundred.

This year another presiding-elder district was
added to the Western Conference, called the Mississippi District. The number of our traveling preachers increased from thirty-eight to forty-nine. Bishop
Asbury attended the Conference. There were thirteen of us elected and ordained deacons. According
to the printed Minutes, this was placed in 1807, but
it was in the fall of 1806. Two years before there
were eighteen of us admitted on trial; that number,
in this short space of time, had fa'l1en*to thirteen; the
other five were discontinued at their own request, or
from sickness, or were reduced to suffering circumstances, and compelled to desist from traveling for
Want of the means of support.

I think I received about forty dollars this year;
but many of our preachers did not receive half that
amount. These were hard times in those Western
wilds; many, very many, pious and useful preachers,
were literally starved into a location. I do not mean

PETER canrwnrenr. 97

that they were starved for want of food; for although
it was rough, yet the preachers generally got enough
to eat. But they did not generally receive in a
whole year money enough to get them a suit of
clothes; and if people, and preachers too, had not
dressed in home-spun clothing, and the good sisters
had not made and presented their preachers with
clothing, they generally must retire from itinerant
life, and go to work and clothe themselves. Money
was very scarce in the country at this early day, but
some of the best men God ever made, breasted the

storms, endured poverty, and trimnphantly planted _

Methodism in this Westerii world.

When we were ordained deacons at this Conference, Bishop Asbury presented me with a parchment
certifying my ordination in the following; words,
namely: i

"Know all by these presents, That I, Francis Asbury, Bishop qf tire Methodist Episcopal 0f2,m~c/2, in
America, under the protection of Almighty God, and
with a single eye to his glory, by the imposition of
my hands and prayer, have this day set apart Peter
Cartwright for the ofiice of a DRAGON in the said
Methodist Episcopal Church; a man whom I udge to
be well qualified for that work; and do hereby recommend him to all whom it may concern, as a proper
person to administer the ordinances of baptism, marriage, and the burial of the dead, in the absence of an
elder, and to feed the flock of Christ, so long as his
spirit and practice are such as become the Gospel of
Christ, and he continueth to hold fast the form of
sound words, according to the established doctrine of
the Gospel. o

" In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my
' 7

98 AD‘TOBIO'GBAPHY or

hand and seal this sixteenth day of September, in the

year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and six.
" Fnmors Asnunr."

I had traveled from Zanesville, in Ohio, to East
Tennessee to conference, a distance of over five hundred miles; and when our appointments were read
out, I was sent to Marietta Circuit, almost rightback,
but still further east. Marietta was at the mouth of
the Muskingum River, where it emptied into the
Ohio. _ This circuit extended along the north bank of
the Ohio, one hundred and fifty miles, crossed over the
Ohio River at the mouth of the Little Kanawha, and
up that stream to Hughes River, then east to Middle
Island. I suppose it was three hundred miles round.
I had to cross the Ohio River four times every round.

It was a poor and hard circuit at that time. Marietta
and the country round were settled at an early day by
a colony of Yankees. At the time of my appointment I had never seen a. Yankee, and I had heard
dismal stories about them. It was said they lived
almost entirely on pumpkins, molasses, fat meat, and
bohea tea; moreover, that they could not bear loud
and zealous sermons, and they had brought on their
learned preachers with them, and they read their
sermons, and were always criticising us poor backwoods preachers. When my appointment was read
_out, it distressed me greatly. I went to Bishop Asbury
and begged him to supply my place, and let me go
home. The old father took me in his arms, and said,

"O no, my son; go in the name of the Lord. It
will make a man of you."

Ah, thought I, if this is the wayto make men, I do
not want to be a man. I cried over it bitterly, and
prayed too. But on I started, cheered by my presidPETER CARTWRIGHT. 99

ing elder, Brother J. Sale. If ever I saw hard times,
surely it was this year; yet many of the people were
kind, and treated me friendly. I had hard work to
keep soul and body together. The first Methodist
house I came to, I found the brother a Universalist. I
crossed over the Muskingum River to Marietta. The
first Methodist family I stopped with there, the lady
was a member of the Methodist Episcopal Church,
but a thorough Universalist. She was a thin-faced,
Roman-nosed, loquacious Yankee, glib on the tongue,
and you may depend on it, I had a hard race to keep
up with her, though I found it a good school, for it
set me to reading my Bible. And here permit me to
say, of all the isrnsthat I ever heard of, they were
here. These descendants of the Puritans Were generally educated, but their ancestors were rigid predestinarians; and as they were sometimes favored
with a little light on their moral powers, and could
just " see men as trees Walking," they jumped into
Deism, Universalism, Unitarianism, etc., etc. I verily
believe it was the best school I ever entered. They
Waked me up on all sides; Methodism was feeble,
and I had to battle or run, and I resolved on the
former. i

There was here in Marietta a preacher by the
name of A. Sargent; he had been a Universalist
preacher, but finding such a motley gang, as I have
above mentioned, he thought (and thought correctly
too) that they Were proper subjects for his imposture.
Accordingly, he assumed the name of Halcyon Church,
and proclaimed himself the millennial messenger. He
professed to see visions, fall into trances, and to converse With angels. His followers were numerous in
the town and country. The Presbyterian and Congregational ministers were afraid of him. He had men

,10516

100 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

preachers and women preachers. The Methodists
had no meeting-house in Marietta. We had to preach
in the court¢house when we could get a chance.
We battled pretty severely. The Congregationalists
opened their Academy for me to preach in. I prepared myself, and gave battle to the Halcyons. This
made a mighty commotion. In the meantime we
had a camp-meeting in the suburbs of Marietta.
Brother Sale, our presiding elder, was there. Mr.
Sargent came, and hung around and wanted to
preach, but Brother Sale never noticed him. I have
said before that he professed to go into trances and
have visions. He would swoon away, fall, and lay a
long time; and when he would come to, he would
tell what mighty things he had seen and heard.

On Sunday night, at our camp-meeting, Sargent
got some powder, and lit a cigar, and then walked
down to the bank of the river, one hundred yards,
where stood a large stump. He put his powder on
the stump, and touched it with his cigar. The flash
of the powder was seen by many at the camp; at
least the light. When the powder flashed, down fell
Sargent; there he lay a good while. In the meantime, the people found him lying there, and gathered
around him. At length he came to, and said he had
a message from God to us Methodists. He said God
had come down to him in a flash of light, and he fell
under the power of God, and thus received his vision.

Seeing so many gathered around him there, I took
a light, and went down to see what was going on.
As soon as I came near the stump, I smelled the sulphur of the powder; and stepping up to the stump,
there was clearly the sign of powder, and hard
by lay the cigar with which he had ignited it. He
was now busy delivering his message. I stepped up

PETER canrwnxenr. 101

to him, and asked him if an angel had appeared to
him in that flash of light.

He said, " Yes."

Said I, " Sargent, did not that angel smell of brimstone 3"

"Why," said he, " do you ask me such a foolish
question?"

" Because," said I, "if an angel has spoken to you
at all, he was from the lake that burneth with fire and
brimstonel" and raising my voice, I said, "I smell
sulphur now!" I walked up to the stump, and called
on the people to come and see for themselves. The
people rushed up, and soon saw through the trick,
and began to abuse Sargent for a vile impostor. He
soon left, and we were troubled no more with him or
his brimstone angels.

I will beg leave to remark here, that while I was
battling successfully against the Halcyons, I was treated with great respect by the Congregational minister
and his people, and the Academy was always open for
me to preach in; but as soon as I triumphed over and
vanquished them, one of the elders of the Congregational Church waited on me, and informed me that it
was not convenient for me to preach any more in their
Academy. I begged the privilege to make one more
appointment in the Academy, till I could get some
other place to preach in. This favor, as it was only
one more time, was granted.

I then prepared myself; and when my appointed day
rolled around, the house was crowded ; and I leveled
my whole Arminian artillery against their Calvinism;
and challenged their minister, who was present, to
public debate; but he thought prudence the better
part of valor, and declined.» This efl'ort secured me
many friends, and some persecution; but my way was

102 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

opened, and we raised a little class, and had a name
among the living.

I will here mention a special case of wild fanaticism
that took place with one of these Halcyon preachers
while I was on this circuit. He worked himself up
into the belief that he could live so holy in this life,
that his animal nature would become immortal, and
that he would never die; and he conceived that he
had gained this immortality, and could live without
eating. In despite of all the arguments and persuasion of his friends, he refused to eat or drink.

He stood it sixteen days and nights, and then died a
suicidal death. His death put a stop to this foolish
delusion, and threw a damper over the whole Halcyon
fanaticism.

I will here state something like the circumstances
I found myself in, at the close of my labors on this
hard circuit. I had been from my father's house
about three years; was five hundred miles from home;
my horse had gone blind; my saddle was worn out;
my bridle reins had been eaten up and replaced,
(after a sort) at least a dozen times; and my clothes
had been patched till it was difiicult to detect the
original. I had concluded to try to make my way
home, and get another outfit. I was in Marietta, and
had just seventy-five cents in my pocket. How I
would get home and pay my way I could not tell.

But it was of no use to parley about it; go I must,
or do worse; so I concluded to go as far as I could,
and then stop and work for more means, till I got

home. I had some few friends on the way, but not

many; so I cast ahead.

My first day': travel was through my circuit. At
about thirty-five miles' distance there lived a brother,
with whom I intended to stay all night. I started,

FITRB CARTWR-IGHT. 108

and late in the evening, within five miles of my stopping-place, fell in with a widow lady, not a member
of the Church, who lived several miles ofl? my road.
She had attended my appointments in that settlement
all the year. After the usual salutations, she asked
me if I was leaving the circuit.

I told her I was, and had started for my father's.

" Wen," said she, " how are you ofi' for money? I
expect you have received but little on this circuit."

I told her I had but seventy-five cents in the world.
She invited me home with her, and told me she would
give me a little to help me on. But I told her I had
my places fixed to stop every night till I got to Maysville; and if I went home with her, it would derange
all my stages, and throw me among strangers. She
then handed me a dollar, saying it was all she had
with her, but if I would go home with her she would
give me more. I declined going with her, thanked
her for the dollar, bade her farewell, moved. on, and
reached my lodging—p1ace. V

By the "time I reached the Ohio River, opposite
Maysville, my money was all gone. I was in trouble

about how to get over the river, for I had nothing to.

pay my ferriage.

I was acquainted with Brother J. Armstrong, a merchant in Maysville, and concluded to tell the ferryman that I had no money, but if he would ferry me
over, I could borrow twenty-five cents from Armstrong,
and would pay him. Just as I got to the bank of the
river he landed, on my side, with a man and a horse;
and when the man reached the bank, I Saw it Was
Colonel M. Shelby, brother to Governor Shelby, of
Kentucky. He was a lively exhorter in the Methodist
Episcopal Church, and an old acquaintance and nelghe
 of my father's,

104 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

When he saw me he exclaimed:

" Peter! is that you ?"

"Yes, Moses," said I, " what little is left of me."

"Well," said he, " from your appearance you must
have seen hard times. Are you trying to get home?"

"Yes," I answered. I

"How are you ofl' for money, Peter ?" said he.

"Well, Moses," said I, "I have not a cent in the
world."

" Well," said he, " here are three dollars, and I will
give you a bill of the road and a letter of introduc
tion till you get down into the barrens, at the PilotKnobb."

You may be sure my spirits greatly rejoiced. So
I passed on very well for several days and nights on
the colonel's money and credit, but when I came to
the first tavern beyond the Pilot Knobb my money
was out. What to do I did not know, but I rode up
and asked for quarters. I told the landlord I had no
money; had been three years from home, and was
trying to get back to my father's. I also told hi-m I
had a little old watch, and a few good books in my
saddle-bags, and I would compensate him in some
way. He bade me alight and be easy. I

On inquiry I found this family had lived here fro
an early day, totally destitute of the Gospel and all
religious privileges. There were three rooms in this
habitation, below—the dining-room, and a back bedroom, and the kitchen. The kitchen was separated
from the other lower rooms by a thin, plank partition,

set up on an end; and the planks had shrunk and left
considerable cracks between them.

When we were about to retire to bed, I asked the
landlord if he had any objection to our praying before
we laid down. He said, "None at 9.11;" and stepped

PETER CART-WRIGHT. 105

intothe kitchen, as I supposed, to bring in the family.
He quickly returned with a candle in his hand, and
said, " Follow me." I followed into the back bedroom. Whereupon he set down the candle, and bade
me good night, saying, "There, you can pray as much
as you please."

I stood, and felt foolish. He had completely ousted
me; but it immediately occurred to me that I would
kneel down and pray with a full and open voice; so
down I knelt, and commenced praying audibly. I
soon found, from the commotion created in the
kitchen, that they were taken by surprise as much as
I had been. I distinctly heard the landlady say,
"He is crazy, and will kill us all this night. Go,
husband, and see what is' the matter." But he was
slow to approach; and when I ceased praying he
came in, and asked me what was the cause of my acting in this strange way. I replied," Sir, did you not
give me the privilege to pray as much as I pleased?"
" Yes," said he, " but I did not expect you would
pray out." I told him I wanted the family to hear
prayer, and as he had deprived me of that privilege,
I knew of no better way to accomplish my obj ectthan to do as I had done, and I hoped he would
not be ofl'ended.

I found he thought me deranged, but we fell into
a free conversation on the subject of religion, and, I
think, I fully satisfied him that I was not beside myself, but spoke forth the words of truth with soberness.

Next morning I rose early, intending to go fifteen
miles to an acquaintance for breakfast, but as I was getting my horse out of the stable the landlord came out,
and insisted that I should not leave till after breakfast. I yielded, but he would not have anything for
my fare, and urged me» to call on him if ever I

106 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

traveled that way again. I will just say here, that is
less than six months I called on this landlord, and he
and his lady were happily converted, dating their conviction from the extraordinary circumstances of the
memorable night I spent with them.

I found other friends on my journey till I reached
Hopkinsville, Christian County, within thirty miles
of my father's, and I had just six and a quarter cents
left. This was a new and dreadfully wicked place. I
put up at a tavern kept by an old Mr. M'. The
landlord knew my father. I told him I had not
money to pay my bill, but as soon as I got home I
would send it to him. He said, " Very well," and
made me welcome. His lady was a sister of the
apostate Dr. Allen whom I have elsewhere mentioned.

Shortly after I laid down I fell asleep. Suddenly
I was aroused by .a piercing scream, or screams, of a'
female. I supposed that somebody was actually
committing murder. I sprung from my bed, and,
after getting half dressed, ran into the room from
whence issued the piercing screams, and called out,
" What's the matter here ?" The old gentleman replied, that his wife was subject to spasms, and often
had them. I commenced a conversation with her
about religion. I found she was under deep concern

about her soul. I asked if I might pray for her.

I" 0, yes," she replied, "for there is no one in this

place that cares for my soul."

I knelt and prayed, and then commenced singing,
and directed her to Christ as an all-suflicient Saviour,
and pray ed again. She suddenly sprung out of the
bed and shouted, "Glory to God! he has blessed my
soul." It was a happy time indeed. The old gentleman wept like a child. We sung and shouted, prayed and praised, nearly all night. Next morning the

rsrnn canrwsnrenir. 107

old landlord told me my bill was paid tenfold, and
that all he charged me was, every time I passed that
way, to call and stay with them.

Next day I reached home with the six and a quarter cents unexpended. Thus I have given you a very
imperfect little sketch of the early travel of a Methodist preacher in the Western Conference. My parents received me joyfully. I tarried with them sevI eral weeks. My father‘ gave me a fresh horse, a bridle and saddle, some new clothes, and forty dollars in
cash. Thus equipped, I was ready for another three
years' absence.

- Our Conference, this year, was held in Chillicothe,
September 14, 1807. Our increase of members was
one thousand one hundred and eighty; increase of
traveling preachers, six. From the Conference in
Chillicothe I received my appointment for 1807-8,
on Barren Circuit, in Cumberland " District, James
Ward presiding elder, who employed Lewis Anderson to travel with me. This brother is now a memher of the Illinois Conference. It was a four weeks'
circuit. We had several revivals of religion in different places. The circuit reached from Barren Creek,
north of Green River, to the head of .Long Creek, in
Tennessee State. I received about forty dollars quarterage. We had an appointment near Glasgow, the
county seat of Barren County. A very singular circumstance took place in this circuit this year; something like the following:

There were two very large Baptist Churches east
of Glasgow. These Churches had each very talented
and popular preachers for their pastors, by the name
of W. and H. The Baptists were numerous and
wealthy, and the great majority of the citizens were
under Baptist influence. The Methodists had a

108 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

small class of about thirteen members. There lived
in the settlement a gentleman by the name of L.,
who was raised under the Baptist influence, though
not a member of the Church. His lady was a mem

ber of one of these large Baptist Churches. Mr. L

was lingering in the last stages of consumption,
but without religion. These Baptist ministers visited
him often, and advised, and prayed with, and for
him. Learning that I was in the neighborhood, he
sent for me ; I went; he seemed fast approaching his
end, wasted away to a mere skeleton; he had to be
lifted, like a child, in and out of the bed. I found
him penitent, and prayed with him, sat up with him,
and in the best way I knew I pointed him to Jesus.
It pleased God to own the little effort, and speak
peace to his troubled soul; he was very happy after
this. He told me the next morning that he wished
to be baptized, join the Church, and receive the sacrament. In the meantime, the Baptist ministers
came to see him, and as I knew he was raised under
Baptist denominational influences, I was at a loss to

know how to act. I took the two Baptist ‘ministers

out, and said to them: "This afflicted brother has
obtained religion, and he desires to be baptized, join
the Church, and receive the sacrament. And," said 

"brethren, you must now take the case into your own

hands, and do with it as you think best. He was

raised a Baptist, and, as a matter of course, he believes

in immersion. And," said I, "my opinion is, if he is

immersed, he cannot survive it; and as you are

strong in the faith of immersion, you must administer
it." "'

"No, no," said they; "he is your convert, and you
must do all he desires. We believe, as well as you,
that he cannot be immersed." ‘

PETER OARTWBIGHT. 109

. " Now," said I, " brethren, he wants not only to be
baptized, but wants to join the Church, the Baptist
Church of course; and if I baptize him by sprinkling
or pouring, you will not receive him into the Baptist
Church; or, in other words, if I do, will you receive
him into your Church '9"

" Well, no," said they; " we cannot do it."

"Now," said I, "brethren, this is a very solemn affair.
You will not baptize him and take him into your
Church; and if I baptize him, still you will not
receive him. There must be something wrong about
this very solemn matter."

They then said they would have nothing to do
with it; that I must manage it in my own way. I
then went and consulted the wife of the sick man.
I told her what her ministers had said. "Now,"
said I, "sister, what must I do ?"

Said she, " Go and ask my husband, and do as he
wishes, and I will be satisfied."

I went, and said, " Brother L., if I baptize you, it
must be by sprinkling or pouring; you cannot be
immersed." , 1

Said he, "I know I can't, and I am willing to be
baptized in any mode; it is not essential."

As soon as preparation was made, I baptized
him by sprinkling, and then proceeded to consecrate the elements and administer the sacrament.
I turned and invited both of the Baptist ministers to
come and commune with the dying saint, but they
refused. Then I turned to his wife, and invited her
to come and commemorate the dying sorrows of her
Saviour with her dying husband. She paused for a
moment, and then, bursting into a flood of tears, said,

"I will ;" and came forward, and I administered to
them both.

110 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

After this I said, " Brother L., do you wish to
have your name enrolled with the members of the
little class of Methodists ‘that worship in the neighborhood 3"

He said, "O, yes ;" and then added, "before you
get round your circuit, I shall be no more on earth,
and I wish you to preach my funeral."

After consultation with his wife, I left an appointment for his funeral. In a few days he breathed his
last, and went off triumphant.

When I came to the appointment, there was a vast
crowd. We had a very solemn time. I stated all
the circumstances above narrated, and at the close
I opened the door of the Church, and Mrs. L., and
six others of her relatives, all members of the Baptist
Church, came forward and joined the Methodists.
This circumstance gave us a standing that enabled
us to lift our heads and breathe more freely afterward. .

In the course of this year we carried Methodist
preaching into a Baptist congregation on Bacon
Creek. A great many of their members gave up
Jalvinism, close communion, and immersion, and
joined the Methodist Church; and we took possession
of their meeting—house, and raised a large society
there that flourishes to this. day. Out of this revival several preachers i were raised up that trained
and blessed the Methodist Episcopal Church for years

afterward.

rnrnn ouvrwarenr. 111

CHAPTER X.
MEETING IN A WAGON.

Owmo to the newness of the country, the scarcity of
money, the fewness of our numbers, and their poverty,
it was a very difficult matter for preachers to obtain
a support, especially married men with families.
From this consideration many of our preachers
delayed marriage, or, shortly after marriage, located.
Indeed, such was our poverty, that the Discipline was
a perfectly dead letter on the subject of house rent,
table expenses, and a dividend to children; and although I had acted as one of the stewards of the Conference for years, these rules of the Discipline were
never acted upon, or any allowance made, till 1813,
when Bishop Asbury, knowing our poverty and sufferings in the West, had begged from door to door in
the older conferences, and came on and distributed
ten dollars to each child' of a traveling preacher under fourteen years of age.

After mature deliberation and prayer, toward the
close of my labors on the Barren Circuit, I thought it
was my duty to marry, and was joined in marriage to
Frances Gaines, on the 18th of August, 1808, which
was her nineteenth birthday; and we had our infare
at my father's, on the 1st of September following,
which was my twenty-third birthday. ' .

The Conference, this fall, was held at Liberty Hill,

Tennessee, on the 1st of October, 1808. Our increase
in members this year was about one thousand three

112 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

hundred and fifty; our increase of traveling preachers was ten. We had three new presiding-elder districts formed this year, namely, Indiana, Miami, and
Muskingum, making seven presiding-elder districts
in the Western Conference.

At this Conference I was elected and ordained an

elder by Bishop M'Kendree. The parchment reads
as follows, viz. :

"Know all men by these presents that I, William
M'Kendree, one of the bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church in America, under the protection of
Almighty God, and with a single eye to his glory,
by the imposition of my hands and prayer, (being
assisted by the elders present,) have this day set apart
Peter Cartwright for the ofiice of an Elder in the said
Methodist Episcopal Church; a man whom I judge to
be well qualified for that work; and I do hereby recommend him, to all whom it may concern, as a
proper person to administer the sacraments and ordinances, and to feed the flock of Christ, so long as
his spirit and practice are such as become the
Gospel of Christ. .

" In testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my
hand and seal, this fourth day of October, in the year
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and eight.

" WILHAM M'KENDR1a:E.

" Lmmmr HILL, T1mNr.ssm:."

My appointment, this year, was to Salt River Circuit, Kentu c-ky District, James Ward presiding elder.
This was a part of the circuit I had traveled in the
years 1804 and 1805.

In the course of this year my father died, and left
me to settle his little estate, which, owing to the forms
of law, took me several months, which was the longest

\

PETER GARTWBIGHT. 113

time I have ever had from the regular work of a

traveling preacher in fifty years; but upon a proper
presentation of the case to my presiding _elder, he
gave me liberty to go and attend to this business.
Giving me this liberty by the presiding elder was then
_according to Discipline.
- At the close of the conference year 1808-9, I attended conference at Cincinnati, and there reported
myself ready for regular work, and my appointment
was to Livingston Circuit. Our increase of membership was four thousand and fifty-one; our increase of
traveling preachers was twenty-one.
* " Livingston Circuit was in the Cumberland District,
Learner Blackman presiding elder. This was my first
field of labor as an exhorter; which circuit I had
formed in the days of my boyhood, and had then returned to J. Page, presiding elder, seventy members.
They had increased now to four hundred and twentyseven; a good increase for six years.

We had not a very prosperous year, but we had
some gracious outpourings of the Spirit of God. I
held a camp-meeting this year, which lasted four days
and nights, without any ministerial aid, save one little
exhorter and an old drunken Baptist preacher, who
preached for me once, on Sunday. He then and there
confessed his dissipation, and wept bitterly, and made
us all cry. We had about thirty converts at this
meeting. At the close of the meeting we had many
seekers who had not obtained comfort. Twelve of
them got into a two-horse wagon, and myself with
them. We had to go about fifteen miles, but before
we reached our home every one of them got power-'
fllllyconverted, and we sung and shouted aloud along
the road, to the very great astonishment of those who
lived along the way. That night the whole neighbor' 8

114. auromoenarnr or.

hood gathered in, and we had a glorious time. Several more were powerfully converted, and many
deeply convicted. The work broke out around the
settlement, and scores were brought to a saving

‘knowledge of the truth.

I will here relate an incident that took place

this' year, concerning one of our Methodist preach- ers; his name was J. D. He was raised a very
bigoted Dunker, or, as they are sometimes denominated, Seventh-day Baptists. When the Methodist
preachers came into his settlement he violently opposed them, asserting the Dunkers were right and
everybody else wrong. After a while, however, he
either really or pretendedly got under deep conviction and professed religion. (This was when the Methodists had borne down all opposition and become
popular.) He joined the Methodists, and they soon
licensedhim to preach. Now he had found the right
way, and all the_ rest were wrong. He had considerable talent, but was a very lazy man. However, the
Methodists got him on a circuit a while, and he was
popular, but did not get money enough to support
him; so he located, and went into land speculations,
and got under par as a good man. This year he
moved into the bounds of my circuit, and we renewed
our former acquaintance, preached together often,
and really we were in a fair way of doing much
good. We broke into a very large Free-will Baptist
settlement, where the preacher was a very weak
brother. We rose high in public opinion, and the
Baptists offered us a good salary if we would join
them and become their pastor. This was a little too
much for my Brother D. He came to me one day
and said, "Brother Cartwright, you and I have
young and growing families: if we would join these

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 115

Baptists they would give us a handsome support, and
as they have no preacher in all this countryof any
talents, we could sway a mighty influence, getting
hundreds into our Church, and secure a good living
for our families in all time to come. Don't you
think," said he, "it would be best to do it ?" I replied: "Brother D., ‘ Get thee behind me, Satan,
for thou art an offense to me.' If ‘money, sir, or a
good living, had been my prime object in joining a
Church, I should never have joined the Methodists;
but when I joined them I joined them from ad firm conviction, believing them to be the best people in the
world; and the longer I live with them, and the more
I understand of their doctrine and system of Church

government, the more firmly I am settled in mind to ‘

abide my choice; and this world has not treasure
enough to allure me from the Methodist Church."
Poor human nature! The temptation was too
strong. Brother D. yielded, joined the‘ Free-will
Baptists, and was soon installed their pastor. Well,
now, he proclaimed, he had certainly found the
right way, and all the World Was Wrong. Well, it
was not long before he was caught in a criminal act,
ruined his moral character, and Was dismissed from
his pastoral charge. I will here say that this said
J. D. Was formerly my armor-bearer in the great
contest I had with the Shakers at Busroe, in Indiana, mentioned elsewhere in this narrative. Wliat
next? Why, J. D. Went and joined the Shakers; and now from heaven God had revealed it to
him that he was right and everybody else wrong.
The Shakers, hearing of his instability of character,
had very little confidence in him. They put him to
hard labor to try him. This he could not stand; and
presently left them, took up with a scattered band of

116 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

New Lights, moved to Texas, and I expect the devil
has got him in safe keeping long before this time.
Our increase for 1809—10 was 1,950. Increase of

traveling preachers, fifteen.

At this conference I was returned to Livingston
Circuit, Cumberland District; Learner Blackman
presiding elder. At the close of this year, 1810-11,

we met at New Chapel, Shelby County, Kentucky,
November 1st, 1810. Our increase of members, this
conference year, 4,264; increase of traveling preachers, thirteen.
The Western Conference met the last time as the

Western Conference, at Cincinnati, October 1st, 1811,
and our increase this year was 3,600. Our increase

‘ in preachers was ten. Our strength of membership

in the entire Western Conference at its last session
as a Western Conference, was 30,741. In 1787 we
had but ninety members that were ofiicially reported
from the West; and if, as we have elsewhere stated,
that at the General Conference of 1st May, 1800, in
Baltimore, the Western Conference was regularly
organized, with about two thousand members, the
reader will plainly see what God wrought in eleven
years by the pioneer fathers that planted Methodism
in this vast Western wilderness; and of the little

.band of traveling. preachers that then plowed the

wilderness, say twelve men, none are now living
save Mr. Hemy Smith. In the fall of 1804, when
I joined the Conference, there were a little over
9,000 members in the Western Conference; in 1811,
30,741. There were then a little over forty traveling
preachers, and in 1810 over one hundred; and
yet, at this time there are not more than six of us
left lingering on the shores of time to look back,
look around, and look forward to the future of the

PETER cxnrwnrenr. 117

Methodist Episcopal Church, for weal or for woe.

_ Lord, save the Church from desiring to have pews,

choirs, organs, or instrumental music, and a congregational ministry, like other heathen Churches
around them!

In 1804, the membership of the whole Church was

8 119,945, traveling preachers 433, throughout the

United States, territories, and Canada. Their increase
this year, throughout the Union, was 6,811. In 1812,
when the Western Conference was divided into Ohio
and Tennessee Conferences, our entire membership
had increased to 184,567; increase of members in

eight years, near 65,000. Traveling ministers in
1804, 433; in 1812, 688.

In 1811 we elected our delegates to the first delegated General Conference ever holden by the Methodist Episcopal Church. This General Conference

was holden in New-York, 1st May, 1812. At this .

General Conference, the Western Conference, which
had existed some twelve years, was divided into two
annual conferences, called Ohio and Tennessee. The
Ohio Conference was composed of the following presiding-elder districts, namely: Ohio District, Muskingum District, Scioto District, Miami District, Kentucky District, and Salt River District: six. Tennessee
Conference was composed of the following districts,
namely: Holston District, Nashville District, Cumberland District, Wabash District, Mississippi District,
and Louisiana District: six. It will be seen that the
State of Kentucky was divided between the two conferences. There were members in Ohio Conference,
23,284; in Tennessee Conference, 22,700. There
were in Ohio Conference, traveling preachers, sixtyfour; in Tennessee, sixty-two. These statistics are
for 1812. - - v

118 suronroeanrnv or

I was appointed to Christian Circuit, Wabash District; James Axley presiding elder. This was a four
weeks' circuit, most of it parts and fragments of other
circuits. I formed it into a four weeks' circuit. We
had some splendid revivals this year, and took in
some three hundred members. We had two or three
very successful camp-meetings; at one of~ them I
baptized one hundred and twenty-seven adult persons
and forty-seven children, all by sprinkling, save seven
adults, whom I immersed. One of them was the
daughter of a very celebrated Baptist minister.

In the north end of my circuit there was a district.
of densely-populated country, about thirty-five miles
across. A Methodist preacher had seldom, even if
ever, preached in this district of country. About
midway of it there lived a Baptist minister, with a
large society and a large meeting-house. He, at an
early day, had settled among them, and prejudiced
nearly all the country against the Methodist preachers and people.

I had to make a day's ride through this settlement
every round, and thought it singular that no Methodist preacher, as I could learn, had ever made a break
in it; and I determined to make one in this region
somehow or somewhere. While riding through, I
stopped at many houses, and asked for the privilege
to preach among them. They looked shy, and denied
me. I prayed God to open my way; and at length,
through an acquaintance I had made, left an appointment to preach at the Baptist meeting-house on
my next round. '

The Baptist minister publicly warned the people
not to hear me; but somehow the novelty of the
thing excited their curiosity, and though a. weekday, 9. large congregation turned out, and among the

rnrmi esarwnmnr. 119

rest, their preacher. He told me he should not hinder
me that time from preaching in his meeting-house;
"but," said he, " you must leave no more appointments at my church, or if you do, you will find the
doors barred against you." Well, I had to submit.
I went in, and preached as well as I could, and the
congregation were considerably affected, even to
weeping. I called on the Baptist minister to conclude, but he refused; so after closing the services,
I told the congregation that I could preach to them
every round, but that their minister had forbidden
me the use of his meeting-house any more; but if
there was any man present that would open his
private house for me to preach in, I would leave an
appointment. A gentleman rose up, and tendered
me the use of his house, and invited me home with
him for dinner; so I left an appointment, and went
with this main and partook of his hospitalities.

When I came round to my appointment, the house
was filled to overflowing, though large. While I was
preaching, near the close of the discourse, suddenly
the power of God fell on the congregation like a flash
of lightning, and the people fell right and left; some
screamed aloud for mercy, others fell on their knees
and prayed out aloud; several Baptist members fell
to the floor under the power of God. There was a
Baptist preacher present. After I had talked, and
exhorted, and sung a long time, I called on this
preacher to pray, but he was so astounded that, he
told me, he could not pray. Our meeting lasted
nearly all night. About twelve persons were converted in the good old way, and shouted aloud the
praises of God. I opened the doors of the Church,
End thirteen came forward and joined. From this
 the work broke amt and many professed religion»

120 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

and we succeeded in planting Methodism on a firm
footing here. The Baptist minister who was pastor of
the congregation that worshiped at the meeting-house
where I preached, had a dreadful rude set of children,
especially a daughter whom they called Betsy. She
would stand on the seats, point and laugh, and when
any would fall under the power of God, she would
say it was nothing but a Methodist fit.

At a camp-meeting this summer, held on the land
of R. Dellam, Esq., now of St. Louis, a fine man, old
Valentine Cook, of precious memory, attended with
me, and labored like a true minister of Christ. There
was a large crowd of people, and mostly raised under
old Baptist influence and prejudice, and as ignorant
of Methodism» and the power of religion as the beasts
that perish. There were several preachers to aid
Brother Cook and myself, but all our preaching
seemed powerless. The meeting dragged heavily
till Sunday. Brother Cook and myself Walked out to
pray; when we rose from our knees, Brother Cool:
said to me ':

" Brother, have you any faith ?"

"A little," I replied.

" I have some," said he.

We were both to preach in succession, commencing
at eleven o'c1ock. He was to preach first, and I to
follow. Said he to me:

" If I strike fire, I will immediately call for
mourners, and you must go into the assembly

and exhort in every direction, and I will manage

the altar. But," said he, "if I fail to _strike fire,
you must preach; and if you strike fire, call the
mourners and manage the altar. I will go through
the congregation, and exhort with all the power God
gives me." ' ' . . ‘

PETER CARTWBIGHT. 121_

We repaired to the stand. He preached; it seemed
as if every word took effect. There was no outbreak;
the vast crowd were melted into silent tears. When
he closed, he bade me rise and preach. I did so.
Just as I was closing up my sermon, and pressing it
with all the force I could command, the power of
God suddenly was displayed, and sinners fell by
scores through all the assembly. We had no need of
a mourners' bench. It was supposed that several
hundred fell in five minutes; sinners turned pale;
some ran into the woods, some tried to get away and
fell in the attempt, some shouted aloud for joy;
among the rest my Baptist preacher's daughter,
whom we have called Betsy. As I went through
the assembly I came across Betsy, who had fallen to
the earth, and was praying at a mighty rate. When
I came to her, she said to me:

" 0, do pray for me; I am afraid I am lost and
damned forever!"

I said to her, " Betsy, get up; you have only got a
Methodist fit," (using her former language ;) but she
roared the louder two or three times. I bid her get
up, saying to her, " You are playing the hypocrite,

. and have only got a Methodist fit; get up, Betsy."

But I assure you she was past getting up. Just
hard by I saw her father, the Baptist preacher. He
was crying, and shaking every joint in him. I went
to him, and said, ‘_‘ Brother A., come and pray for
Betsy." He replied:

" Lord, have mercy on me! I cannot pray."

" Amen," said I. " Pray on, Brother A., the Lord
will have mercy." I then exhorted Betsy, and
prayed for her. -If ever I saw the great deep of a
sinner's heart broken up, hers was. She wrestled and
prayed all night. N extjmorning, about sunrise, the

122 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Lord in a powerful manner converted her. She rose
and went over the camp-ground like a top. She at
length met her father, the, preacher, and of all the
exhortations ‘that I ever heard fall from the lips of a
mortal, hers was the most powerful to her father.
She said to him:

" You, father, have taught me from my childhood to
hate and despise the Methodists till my soul was wellnigh lost and ruined forever!"

She then assured him that he had no religion at
all, and begged him to repent and get his soul converted. She made him kneel down, and she engaged
for him in mighty prayer. I

About eleven o'clock on Monday I opened the doors
of the Church, and forty-two joined, and among the
rest, Betsy. From this meeting a revival spread almost through the entire country round, and great additions were made to the Methodist Church. The circuit
was large, embracing parts of Logan, Muhlenburgh,
Butler, Christian, and Caldwell Counties in Kentucky, and parts of Montgomery, Dixon, and Stewart
Counties in Tennessee.

On the west part of Red River there was a Presbyterian minister settled, who had a large brick .

church He had settled at an early day, and the few
scattered Methodists who lived in the bounds of his
congregation, having no Methodist preaching, had
joined his Church rather than live out of Church all-a
together. I was invited to preach about five miles
from this minister's church. I sent an appointment.
At the time a large congregation turned out; the
people were deeply aifected. When I closed, I
stated to the assembly that I could preach to them
every four weeks, if they desired it. They told me
they &d, and I accordingly left another appointurns oanrwarenr. . 128

ment. When -I came the house was crowded, and the
Presbyterian minister came. I preached, and there
was a general weeping all through the congregation.
The minister concluded for me, and I left another appointment. The minister stayed and dined with me.
After dinner he asked me to walk out with him. I
did so. When we had seated ourselves, he told me
he wanted to talk to me about my preaching in that
neighborhood. He said that this neighborhood was
in the bounds of his congregation ; that I was heartily
welcome to preach; but-, said he, you must not
attempt to raise any society. I told him that was
not our way of doing business ; that we seldom ever
preached long at any place without trying to raise a
society. He said I must not do it. I told him the
people were a free people and lived in a free country,
and must and ought to be allowed to do as they
pleased; that I should never condescend to try to
proselyte; but if I continued to preach there, and if
any of the people desired to join the Methodist
Church, I should surely give them the privilege to do
so; and that I understood there were ten or twelve
members of the Methodist Church had joined ‘his
Church as Methodists, with the fair understanding
that if the Methodists ever organized a society convenient to them, they were to have the privilege of
joining their own Church without any hard thoughts
or censures. He said that was true; but if we
raised a society -it would diminish his membership,
and cut off his support. "Well," said I, " my dear
sir, if the people want me to preach to them I shall
do it, and if they desire to join our Church I shall
take them in; and I intend, when I come next time,
to organize a class, fer several have desired me to <10
30.". .Said he, "I will be here, and will 096111] 09'

124 AUTOBIOGRAPHY. or

pose you." Said I, " If you think that the best way,
do so." While I was absent for three Sabbaths successively, he opened his batteries on me, told them
what I had said, and warned them not to attend my
meeting. This roused the whole country, and made
me many fast friends; even his own members remonstrated against his course, saying to him, nobody
was obliged to join the Methodists, and if they preferred the Methodist Church to his, it was their right
to oin it.

When I came round we had a vast crowd out, but
the minister did not appear. At the close of my sermon I read our General Rules, and explained our economy. I then told them that my father had fought
in the Revolution to gain our freedom and liberty of
conscience; that I felt that my Presbyterian brother
had no bill of sale of the people; that I was no robber of Churches; but if I had any members in my

_ Church that liked the Presbyterians better than the

Methodists, I wanted them to go and join them ; but
if there were any there that day that believed the
Methodist doctrine, and were willing to conform to the
Discipline of the Methodist Church, and desired to
join us, let them come and give me their hand, and I
would form them into a class and appoint them a
leader. There were twenty-seven came forward;
thirteen of them were members of this minister's
Church. I publicly ascertained this fact, and then
told the thirteen that I did not want to give any
offense, and that I wanted them all to go to their
next meeting, and ask a letter, stating their reasons,
and I would receive them into full membership at
once. One of them, a fine, intelligent man, and an
elder, said‘ that he knew they would not give them
letters. I remarked, " Go and ask for them; and if

PETER CABTWBIGHT. 125

they refuse, come back, and I will receive you any
how." They went, but the Church would not give

' them letters, although there was nothing against their

moral characters. After that I received them into
the Methodist Church. Public opinion was in my
favor, and many more of this preacher's members
came and joined us, and the minister sold out and
moved to Missouri, and before the year was out I
had peaceable possession of his brick church.

126 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

CHAPTER XI.

SLAVERY IN THE CHURCH.

- IN' the fall 'of 1812, our Tennessee Conference was
holden at Fountain Head, State of Tennessee, on the
first of November. At this first session of the Tennessee Conference the Illinois District was organized,
and J. Walker appointed presiding elder. The Illinois Circuit, as a mission, was formed in 1804, and
Benjamin Young appointed to it. It was attached to
the Cumberland District, L. Garrett presiding elder.
Brother Young returned sixty-seven members.

At this Conference I was appointed by Bishop
Asbury to the Wabash District, which was then composed of the following circuits,'namely: Vincennes, in
the State of Indiana ; and Little Wabash and Fort MasIack, in Illinois. These three circuits were north of
-he Ohio River; the balance of the district was in
Kentucky, namely, Livingston, Christian, Henderson,
Hartford, and Breckenridge Circuits. In traveling
the district I had to cross the Ohio River sixteen
times during the year.

I told Bishop «Asbury that I deliberately believed
that I ought not to be appointed presiding elder, for
I was not qualified for the office; but he told me there
was no appeal from his judgment. At the end of six
months I wrote to him, begging a release from the
post he had assigned me; but when he returned an
answer, he said I must abide his judgment, and stand
in my lot to the end of the time. I continued accordC
I

rurnn canrwamnvr. 127

_ing1y in the service, but the most of the year was

gloomy to me, feeling that I had not the first qualifi- ~

cation for the ofilce of a presiding elder. Perhaps I
never spent a more gloomy and sad year than this in
all my itinerant life; and from that day to this I can
safely say the presiding elder's ofiice has had no special charms for me; and I will remark, that I have
often wondered at the aspirations of many, very many
Methodist preachers for the ofiice of presiding elder;
and have frequently said, if I were a bishop, that such
aspirants should always go without oflice under my
administration. I look upon this disposition as the
out-cropping of fallen and unsanctified human nature,
and whenever this spirit, in a large degree, gets into
a preacher, he seldom ever does much good afterward.

We had through the summer and fall of this conference year some splendid camp-meetings, many conversions, and many accessions to the Church. In the
fall We met. at Conference, October 1st, 1813, at Rees's
Chapel, Tennessee. The name of Wabash District was
changed to Green River District, and Vincennes,
Little Wabash, and Fort Massack Circuits, north of
the Ohio River, were stricken off and attached to the
Illinois District, and Dixon and Dover Circuits, south
of the Cumberland River, that had belonged to Nashville District, Were attached to Green River District.
I was appointed by Bishop Ashury« presiding elder of
this district, some time in the course of the summer
of this conference year, 1813. We had a campmeeting in the Breckenridge Circuit, and a glorious
good work of religion was manifest throughout the
meeting. It was at this meeting that Benjamin
Ogden, one_ of the early preachers sent to the West,
who became disaffected, and left the Methodist Epis‘128 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

copal Church under the secession of J. O'Kelly, and
backslid, professed to be reclaimed, and returned to
his mother Church. '

Slavery had long been agitated in the Methodist
Episcopal Church, and our preachers, although they
did not feel it to be their duty to meddle with it
politically, yet, as Christians and Christian ministers,
be it spoken to their eternal credit, they believed it
to be their duty to bear their testimony against slavery
as a moral evil, and this is the reason Why the Gen~
eral Conference, from time to time, passed rules and

regulations to govern preachers and members of the

Church in regard to this great evil. The great object
of the General Conference was to keep the ministry
clear of it, and there can be no doubt that the course
pursued by early Methodist preachers Was the cause
of the emancipation of thousands of this degraded race
of human beings; and it is clear to my mind, if Methodist preachers had kept, clear of slavery themselves,
and gone on bearing honest testimony against it, that
thousands upon thousands more Would have been
emancipated who are now groaning under an oppression almost too intolerable to be borne. Slavery is
certainly a domestic, political, and moral evil. Go
into a slave community, and you not only see the
dreadful evils growing out of the system in the almost
universal licentiousness which prevails among the
slaves themselves, but their young masters are often

tempted and seduced from the paths of virtue, from C

the associations in which they are placed; and there
is an under-current of heart-embittering feeling of
many ladies of high and noble virtue, growing out of
the want of fidelity of their husbands, and the profligate course of their sons. Let any one travel through
slave states, and see the thousands of mixed blood, and

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 129

then say if I have misrepresented the dreadful causes
of domestic disquietude that often falls with mountain
Weight on honorable wives and mothers. And although,
in the infancy of this republic, it seemed almost impossible to form a strong and democratic confederacy,
and maintain their independence without compromising constitutionally this political - evil, and thereby
fixing a stain on this "Land of the free and home of
the brave," yet it was looked upon as a great national
or political evil, and by none more so than General
Washington,‘ the father of the republic. I will not
attempt to enumerate the moral evils that have been
produced by slavery; their name is legion. And now,

notwithstanding these are my honest views of slavery, _

I have never seen a rabid abolition or free-soil society that I could join, because_they resort to unjustifiable agitation, and the means they employ are
generally unchristian. They condemn and confound
the innocent with the guilty; the means they employ
are not truthful, at all times; and I am perfectly satisfied that if force is resorted to, this glorious Union
will be dissolved, a civil war will follow, death and
carnage will ensue, and the only free nation on the
earth will be destroyed. Let moral suasion be used to
the last degree for the sake of the salvation of the
slaveholders, and the salvation of the slaves. Let us
not take a course that will cut oil' the Gospel from
them, and deliver them over to the uncovenanted
mercies of God, or the anathemas of the devil. I have
had glorious revivals of religion among the slaves, and
have seen thousands of them soundly converted to
God, and have stood by the bedside of the dying slave,
and have heard the swelling shout of Christian victory
from the dying negro as he entered the cold waters

of the river of Jordan.
0

180 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

At our Breckenridge Circuit camp-meeting the following incident occurred. There were a Brother S.
and family, who were the owners of a good many
slaves. It was a fine family, and Sister S. was a
very intelligent lady, and an exemplary Christian.
She had long sought the blessing of perfect love, but
she said the idea of holding her fellow-beings in bondage stood out in her way. Many at this meeting
sought and obtained the blessing of sanctification;
Sister S. said her whole soul was in an agony for
that blessing, and it seemed to her at times that she
could almost lay hold, and claim the promise, but she
said her slaves would seem to step» right in between
her and her Saviour, and prevent its reception; but
while on her knees, and struggling as in an agony for
a clean heart, she then and there covenanted with the
Lord, if he would give her the blessing, she would give
up her slaves and set themlfree. She said this covenant
had hardly been made one moment, when God filled

' her soul with such an overwhelming sense of Divine

love, that she did not really know whether she was in
or out of the body. She rose from her knees, and
proclaimed to listening hundreds that she had obtained
the blessing, and also the terms on which she had
obtained it. She went through the vast crowd with
holy shouts of joy, and exhorting all to taste and see
that the Lord was gracious, and such a power attended
her words that hundreds fell to the ground, and scores
of souls were happily born into the kingdom of God
that afternoon and during the _night. Shortly after
this they set their slaves free, and the end of that
family waspeace.

There was another circumstance happened at this
camp-meeting that I will substantially relate. It was

one of our rules of the camp-meeting that the men ‘

rmrnn canrwnronr. 181

were to occupy the seats on one side of the stand,
and the ladies the other side, at all hours of public
worship. But there was a young man, finely dressed,
with his bosom full of ruflies, that would take his seat
among the ladies; and if there was any excitement
in the congregation, he would rise to his feet, and
stand on the seats prepared for the occupancy of the
ladies. I reproved him several times; but he would
still persist in his disorderly course. At length, I re' proved him personally and sharply, and said, "I mean

that young man there, standing on the seats of the
ladies, with a. ruflied shirt on." And added, " I doubt
not that rufied shirt was borrowed."

This brought him off the seats in a mighty rage.
He swore he would whip me for insulting him. After
a while, I was walking round on the outskirts of the
congregation; and he had a large company gathered
round him, and was swearing at a mighty rate, and
saying he would certainly whip me before he left the
ground.

I walked up, and said, " Gentlemen, let me in here
to this fellow."

They opened the way. I walked up to him, and
asked him if it was me he was cursing, and going
to whip.

He said it was.

"Well," said I, "we will not disturb the congregation fighting here; but let us go out into the woods,
for if I am to be whipped, I Want it over, for I do
not like to live in dread."

So we started for the woods, the crowd pressing
after us. I stopped and requested every one of them
to go back, and not a man to follow; and assured
them if they did not go back, that I would not go
another step; they then turned back. The camp182 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

ground was fenced in. When we came to the fence
I put my left hand on the top rail and leaped over.
As I lighted on the other side one of my feet struck a.
grub, and I had well-nigh sprained my ankle; it
gave me a severe jar; and a pain struck me in the
left side from the force of the jar, and involuntarily
I put my right hand on my left side, where the pain
had struck me. My redoubtable antagonist had got
on the fence, and looking down at me, said,

" D—n you, you are feeling for a dirk, are you '9"

As quick as thought, it occurred to me how to get
clear of a whipping. ‘

"Yes," said I; " and I will give you the benefit of
all the dirks I have ;" and advanced rapidly toward
him. . 7

He sprang back on the other side of the fence
from me. I jumped over after him, and a regular
foot race followed. I was so diverted at my cowardly
bul1y's rapid retreat that I could not run fast; so he
escaped, and I missed my whipping. .

There was a large pond not very far from the campground, and what few rowdies were there, concluded
they wo11ld take my bully and duck him in that pond
as a punishment for his bad conduct; so they decoyed him off there, and they got a long pole, and
stripped some hickory bark, and securing him on
the pole, two of them, one at each end, waded in
and ducked him nearly to death; he begged and
prayed them to spare his life; he promised them that
he would never misbehave at meeting again, and
that he would immediately leave the ground if they
would let him go. On these conditions they released
him, and I got clear of my ruflle-shirted dandy.

It may be asked what I would have done if this
fellow had gone with me to the woods. This is hard

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 133

to answer, for it was a part of my creed to love everybody, but to fear no one; and I did not permit myself

to believe any man could whip me till it was tried; _

and I did not permit myself to premeditate expedients in such cases. I should no doubt have proposed to him to have prayer first, and then followed
the openings of Providence.

This year there was a considerable decrease in
membership in the Methodist Episcopal Church,
owing chiefly to the war with England; and we felt
the sad effects of war throughout the West, perhaps as
sensibly as in any part of the Union. A braver set
of men never lived than was found in this Western
world, and many of them volunteered and helped to
achieve another glorious victory over the legions of
England, and her savage allied thousands. Of course
there were many of our members went into the war,
and deemed it their duty to defend ‘our common country under General Jackson.

In the fall of 1813, October 1st, our Conference
was held at Rees's Chapel, Tennessee, and for 1813-14
our appointments remained pretty much as they were
before. I was returned to the Green River District;
this year the Missouri District was formed, and admitted as part of the Tennessee Conference. In the
course of this year, or about this time, there were
new fields of labor entered by our preachers along
the Cumberland River, near the line between Tennessee and Kentucky. We preached in new settle~
ments, and the Lord poured out his Spirit, and we
had many convictions ‘and many conversions. It
was the order of the day, (though I am sorry to say it,)
that we were constantly followed by a certain set of
proselyting Baptist preachers. These new and wicked
settlements were seldom visited by these Baptist

184 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

preachers until the Methodist preachers entered
them; then, when a revival was gotten up, or the
work of God revived, these Baptist preachers came

‘ rushing in, and they generally sung their sermons;

and when they struck the long roll, or their sing-song
mode of preaching, in substance it was " water I"
" water I" " you must follow your blessed Lord down
into the water !" I had preached several times in a
large, populous, and wicked settlement, and there
were serious attention, deep convictions, and a good
many conversions; but, between my occasional ap
ipointments, these preachers would rush in, and try to
take our converts off into the water; and, indeed,
they made so much ado about baptism by immersion,
that the uninformed would suppose that heaven was
an island, and there was no way to get there but by

' di/ming or 

Among the Baptist preachers that rushed in on us
in this new settlement there came along a lank, longlegged, and extremely illiterate and ignorant old
preacher by the name of H——-s, and he was as impudent as a wolf. He sent an appointment, and he
was to blow the Methodists skyhigh. I had never

._ seen him, nor had he ever seen me. I heard of his

appointment, and concluded that I would go; and if
he really killed all the Methodists, if I could muster
force enough I would bury them out of the Way.
The time came on, and this mighty Goliath appeared,
with two armor-bearers. I stayed out until he commenced the battle, then I moved into the congregation, and took my seat with pen, ink, and paper;
thinking if I was to be killed, and he did not dispatch
me too suddenly, I would at least try to write my
wilL He commenced the battle by warning the
people to take care of these Methodist preachers that

rnrma canrwnrenvr. 185

were black broadcloth coats, silk jackets, and fairtoppcd boots, and a watch in their pockets; that
rode fine fat horses, &c. He then said he would tell
them how these Methodist preachers got the money
to buy all these fine clothes and horses. He said,
that in order to join the Methodist Church, the
preachers received twenty-five cents for every one
that they took into the Church, and twenty-five cents
for every baby they sprinkled, and that these babies
were considered members of the Church, and thus

that every member, adult or infant, had to pay a

dollar a head annually; and that these moneys constituted a large fund, and the Methodist preachers
could well afford to dress fine and ride fat horses.
But, said he, here is poor old H———s, (alluding to
himself,) if he can get a wool hat and a wallet of
dumplings he is content, and thinks himself well ofl'.
Now, said he, my dear brethren, these Methodist
preachers often remind me, in the doctrine they
preach, of the manner of certain men that catch
monkeys in certain countries.‘ The monkeys are very
fond of black haws; the monkey-catchers go and seatter these black haws around the roots of the trees in
which the monkeys are, and then they retire: the
monkeys come down and devour the haws. The
next time these monkey-catchers come they bring
sheep-saffron, that very much resembles black haws.
They scatter the sheep-saffron around the roots of the
trees and retire, and the poor, simple monkeys eat up
the saffron, and it makes them so sick they cannot
climb, but lie down, and then these men rush out
and catch them. So it is, said he, my brethren, with
these Methodist preachers. They preach some truth,
which takes with the people; then they come with
their sheep—sa.fi'ron, or rotten doctrine, and the poor,

136 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or‘

simple people, like the foolish monkeys, swallow down
these false doctrines, and it makes them sick, and
then these Methodist preachers catch them. He then
compared Methodist preachers to a boy climbing a
pole, &c. You may be sure this was a deadly shot. I
As soon as he was done, to keep up appearances,
he said, if there was any one present that wanted to
reply to him, let him come forward. I arose, and
marched up, and took the stand, and in a very little
time nailed all his lies to the counter; and by respectable gentlemen _ out of any Church proved his
statements to be false, and poured round upon roundon him so hot and so fast, that he started for the
door. I ordered him to stop, and told him, if he did
not, I would shoot him in the back for a tory; he
got out at the door. He was taken so at surprise,
and charged on so suddenly, that he forgot his hat,
and he peeped round the door-chink at me. I blazed
away at him till he dodged back, and started off,
bare-headed, for home, talking to himself by the way.
As he‘ retreated in this situation he was met by a gentleman, who hailed him, and said, " Mr. H———s,
what is the matter? where is your hat ?" " O Lord!"
he exclaimed, " that Methodist bull-dog Cartwright

came to my meeting, and opened a. fire on me that
no mortal man could stand, and I left." " Come," said

the gentleman, " go back and get your hat." " No,"
said _.he, "I will not go back, if I never see another
hat on earth." This encolmter blowed this proselyting, sheep-stealing preacher to never, where another
Baptist preacher that I once heard of would have
gone to, if he had jumped off.

Now I must explain this allusion a little. At an early
day I heard a Baptist preacher preach, and toward the
close he alluded to his own experience. When in a

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 137

state of conviction, he said he was in great distress;
he sought relief on the right and left, but found none,
and at length he said he thought he would start off and
travel to the ends of the yeartlz, and when he got there
that he would jump off ; and now stopping suddenly,
he asked his congregation, "Where do you think I
would have gone to 3" and answering for them, said he,
"I should have gone to NEVER."

While I am giving a few strictures on the unworthy
conduct of a few of the preachers of this denomination, I will state another incident that occurred about
this time. I settled on a little new place, near the
road leading from Hopkinsville, Christian County, to
Russellville, Logan County, Kentucky, and was destitute of stabling. Presently there rode up an old
gentleman and a youth he called his son.

He asked me if Peter Cartwright, a Methodist
preacher, lived there.

I answered he did.

He asked, " Are you the man?"

I answered, " Yes."

‘‘,Well,'' said he, " I am a Baptist preacher, have
been to Missouri after this my sick son, and I have
called to stay all night with you." I told him to do
so, and alight and come in. I disposed of their horses
as best I could, supper was prepared, and they partook
of our fare. After supper they ‘both stepped into the
other room, and when they returned I smelled whisky
very strongly; and although these were not the days
of general temperance as now going on, yet I thought
it .a. bad sign for a preacher to smell very strong of _
whisky, but said nothing. When we were about to
retire to bed, I set out the books and said, "Brother,
it is our custom to have family prayer; take the
books and lead in family prayer." He began to make

188 . AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

excuses and declined. I urged him strongly, but he
refused, so I took the books, read, sung, and prayed;
but he would not sing with me, neither did he, nor his
son, kneel when We prayed. Next morning the family
was called together for family prayer; again I invited
him to pray with us, but he would not. As soon as
prayer was over he Went into the other room, and
brought out his bottle of Whisky; he asked me to
take a dram. I told him I did not drink spirits. He
offered it to all my family, but they all refused. After
breakfast he and his son harnessed up their horses to
start on their way home.

"Perhaps, brother," said he, " you charge ?"

"Yes," said I, "all whisky-drinking preachers, that
will not pray with me, I charge."

" Well," said he, "it looks a little hard that one
preacher should charge another."

" Sir," said I, "you have given me no evidence
that you are a preacher, and I fear you are a vile imposter; and when any man about me drinks whisky,
and will not pray with me, preacher or no preacher,
I take a pleasure in charging him full price; so haul
out your cash." He did so, but very reluctantly.

I am glad these unworthy examples of these preachers do not apply to the Baptist ministry generally,
but many of them are friends of temperance, and
scorn the contemptible business of proselyting members from other Churches. So may they continue, and
give up their exclusive baptism by immersion.

rnrnn oanrwaxenr 189

CHAPTER XII.

CAMP-MEETIN G IN CIDENTS.

ON the 29th September, 1814, our Tennessee Conference commenced its session at Kenerley's Chapel, nine
miles north of Russellville, Logan County, Kentucky.
Bishops Asbury and M'Kendree were both present.
These two venerable bishops of the Methodist Epis‘ copal Church were both single men, and lived and

died without ever marrying. There is no doubt but the
scanty means of a support, and the vast field of their
pastoral labor, induced them to remain unmarried, and
devote their whole time to the building up the Church.
Their field of ministerial labor was from East to West,
from North to South, all over these United States
and Territories, and the British Provinces in Canada.
The Union itself was in its infancy. When these men
bestowed the most of their ministerial labor, we had
just thrown off the yoke of the British government,
just ended a bloody war; great scarcity of money
prevailed; the Methodist Churches were few, feeble,
and poor; a single man in that early day was only
allowed sixty-four, eighty, and never more than one
hundred dollars, and the bishops no more than any
other single traveling preacher, and always dependent
on the voluntary contributions of the people for this
small pittance. Many of our married preachers had
been starved into .9. location, and many more, during
their illustrious sacrificing lives, were actually compelled to desist from traveling for want of means of

140 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

support for their families. From the poverty of the
Church, and the vastness of the field of their ‘itinerant
life, Mr. Asbury, and Bishop M'Kendree t_oo, advised
the traveling preachers to remain single; but a few
years proved to these devoted bishops themselves
that Methodist preachers were but men, subject to
like passions with other men. The various courtships
and marriage contracts, to be consummated at some
future and distant day, satisfied these devoted men
of God that it was better for even Methodist preachers
to marry than to remain single, after they had formed
a ministerial character; and although I had traveled
ten years, had a wife and two children, and had acted
as steward of the Conference for several years, yet
up to this time, as I have elsewhere stated in this
narrative, no allowance had been made for me, or

‘any other traveling married preacher, for house rent

and table expenses, or for our children.

At this conference, Bishop Asbury came with ten
dollars for every traveling preacher's child or children
born in the‘ traveling connection. This money he had
begged from door to door down East, in the older and
wealthier conferences, for the suffering children of
the married traveling itinerants in the West. This,
indeed, was a fatted calf to many of us, who had received hardly enough to keep soul and body together.
At this conference the stewards were instructed to
settle all the claims of the preachers and their families,
as the Discipline provides.

By an examination of the Minutes, it will be seen
that the Ohio Conference still had its six presidingelder districts, and Tennessee eight districts, (for
1814-15.) For several years, about this time, our
increase of members was small, owing to the war and
rumors of war. The traveling preachers in the Ohio

PETER QARTWRIGHT. 141

Conference had increased to sixty-three, and in. the
Tennessee Conference to sixty-six.

At a camp-meeting holden this year, in the edge
of Tennessee, for the Christian Circuit, there were a
great many people attended, and among them a gang
of rowdies. The ringleaders of the rowdies went by
the names of. J. P. and William P., two brothers; their
parents were fine members of the Methodist Episcopal
Church. I found it would be hard to keep order, and
Iwent to J. P., and told him I wanted him to help
me keep order. Said I, "These rowdies are all afraid
of you; and if you will help me, you shall be captain,
and choose your own men."

He said he did not want to engage in that way;
but if I would not bind him up too close, but let him
have a little fun, away off, he would then promise me
that we should have good order in the encampment
through the meeting. I said, " Very well; keep good order in the congregation, and if you have any little fun, let it be
away off, where it will not disturb the worship of
God."

There came into the congregation a young, awkward fellow, that would trespass on our rules by seating himself all the time among the ladies. It was
very fashionable at that time for the gentlemen to
roach their hair; and this young man had a mighty
bushy roached head of hair. I took him out several
times from among the women, but he would soon be
back again.

I told J. P. I wished he would attend to this young
man. " Very well," said he; and immediately sent
off and got a pair of scissors, and planted his company

i ' about a half mile off ; then sent for this young fellow, under the pretense of giving him something to

142 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

drink.' When they got him out there, two of them,
one on each side, stepped up to him with drawn
dirks, and told him they did not mean to hurt him
if he would be quiet; but if be resisted or hallooed,
he was a dead man. They said they only wanted to
roach his hair, and put him in the newest Nashville
fashion. The fellow was scared almost to death, but
made no resistance whatever. Then one with the
scissors commenced cutting his hair, and it was haggled all over at a masterly rate. When they were
done shearing him, they let him go; and he came
straight to the camp-ground. Just as he entered
it, I met him; he was pale as a cloth. He took off
his hat, and said, " See here, Mr. Cartwright, what
them rowdies have done!" I had very hard work to
keep down my risibilities; but I told him he had
better say nothing about it, for if he did. they might
serve him worse. He soon disappeared, and interrupted us no more during the meeting.

Our camp-ground was right on the bank of a creek.
Just behind the preachers' camp, there was about
room enough to place two or three carriages; then'
the bank of the creek, which was about ten feet high.
Not far from the shore was a deep hole of water,
about six feet deep. William P., the brother of my
captain of order, was very rude, and I reproved
him sharply. . I understood that he swore he would
run my carriage (which I had placed behind the
preacher's tent, right on the bank) into the creek.
There was but one way to pass to my carriage. At
night I lay watching, with a good stick in my hand ;
and presently I saw William take hold of my carriage,
and begin to turn it, in order to run it down the bank
into the creek. I slipped out, and rushed upon him
with my cudgel. I was in the only pathway; and

PETER cuvrwnrenr. 143

he, fearing a good knock-down, leaped over the' bank
right into the deep hole of water, and came out on
the other side, and ran oif.

It made him very angry that he was defeated. He
swore that he would have satisfaction out of me before
the meeting was over. In the meantime, the power
of God fell on the people gloriously; many hardened
sinners were arrested, and a ‘great many were converted; and on Sunday the mighty power of God
was felt to the utmost verge of the congregation. On
Sunday night, our altar was crowded with weeping
penitents‘. While I was in the altar, laboring with
the mourners, I saw William come up and lean on
the pale, on the outside of the altar. I kept my eye
on him; and suddenly he leaped over into the altar,
and fell at full length, and roared like a bull in a net,
and cried aloud for mercy. While I was talking to
and praying for him and others, I trod on something
near where he had been standing that felt soft. I
stooped down and looked, and lo and behold, what
should it be but a string of frogs, strung on a piece of
hickory bark! I took them up, and carried them into
the tent, not knowing what it meant. .

Just about daybreak, Monday morning, William
P. raised the shout of victory, after struggling hard
all night. Our meeting went on gloriously all that
day, and for several days and nights, with very little preaching or intermission; and many were the
happy subjects of converting grace. Some time on
Monday, my notorious William came to me, and told
me that he gathered and strung that batch of frogs,
and brought them to the altar, intending, while I was
stooping and praying for the mourners, to slip them
over my head and round my neck; and while he was
seeking an opportunity to do this, the mighty power

144 _ AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

of Gee‘. fell on him. He said he never wanted to be
any nearer hell than he felt himself to be when the
power of God arrested him. Many of the very
worst rowdies that attended this meeting were struck
down and converted to God; and thus ended the
Frog Campaign. About seventy joined the Church.

There was another incident which occurred at
this meeting that I will relate. Not very distant from
Hopkinsville, near which town I lived, there was a
very interesting, fashionable, wealthy family, who
were raised with all the diabolical hatred that a
rigidly enforced predestinarian education could impart against the Methodists. It had pleased God, at a

-camp-meeting near them, that I superintended, to
arrest the wife and two of the daughters of the gentleman who was the head of this family, and they
were powerfully converted, and joined the Methodist
Church, and, as is common, they felt greatly attached
to me as the instrument, in the hands of God, of their
salvation. This enraged the husband and father of
these interesting females very much. He not only
threatened to whip me, but to kill me. He said I must
be a very bad man, for all the women in the country
were falling in love with me; and that I moved on
their passions and took them into the Church with
bad intentions. His eldest daughter, a fine, beautiful,
intelligent younglady, wanted to attend the above-mentioned camp-meeting, and bespoke a seat in my carriage, in company with others going to the same meeting. At first her father swore she should not go; but on
second thought he consented, but told his wife and
daughter that he would go along, and that he would
watch me closely, and that he had no doubt, before
he would return, he would catch me at my devilment,
and be able to show the world that I was a bad man,

rnrnn CARTWBIGHT. 146

and put a stop to the women all running mad after
this . bad preacher. His daughter made ready, and
we all started. We had about twenty-eight miles to
go to reach the encampment. His daughter thought
it her duty to tell me the designs of her father, and
said she hoped I would be on my guard, for she verily
thought that her father was so enraged that if he
could not get something to lay to my charge to ruin
my character as a preacher, that he would kill me
from pure malice. I told her, of course, I was wide
awake, and duly sober, and I had not the least fear
but what God would give me her father as a rescued
captive from the devil before the camp-meeting
closed. Said I, "You must pray hard, and the work

-will be done." I said to her, " It is not the old big devil

that is in your father; it must be a little weakly, sickly devil that has taken possession of him, and I do not
think that it will be a hard job to cast him out. Now,"
said I, " IfGod takes hold of your father and shakes him
over hell a little while, and he smells brim stone right
strong, if there was a ship-load of these little sickly de_vils in him, they would be driven out just as easyasa
tornado would drive the regiments of musquitoes from
around and about those stagnant ponds in the country. Cheer up, sister; Ibelieve God will give me your
father before we return." Seeing me so bold_ and confident she wept, and raised the shout in anticipation of
so desirable an event. When we got to the campground I had the company and their horses all taken
care of, and then said to this man: ".We have a large
preachers' tent, well provided with good beds; come,
you must go with me and lodge in the preachers' tent."
He seemed taken by surprise, and hesitated, but I
took him right into the tent. " Now, sir," said I, " make

yourself at home. for I hope to see you soundly con10

146 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

verted before this camp-meeting comes to a close." I
saw his countenance fall, and perhaps this was the
starting-point of his deep and pungent convictions.
The trumpet sounded for preaching; I mounted the
stand and preached; this man came and heard me.
I saw clearly from his looks, that he was convicted,
and had a hard struggle in his mind. He said to me,
after the meeting was over, that my taking him into the
preachers' tent and treating him so kindly, was the
worst whipping he ever got; he could not sleep, A he
said. Sometimes he thought he was a poor mean
devil to treat me as he had done; and surely I must
be a Christian, or I never could treat him so kindly
after he had said so many hard and bitter things about
me. As the meeting progressed his convictions increased till he could neither eat nor sleep.

On Sunday night, when such a tremendous power
fell on the congregation, and my gang of rowdies

* fell by dozens on the right and left, my special per. secutor fell suddenly, as if a rifle ball had been shot

through his heart. He lay powerless, and seemed
cramped all over, till next morning; and about sunrise he began to come to. With a smile on his countenance, he then sprang up, and bounded all over the
camp—ground, with swelling shouts of glory and
victory, that almost seemed to shake the encampment. This was a glorious time for his daughter; she
came leaping and skipping to me, and shouted out
that those little mean and sickly devils were cast
out of her father. He joined the Church, went home,
and for days the family did little else but sing, pray,
and shout the high praises of God.

From this family a blessed revival broke out and
spread all round, and many were awakened and converted to God. 0, how often the devil overshoots

rnrna cnzrwnrenr. 147

the mark by inducing his subjects to persecute
preachers and the Church. God is above the devil,
and the devil can never be cast out until he is first
raised, or waked up.

Although I have never laid much stress on dreams,
yet on Monday night of this camp-meeting 1 had a
dream that made some impression on my mind. 1
here relate it and what followed, and let it go for
what it is worth; for " what is the chaff to the
wheat?" In my night visions I thought ‘I went on a
fishing expedition. I thought the fish bit well, and
I drew up and threw out many excellent, fine fish.
At length I felt that a large fish, or something else,
had got hold of my hook. I began to draw whatever it was out, but it came slow and pulled heavy.
At length I drew it to land, when behold, it was a
large mud turtle. I awoke, and 10 it was a dream;
and I was glad of it. i

There had been in attendance on our camp-meeting, an old apostate Baptist preacher, who had left
his wife, who was yet living, and taken up with a
young woman, and they were actually living in open
adultery. He had, as he said, been awfully convicted during the meeting. He said he knew he had
once enjoyed religion, but had lost it. He knew he
had lost it all, and that, therefore, the doctrine of the
unconditional perseverance of the saints, which he
had preached for many years, was false; but he
wanted to be saved, and he desired to join the Methodist Church. He said he belonged to a secret
society, and they had not excluded him from that
society, and they were honorable, high-minded men.

All this took place in the public congregation. I
told him that if we, as a Church, could do him any
good on fair Scriptural terms, we should be glad to

148 . AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

do it. " But," said I, " you cannot be so ignorant as
not to know that the word of God condemns your
course, and if our sins are as dear to us as a right
foot, or hand, or eye, they must be cut off, or plucked
out, and cast from us, or we cannot enter heaven.
Now, sir, are you willing, and will you give up this
course of living, put away the woman with whom
you are now living, and go and live with your lawful wife, and will you do it now 2"

He burst into tears, wrung his hands in apparent
agony, and said he wanted to be saved. "But will
you not take me in on trial six months?"

"No, sir, we will not, unless you sacredly pledge
yourself, before God and the Church, that you will.
from this moment, abandon your present course of
living."

He said he was afraid to promise this.

"Then," said I, "it is altogether useless to say another word on the subject, for we will not, under any
consideration, receive you even on trial."

So we parted, and I fear he was eternally lost.
Now whether this was my mud turtle or not, about
which I dreamed, I cannot say; yet it really looked
to me very much like it. ~

A few years before this, there had been transferred
from the Baltimore Conference, a warm-hearted,
lively, and zealous preacher by the name of James
Ward. His labors were greatly blessed, and some
very powerful revivals of religion followed. ‘ There
was also a tolerably popular Baptist minister, by the
name of J. V 11, who attended several of Brother
Ward's meetings; and whether he was in reality
stirred up, or from other considerations, I will not
pretend to judge, but so it was; he started out on a
large preaching scale. He was a tolerably good

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 149

preacher, and he was popular, and he soon had a
mighty stir in the Baptist Church, and hundreds
joined that Church, and he baptized them. He
greatly erred on one subject; that was, he took a
great deal of pleasure in proselyting from other
Churches and making them members of his Church,
as he said, by "wetting their jackets," that is, immersing them. He had been very successful in the
upper counties of Kentucky.

I had once accidentally fallen in at one of his appointments, and heard him preach, but had no introduction to him; and from this circumstance I knew
him, but he did not know me. About this time he
sent a train of appointments down in the southern
parts of Kentucky and West Tennessee, about Nashville, etc., etc. I had been on to Baltimore, attending General Conference, and was returning home
near Hopkinsville, in Southern Kentucky, in the
month of June. We traveled in those days mostly
on horseback. It was very warm, and dusty riding.
When I got to Nashville I was informed that Mr.
V. had just closed a protracted meeting in Nashville,
and was to start for Hopkinsville that morning, and
that it was probable I would fall in with him;
and so it turned out. A few miles from Nashville I
fell in with him. It being so warm and dusty I had
pulled off my coat and neckerchief, and tied them on
behind me, and of course I was very dirty, and looked,
I suppose, very little like a preacher. I rode up and
spoke to Mr. V., and he to me. I had, in one respect,
the advantage of him. I knew him, but he did not
know me, but I studiously avoided calling him by
name. He was very familiar and loquacious.

" You are traveling, sir ?"

"Yes, sir," was my reply.

150 . AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

" What parts are you from ?"

"I am directly from the City of Baltimore," said I.

" Well, what is the news in that country?" said he.

"Nothing very strange," said I. '

" Well," said he, " what is the most prevalent religion, or most numerous denomination in that city 3"

"Well," said I, " those despicable Methodists are
the most numerous of any Protestant Church there,"
answering him with a view to draw him out.

" Well," said he, "that is a pity, for they are on a
very rotten and sandy foundation."

"Yes," said I, "but perhaps the people might fall
into worse hands."

"Hardly," said he. "But, sir, how are the Baptists
prospering in and about Baltimore?"

"Well," said I, "the Baptists are hardly known in
that country."

" Are you not mistaken, sir 9"

" N o, sir, I am not mistaken."

" Well, what can be the cause of that 3"

" Why, sir, it is not strange at all; the Baptists are
exclusive immersionists, and won't commune with
any other Christian denomination; and they, on these
principles, cannot flourish among an enlightened and
intelligent religious community."

Just here the battle commenced, and this was what
I wanted. He began to eulogize the Baptists, and
contended that their mode of baptism was the only
one that was Scriptural. The battle, or argument,
lasted several hours, as we rode on side by side ; but
at length he showed unmistakable signs of confusion, for he left the field of argument, and began to
boast of the hundreds of Methodists and Presbyterians
that he had immersed, and said " he was on his way
then to Hopkinsville, and expected to immerse many

rmrnn can-wxzomr. 151

of the Methodists, the converts of Peter Cartwright,
a Methodist preacher that lived down there; and,
sir," said he, " there is no Scripture for infant baptism."
I then asked the following questions:

"Do you believe that all children are saved, and
go to heaven, and that there is not one infant in
hell ?"

" Certainly I do," said he.

" Well, if there are no children in hell, and all
children dying in minority go to heaven, is not that
Church that has no children in it more like hell than
heaven ?"

This question closed our argument, for he answered
not at all." Just then we came to the forks of the road;
the right, which he was to go, led to Russellville, and
the left, my road, to Hopkinsville. As we shook
hands and parted, said I, " Mr. V., I know you,
and have the advantage of you; my name is Peter
Cartwright; I live two miles from Hopkinsville,
where you are going next week to wet so many of
the jackets of my Methodist members; call and stay
all night with me; I will help you make out your
notes, and will see to the wetting of the jackets of
my members." He promised to do so, but never
came to my house. He attended to his appointments,
but wet no Methodist jackets, and never succeeded in
winning any great spoils in that region of country.
He flourished a while; then joined the Campbellites;
then left them, and returned to the Baptist Church,
as I am informed; then moved to Missouri, and died.

I hope his end was peaceful.

152 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

CHA.'P'1'ER XIII.

BISHOP ASBURY.

IN the fall of 1815 our Conference was nolden at
Bethlehem Meeting-house, in Wilson County, Tennessee. Bishops Asbury and M'Kendree attended, though
they were both in feeble health; and;this was the
last Conference in the West that we were permitted
to see Bishop Asbury. He preached to us' with great
unction and power, though in extremely feeble health,
not able to stand, and had to sit while he spoke to us
for the last time. At this Conference we elected our
delegates to the General Conference, which was to
meet in Baltimore on the first of May, 1816. After
the election was over, Bishop Asbury called us (that
is, the delegates elected) to his room, and then and
there told us about the dissatisfaction that had made
its appearance among some of the preachers with the
government of the Methodist Episcopal Church, explained the cause, and advised us to hold fast to the
landmarks of Discipline with a firm grasp. His
whole soul seemed to go out after the unity of Methodism, and to adopt every prudential measure to prevent any schism among us. He was very desirous to
reach the General Conference; but the Lord‘ ordered
it otherwise; for, after he left Tennessee to go to
South Carolina, he was attacked with a complication
of diseases; but still slowly moved on north, in hope
of meeting the General Conference in Baltimore.
On the 24th of March he reached Richmond, VirPETER GAR'1"WR[GH'1'. 158

ginia, where he preached his last sermon. Being too
feeble to walk, The was carried in the arms of his
friends to the house of God, and then propped on a
table ; there, as he sat, he delivered his last message to
mortal man, hardly able to do so for want of breath.
His sermon had a thrilling efl'ect upon the congregation. After preaching he was borne back to his
carriage, and still urged on his way toward Baltimore.
But when he arrived at the house of his old friend,
Mr; George Arnold, about -twenty miles south of
Fredericsburgh, Virginia, he could proceed no further.
Q It was on Friday evening, the 29th of March, when
this man of God, who had traveled half a century
near three hundred thousand miles, was taken from
his carriage the last time. He lingered till Sunday,
the 31st of March, in great distress of body. On that
day, at the usual hour of religious worship, he requested the family to come together. The Rev. John
W. Bond, who had been his traveling companion for
two years, prayed, and read and expounded the twenty chapter of Revelation. During these exercises
tligdying man of God was calm,°and much engaged
in prayer. A few minutes after the close of these religious services, as he was sitting  his chair, with
his head reclined on the hand of his faithful attendant,
without a struggle or a sigh, he fell asleep in death.
A‘ He was buried in the family burying-ground of a
Brother Arnold, at whose house he died; but the General Conference, at its session on the 1st of May, 1816,
at the request of the people of Baltimore, ordered his
remains removed, and deposited in a vault prepared
for that purpose beneath the pulpit of Eutaw-street_
Church. ‘H T A _ ,
The reinterment of this great and good man presented a scene of the most thrilling interest that I

5

154 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

ever beheld. The body was followed from the Light
street to the Eutaw-street Church by a vast concourse

of people. At the head of the procession marched
Bishop M'Kendree, the faithful colleague of the dc

parted Asbury; next followed the members of the
General Conference, and last came the people in almost unnumbered thousands. Bishop M'Kendree
pronounced the funeral oration, and many were the
tears shed by the weeping attendants; and the mortal
body of the venerable Bishop Asbury was laid to
rest till the general resurrection.

Over the vault is inscribed the following epitaph:

Ssonnn
to the memory of
THE REV. FRANCIS ASBURY,
Bishop of the
Methodist Episcopal Church.
He was Born in England, August 20th, 1745;
Entered the Ministry at the age of seventeen;
Game 3. Missionary to America, 1771 ;

Was ordained Bishop in this city December 27th, 1784;
Annually visited the Conferences in the United States, with
much zeal; continued to preach the word
for more than half a century;
and literally ended his labors with his life,
near Fredericsburgh, Virginia,
in the full triumph of faith, on the 31st of March, 1816,
aged 70 years, 7 months, and 11 days.

His remains were deposited in this vault, May 10th, 1816,
by the General Conference then sitting in this city.

His Journals will exhibit to posterity his labors, his difliculties,
his suiferings, his patience, his perseverance,
his love to God and man.

His remains were again removed from this vault, and deposited,
- by order of the General Conference of 1852, in a

cemetery near Baltimore; and a monument
is raised to perpetuate his memory to
future generations.

155

I_ will here state a case, in reference to Bishop Asbury's transcendently superior talent to read men,
which occurred at one of our western conferences.
The conference had been preceded with glorious revivals of religion, and many of the wealthy, and some
of the learned, had joined the‘ Methodist Episcopal
Church, among whom were two very learned young
men; one of them the son of a very distinguished,
learned teacher, the other the son of a general—-a distinguished, wealthy man. Both of these young men
professed to have a call to the ministry, and came with
a recommendation to the Conference to be received
on trial in the traveling connection. They were both
present, and Bishop Asbury had narrowly observed
their conduct and conversation. At the proper time
Brother Learner Blackman, their presiding elder,
presented their recommendations. He spoke of them
in the highest terms, and considered them a great acquisition to the ministry and the Church. The Conference received them with great unanimity. Bishop
Asbury had sat with his eyes nearly shut. After they
were received he seemed to wake up.- " Yes, yes I"
he exclaimed; " in all probability they both will disgrace you and themselves before the year is out."
And sure enough, in six months one was riding the
circuit with a loaded pistol and a dirk, threatening to
shoot and stab the rowdies; the other was guilty of a

PETER OARTWRIGHT.

misdemeanor, and in less than nine months they were —

both out of the Church. Bishop Asbury would ofien

say to the preachers, " You read books, but I read
men."

. We received our appointments for this conference
year, 1815-16, with but little dissatisfaction. I was
returned to the Green River District. Our increase
of members or preachers, in the Ohio and Tennessee

\

156 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Conferences, was but small this year, though we had
some increase.

. In the spring of 1816 our General Conference convened, on the 1st of May, in the city of Baltimore.
This was the second delegated General Conference of
the Methodist Episcopal Church, and the first to which
I was elected.

We had no steamboats, railroad cars, or comfortable
stages in those days. We had to travel from the extreme West on horseback. It generally took us near
a month to go; a month was spent at General Conference, and nearly a month in returning to our fields
of labor. How different the facilities of travel then
and now.

Bishop Asbury being dead, and Bishop M'Kendree's
health being poor, it became necessary to have two
more bishops, and, accordingly, we elected Enoch
George and R. R. Roberts, two good men, and talented, regularly drilled in the itinerant work, and
well prepared, from experience and practice, to
sympathize with the seven hundred traveling preachers they had to station every year, suiting their talents to over two hundred and fourteen thousand members in these United States and Territories, and the
Provinces of Canada.

This was a year of general prosperity throughout
the connection; over thirty thousand probationers
had been added to the Church. Many of us feared
that at the decease of Bishop Asbury, dissensions and
divisions would arise and injure our beloved Zion;
but we had no question that gave us much trouble at
that time. It is true, slavery was a troublesome matter
to legislate on; but the one-eyed creature called Rabid
Abolitionism had, at that time, been just born, and
had but just cut its teeth, and could not bite hard; and

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 157

it is a notorious fact, that all the preachers from the
slaveholding states denounced slavery as a moral
evil; but asked of the General Conference mercy
and forbearance on account of the civil disabilities
they labored under, so that we got along tolerably
smooth. I do not recollect a ‘single Methodist
preacher, at that day, that justified slavery. But
0, how have times changed! '

Methodist preachers in those days made it a matter
of conscience not to hold their fellow-creatures in
bondage, if it was practicable to emancipate them,
conformably to the laws of the state in which they
lived. Methodism increased and spread; and many
Methodist preachers, taken from comparative poverty,
not able to own a negro, and who preached loudly
against it, improved, and became popular among
slaveholders; and many of them married into those
slaveholding families, and became personally interested ‘in slave property, (as it is called.) Then they
began to apologize for the evil; then to justify it, on
legal principles; then on Bible principles; till lo and
behold! it is not an evil, but a good! it is not a curse,
but a blessing! ‘till really you would think, to hear
them tell the story, if you had the means and did not
buy a good lot of them, you would go to the devil for
not enjoying the labor, toil, and sweat of this degraded race, and all this without rendering them any
equivalent whatever!

I will here repeat what I have elsewhere stated in
this narrative: that I verily believe, if the Methodist
preachers had gone on as in olden times, bearing a
testimony against the moral evil of slavery, and kept
clear of it themselves, and never meddled with it
politically, and formed no free-soil or abolition societies, and given all their money and the productions

158 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

of their pens in favor of the colonization organizations,
that long before this time many of the slave states
would have been free states; and, in my opinion, this
is the only efl'ectual way to get clear of slavery. If
agitation must succeed agitation, strife succeed strife,
compromise succeed compromise, it will end in a dissolution of this blessed Union, civil war will follow,

‘and rivers of human blood stain the soil of our happy
country. A

At this General Conference I heard, for the first
time in my life, whisperings and innuendoes against
the government of the Church. I suppose radicalism
had just pipped. Many of our preachers that had
traveled had, as I said before, married into slaveholding and otherwise wealthy families. Some of the
first order of talent, that had located, began to say
that local preachers ought to have a voice in the lawmaking department of the Church; and in order to
make friends,.they said the laity ought to have a voice
in all the Conferences; but there was no special outbreak at this General Conference. But the unhallowed
leaven of disaffection spread; the friends of reform (so
called) established a press, and formed what they called
Union Societies; so that by public lectures, the Union
Societies, and the press, by 1820, when the General
Conference met again in Baltimore, it was astounding
to see what evil disaffections had taken place.

They then came out boldly. They wanted to revolutionize the whole government of the Methodist
Episcopal Church. Many of our old and talented
preachers were loud and bitter in complaints against
our Church government; and I was greatly alarmed
to see so many strong, talented men carried away.
Some of the hardest and bitterest things ever written
or spoken against the power of the bishops, or the

rnrnza canrwnzenr. 159

despotism of the itinerant preachers' administration,
-were spoken and written by men that were afterward
made bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church and
the Southern Church. Motion after motion was made,
resolution after resolution was introduced, debate fol. ‘ lowed debate, for days, not to say weeks. The radicals wanted to take away the power of the bishops to
appoint preachers to their fields of labor; especially
to deprive them of the power to appoint presiding
elders, and make them elective by the annual conferences; to have a lay delegation, and many other things.

Finally, they concentrated all their arguments to
make presiding elders elective; but on counting
noses, they found we had a majority, though small;
and rather than be defeated, they moved for a committee of compromise. Strong men from each side
were chosen; they patched up a sham compromise,
as almost all compromises are, in Church or State.
The committee reported in favor, whenever a presiding elder Was needed for any district, the bishop
should have the right to nominate three persons, and
the conferences should have the right to elect one
of the three. This report passed by a vote of about
sixty; there were twenty-three, if my recollection is
correct, in the minority against it.

This report having passed, the radicals had a real
jubilee. It was the entering wedge to many other
revolutionary projects; and they began to pour them
in at a mighty rate. I had, in my speech in debate
on the subject, predicted that this would be the case.
Our friends began to see their error, but it was wellnigh too late.

In the meantime Bishop Soule, now of the Church,
South, had been elected to the office of a bishop,
and he informed the General Conference that he

160 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

could not be ordained, because he could not conscientiously administer the government according to this
iuglorious compromise. (Perhaps this was the best
act that Bishop Soule ever performed.)

In the meantime I visited the room of Bishop
M'Kendree, who was too feeble to preside in the
Conference. He wept, and said this compromise
would ruin the Church forever if not changed, and
advised that we make a united effort to suspend
these rules or regulations for four years, and we
counted votes, and found we could do it, and introduced a resolution to that,efi'ect.- And now the war
commenced afresh, and after debating the resolution for several days, the radicals found that if the
vote was put we would carry it, and they determined
to break the quorum of the house, and for two or
three times they succeeded. Bishop Roberts at
length rebuked them sharply, and said, " If you cannot defeat the measure honorably, you oughtnot to
do it at all. Now," said he, "keep your seats and
vote. like men." This awed several of them, and
they kept their seats; the vote was put_and carried,
and these obnoxious rules were suspended for four
years.

But peace and harmony were very far from being
restored to the Church. A strong and violent effort
was made for the next four years by the revolutionists, to carry their radical measures, and thousands of
our members became disaffected, and by their constant agitations disturbed the peace, and endangered
the harmony of the Church, until it really became
imperatively necessary to arrest these lawless disturbers of the peace of the Church. They were arrested,
brought to trial, and expelled for rebellion against the
constituted authorities of the Church.

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 161

These wholesome and salutary measures were, by
these self-styled reformers, denounced as tyranny and
despotism. At our next General Conference, in Baltimore, in 1824, the radical war against the Church
still raged with unabated fury; but we still had a
majority in favor of our old and Well-tried government, and we succeeded, after long and tedious debate, in suspending those heretical rules for four years
more. This was the death warrant to the revolutionists. From this time, many of the preachers and
members began calmly to review their ground of
reform, and became well satisfied that it was all
wrong; and they retraced their steps, and became
able and efiicient expositors of the polity of the
Methodist Episcopal Church.

The reaction threw death and destruction in_to the
radical ranks, and created, as they thought, the necessity of a separate organization. Accordingly, they
set to work, and formed what they were pleased to
call the Protestant Methodist Church, in which they
incorporated all those radical meas1u'es for which
they so strenuously contended before their amputation or secession. They carried oil‘ thousands of our
members, and many of our very talented preachers, and
now they thought that they would sweep the world;
and truly they have swept it, for they formed a complete trash trap, and a great many of our unfaithful
members and preachers, that walked disorderly and
would not be reproved or cured, have gone into it,
and upon the whole they have saved the Methodist
Episcopal Church a great deal of trouble in trying
and expelling disorderly preachers and members;
for whenever they were expelled or arraigned for
misconduct, they fled to these seceders. They took

them in, regardless of the crimes laid to their charge;
1 l

162 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

and by 1828, when our General Conference sat in
Pittsburgh, this little radical brat gave its last squeak
among us, and we repealed those obnoxious rules
and regulations. The Church was restored to peace
and harmonious action, and we have done infinitely
better without them than we did with them.

That this professed reform has proved, beyond any
reasonable doubt, an entire failure, I think cannot be
questioned by any impartial and unprejudiced mind
Over thirty years have rolled by since they organized. They boasted that they commenced with over
twenty thousand members, headed by a strong corps
of talented preachers; and after gathering up thensands of the expelled and disaffected members of the
Methodist, as well as other Churches, their numerical
strength at this day is not, perhaps, over seventy
thousand. They have tried to their hearts' content
their Presbyterian form of government and their lay
delegation. Their operations remind one of an old
horse-mill with about one third of the cogs out of the
main wheel. There is a mighty jarring and jolting,
and often a mighty strife about who shall be the big
man. Woe to them that kick against the pricks.

And now I say, and I speak with a respectful deference, was there ever a heresy in doctrine or Church
government that was not started by preachers? Look
at the ten thousand and one erroneous doctrines,
schisms, and divisions, that have sprung up almost in
every country and clinic, and in almost every age,
and then ask, was there not a preacher or preachers
at the head of it? And here I may speak with confidence, and say, so far as the Methodist Church is concerned, from the days of John Wesley down to the
present, there never has been a schism or a division
in our Church but it was headed by a preacher or

rsrna oanrwnranr. 168

preachers, that have become wise above what is
written. Witness the seven divisions among the
Wesleyan Methodists in England; then view the
secessions in these United States, in the Methodist
Episcopal Church. Look at Hammet in the South,
at Stillwell in New-York; see James O'Kelley in
Virginia; then behold the radical secession from
1820 to 1828 throughout the length and breadth of
the land; then come to the great secession of the
South in 1844.

If these secessions had been left to the voice of our
members, would they ever have taken place? No,
verily, no, will be the answer of every intelligent
man, woman, and child. But these preachers took
an ungodly advantage of the members who stood
firmly and strongly opposed to a division of the
Methodist Episcopal Church, and now, to keep up
appearances, these very preachers, with their bribed
judges, sneeringly call the Methodist Episcopal
Church the Methodist Church, 2Vorth, and say we are
all rabid abolitionists, when they do verily know
it is all false. At their late General Conference they
have fully disclosed the cloven foot of the Slaveryloving preachers, for they have stricken out of their
Discipline every rule on the subject of Slavery, and
had well-nigh stricken out that part of the General
Rules that interdicts the slave trade, (according to
their interpretation.) I should not be greatly surprised if, in a few years, this rule goes by the board,
and some of these Slavery-loving preachers are
engaged in importing them by the thousands into
this land of the free and home of the brave. O, kind
Heaven, prevent it, and reclaim these wretched wanderers!
And now, though we have spoken freely of preach164 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

ers and their faults, their errors ought not to be con-_
cealed. But this fact is not, as we conceive, any triumph to infidelity, nor should it discourage the Church.
Among the first twelve that Christ called to the
blessed work of the ministry there were two that
fatally erred: Judas betrayed and Peter denied him;
the love of money and the fear of man were too strong
for their religious attachment to Christ, and only
proves the necessity of sacrificing everything for the
immortal honors of the cross; and although our sins
are as near and dear to us as a right eye, hand, or
foot, they must be plucked out, or cut oil', and cast

‘from us, knowing it is better, infinitely better, to

make these sacrifices than retain them all, and be cast
into hell. What a sad account will many preachers
have to give in the day of judgment, who have
preached a fi'ee salvation to listening thousands, while
their poor degraded slaves are deprived of many of
the blessings of life, and privileges of civil and religious liberty. These preachers must and do know that
slavery is at war with the attributes and perfections
of God, who will never punish the innocent or let the
guilty go free.

Who ever before knew of a professed slavery Church?
that is, one which justified slavery by the word of God?
Well may some of them be ashamed of their assumed
name, Methodist Episcopal 0}?/tt1'6h, South, and wish to
change it; for it is evident that they can never preach
the Gospel successfully in any country that opposes
slavery; for they could not, by possibility, have any
confidence in such‘, preachers; and the poor slaves,
in proportion to their capabilities of reasoning on the
subject, just in that ratio must they lack confidence
in such preachers. Nay, they must lack confidence
in that God and religion that these preachers recomPETER canrwmenr. 165

mend to them, and I am solemnly afraid that thousands of these poor slaves will be lost under the influence of these slaveholding preachers; but I predict
the downfall of such a Church, and hope by other
men and means God Will yet save the thousands of
the South, and preserve our happy Union until it shall
give liberty, civil and religious, to unnumbered millions of thehuman family.

‘'33:'. -4-3::

160 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

CHAPTER XIV.

FORMATION OF EARLY CIRCUITS IN THE WEST.

OUR Annual Conference this year was held at Franklin, Tennessee, October 20th, 1816. Our increase this

year in the West, including the Ohio and Tennessee Conferences, was 1,203. Our increase of traveling
preachers in these two conferences was but two, owing
to many locations for want of means of support. My
four years on the Wabash and Green River District
having expired, Bishop M'Kendree told me he desired
me to go to the Holston District; but it was a long
journey to move, and I had a young and increasing
family, and I was poor. I asked him to be excused,
but if he thought it best I would go ; but he appointed
me to the Christian Circuit, in the Green River District, James Axley presiding elder; this was the year
1816-17.

It must be borne in mind that in the West we
always received our appointments .for the year in
the fall of the previous year, and it must also be remembered that the General Conference of 1816 formed
the Missouri Conference, which covered that State,
and Arkansas, Illinois, and Indiana States. Of course
there was a considerable change in our work. They
also, at the same General Conference, formed the
Mississippi Conference. The Ohio Conference was
composed of Ohio, Muskingum, Scioto, Miami, and
Kentucky Districts, five in number. The Missouri
Conference was composed of Illinois and Missouri

PETER canrwnrenr. 167

Districts, covering the principal settlements in four
large states, though only two districts.

It is probable that the first introduction of Methodism in the State of Indiana was in 1802 or 1803. In the
fall of 1804 Clark's Grant, or the Illinois Grant, as it was
called, which was opposite and north of Louisville, was
then included in the Salt River and Shelbyville Circuits, and Brother Benjamin Lakin and myself crossed
the Ohio River, and preached at Brother Robertson's
and Prather's. In this grant we had two classes, and
splendid revivals of religion; and if my recollection
serves me correctly, this Illinois Grant was formed
into a circuit in 1807-8, and Moses Ashworth was
appointed to travel it; it was called Silver Creek Circuit. This was the first regular circuit ever formed
in the State of Indiana, and composed of one hundred
and eighty-eight members. The next circuit formed
in the State of Indiana was called Vincennes Circuit,
which I formed in 1808, at the time I fought the
memorable battle with the Shakers, in the Busroe
Settlement, elsewhere named in this narrative. This
circuit was temporarily supplied probably till 1811;
it then had 125 members, and Thomas Stillwell was
its first regular preacher; it belonged to the Green
River District. The first introduction of Methodism in
the State of Illinois is hard to determine.

The real pioneer and leader of Episcopal Methodism
in the State of Illinois was Captain Joseph Ogle, who
came to Illinois in 1785, and was converted under
the preaching of James Smith, (Baptist,) of Kentucky,
who visited and preached in Illinois in 1787. The
first Methodist preacher was Joseph Lillard, who
visited this state in 1793, and formed a class in St.
Clair County, and appointed Captain Ogle leader.
The next Methodist preacher was John Clarke, who

168 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

was originally a circuit rider in‘ South Carolina,
from 1791 to 1796, when he withdrew on account of
slavery. He was the first man that preached the
Gospel west of the Mississippi, in 1798. The Rev.
Hosea Riggs was the first Methodist preacher that
settled in Illinois, and he revived and reorganized
the class at Captain Ogle's, formed by Lillard, which
had dropped its regular meetings.

From 1798 there seems to have been no regular
preacher in Illinois till 1804; then Benj amin Young was
sent as a missionary. In the fall of 1805 he returned
sixty—se ven members, and Joseph Oglesby was appointed to succeed Brother Young on the Illinois Circuit.
This circuit was in the Cumberland District, Western
Conference, and Lewis Garrett presiding elder, though
I think he never visited Illinois. In 1806 Charles
Methany was appointed to the Illinois Circuit. In
1807 Jesse Walker was appointed to this circuit, and
in 1808 John Clingan. I All these early pioneer preachers have long since passed away and gone to their
reward. "Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord;
they rest from their labors, and their works do follow
them."

The Tennessee Conference was composed of Salt
River, Nashville, Cumberland, Green River, Holston,
and French Broad Districts. The Mississippi Conference was composed of Mississippi and Louisiana
Districts. Our old Western Conference had now, in‘
four years from its first division, increased to four
Annual Conferences, and they started in this form
with the following ministers and members. According to the Minutes of 1817, Ohio had 22,171 members,
and 62 preachers; Missouri had 3,173 members, and
23 traveling preachers; Tennessee had 19,401 members, and 53 traveling preachers; Mississippi Confer-°

‘PETER oA.n'rwn1e11'r. 169

once had 1,941 members, and 11 traveling preachers.
Our four conferences now covered the following states :
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Arkansas, Louisiana,
Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, and
Western Virginia, and some appointments in North
Carolina. In the fall of 1813 I had lefl: the Christian
Circuit for the District, with 7 43 members, and I now
found 546, but parts of the circuit and membership
had been merged into other circuits. I was without
any helper, and it was a full four weeks' circuit.

This year we had some glorious revivals. There was
a small society of good members some five miles north
of Hopkinsville; one of our quarterly meetings was
holden here, and a blessed work broke out; some
seventy were converted and oined the Church.
Several of these young converts made useful ministers in the Methodist Episcopal Church.

Down near the Tennessee State line, there moved
and settled two wealthy Methodist families, but they
were surroimded by a strong settlement who were
very rigid Calvinists, raised to hate the Methodists.
I took them in the circuit, but it being a week-day
appointment, and strong prejudices against us, our
congregations were small. These two families had
over one hundred and twenty slaves, and the slaves
were dreadfully wicked; they were a drunken, Sabbath-breaking, and thievish set of slaves. The masters
were very humane and indulgent. There were but
two, I believe, among them that were professors at
all; two old gray-headed men. One of them was a
Methodist, the other was a Baptist; both were exhorté
ers among the people of color. The brother at whose
house I preached was a plain, old-fashioned Methodist in almost everything save slavery. I was opposed
to slavery, though I did not meddle with it politically,

170 AETOBIOGRAPHY or

yet I felt it my duty to bear my testimony against the
moral wrong of slavery. The old brother took some
exceptions to my testimony against it. I saw very
plainly that in all probability these slaves must be
lost. On week days they were under an overseer,
and not permitted to hear preaching. Sundays they
were out drinking and trading, selling brooms, baskets, and the little articles they manufactured. I felt
distressed at the thought that they would be lost. At
length I asked the old brother to give me the privilege to go to their cabins and preach to them; he

thought this too great a degradation for a preacher.

I told him if something was not done for them they

would all be lost, and that God held him in a strong

sense accountable, and that something must be done.

He said he was willing I should preach to them if I
would preach to them in his house. I told him I had
this objection to that: "You white people will be present, and your very presence will embarrass them and
me both. I want to talk to them as ignorant negroes,

and tell them of all their drunkenness, stealing, acts of
adultery, and Sabbath-breaking; and I cannot do it

if the white people are present." He then proposed

to give the negroes the large room and entry, and

that he and his brother-in-laW's family would retire

to another room. I said, "If you will let me lock

you up, I will agree to it." He assented.

The appointment was made, and all the slaves of
the two families directed to attend. I told John and
Harry, the two black men that were exhorters, that
if any impression was made on any of them, they
must set out a mourners' bench, and assist me in talking to and praying with them.

The day rolled on; I attended; the room was full,
and entry too. I locked up the white people, in

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 171

another room and went in and took my stand. There
was belonging to the old brother, a large, likely mulatto man, the carriage-driver; he dressed much finer
than his master; he came and took his stand in the
door, his bosom full of rufiles. He looked scornfully
on me, as good as to say, " Yes, you think you are
going to do great things in preaching to us colored
people." I sung and prayed; took my text; explained
the plan of salvation through Jesus Christ; then told
them of all their dirty deeds, in as plain language as
I could command; and then, in as warm an exhortation as I could give, I warned them to flee from the
Wrath to come ; and just as I closed, the large rufi"leshirted carriage-driver fell full length on the floor,
and made the house jar and tremble. In a few minutes they fell right and left, till the place was strewed
with them in every direction. John and Harry, my
two armor-bearers, set out a bench, and gathered
them to it till they could get no more, f0? the crowd;
and the first thing I knew, here were the old brother
and his wife, his brother-in-law and wife, talking to
and praying with the negroes, and several of their
children down with the negroes praying for mercy at
a mighty rate. Our meeting lasted all the afternoon
and night, and there were forty conversions; several
of the white children among the rest. From this a

' blessed revival spread among the slaves, and many

of them, I believe, were soundly converted. I took
some seventy into the Church; baptized them and
their children. Several of these colored men made
respectable local preachers to preach to the slaves
around the country.

These two old Methodist men said I had in a temporal sense bettered or enhanced the value of their
servants more than a thousand dollars; they cemed

—

172 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

getting drunk, stealing, and breaking the Sabbath. .

This revival among the slaves, with many others
that I have been engaged in, fully satisfies me that
the Gospel ought to be carried to slaves and owners of
slaves; for if the religion of Jesus Christ will not finally
bring about emancipation of the slaves, nothing else
will. I am greatly astonished at many good Methodist
preachers that say, " Don't carry the Gospel into slave
states, but deliver over to the uncovenanted mercies
of God slaves and their masters ;" for they say vi;-tu.
ally, none of them can be saved. But I know better;
and unless freedom for the slaves is accomplished,
under the redeeming influence of religion, this happy
Union will be split from center to circumference, and
then there will be an end to our happy and glorious
republic. And if we do not carry the Gospel to these
slaves and their masters, who will? surely ‘not the
ministers who  slavery by perverting the word
God; and still more surely not abolition preachers,
who by political agitation have cut themselves ofi'
from any access to slaveholders or slaves.
I wish we had a trained band of preachers of the
'Methodist Episcopal Church who are willing to let
our Discipline be as it is, to send‘ into every slave
state in the Union. Surely here is missionary ground
that ought to be occupied with great care, for the
salvation of the perishing thousands of the South, and
for the final overthrow of slavery, under the benign
influences of the Christian religion.

There was another incident occurred this year',

that I will mention in this place. Many of the
early Methodists somehow imbibed the notion that
a quarter of a dollar meant what we call quarter
age; and although many of them were wealthy, it
was hard to convince them that twenty-five cents

‘PETER CARTWBIGHT. 173‘

were not quarterage, and that every member should
pay according to his ability. This was one cause
why so many of our preachers were starved into a
location, and of necessity had to retire from the
itinerant' field.

There were two wealthy families moved into my
circuit from one of the old states, and settled in a
very wicked neighborhood. They came to me, and
insisted that I should take them into the circuit and
preach to them. I did so; and formed a class of
five white members, and one old black man. The
round on the circuit before the next quarterly meeting I told them, as none of them would go to the
quarterly meeting, that if they had anything to send
up as their quarterage to support the Gospel, if they
would hand it to me, I would credit it to their names
on the class paper.

The old negro man stepped forward and laid down
his quarter of a dollar. Next came his mistress; she
handed me two dollars; then came her husband and
the master of the old black man, and threw down
twenty-five cents.

Said I, "Colonel, what is this twenty-five cents
for ?" "

Said he, " It is my quarterage." I

"Surely, colonel," said I, "you are going to give
more than that."

"No, sir," said he; "I will have you to know beggars are not to be choosers."

"Well, sir," said I, "I will have you to know I am
no beggar. I have a just claim on you, and you owe
it to me; and if you will not give me more than that,
I will not have it."

" Very well," said he.

So I left the money on the table. " And now, sir,"

174 AU'l‘OB‘IOGRAPHY or

said I, "if you will not support the Gospel, I shall
not leave any other appointment here, but will go
and preach to those who are willing to support the
Gospel."

The old brother was considerably riled. His good
lady expostulated with him; but he was inexorable.
The sister told me afterward that the colonel spent
a sleepless night; he kept twisting, and turning from
side to side, and groaning all night. She spoke to
him several times, and told him if he would resolve
to be more liberal, his bad feelings would go off, and
he would sleep better. The old brother got up the
next morning, and after family worship, he said to
me:

" Brother, what ought I to give as quarterage ?"

"O," said I, "brother, I can't answer that question; that is a matter between God and your conscience. But," said I, " brother, solve the following‘

question, and you will know what you ought to give:
If your old negro man, not worth ten dollars, gave
twenty-five cents a quarter, what ought Colonel T.,
who has seventy slaves, two thousand acres of good
and, several thousand dollars out at interest, and
worth, at least, fifty thousand dollars, to give ?"

O The solving of this question stumped him, and his
quarterage ever afterward, as long as I knew him,
came by dollars and not cents. And when last I saw
him, as I moved to Illinois, he stopped me in the
road, and said:

" Brother, I owe you a thousand dollars, and here's
part of it," handing me a fifty dollar bill.

His excellent wife, leaning on his arm, said to me,
"I owe you as much as my husband, take a part,"
and handed me a twenty dollar bill. Thus I cured a
quarter-of-a-dollar-qnarterage member; and, my dear

PETER CARTWRIGHT. . 175

reader, if you are one of these old dispensationists,
look out for a perfect cure, or come and be healed
of this parsimonious leprosy.

In traveling the Christian Circuit, which crossed
the Tennessee State line, and lay partly in Tennessee,
and partly in Kentucky, in one of my exploring
routes, hunting up new ground and new appointments to preach at, late one evening, ‘in or near the ‘

Cumberland River Bottom, I called at a gentleman's gate, and asked the privilege of staying all
night. The gentleman very readily granted my
request. He was a wealthy farmer, the owner of
several slaves. I found a mild, good, easy, fashionable family. After supper, several neighbors came in
to spend an evening in social chat. Being a stranger
among them, I turned the conversation on religious
subjects; inquired if they had any preaching. I
soon found they had very little preaching of any
kind. I told the gentleman my business was to
preach anywhere I could get peaceable and orderly
hearers, and asked him if I might not leave an appointment to preach at his house. He pleasantly
said, if he had heard me preach and liked my preaching, he could better determine whether to grant me
the privilege to leave an appointment or not. I told
him as he had a large family, black and white, and
as there was some five or six visitors present, if he
had no objections, and would call them together, I
would preach to them, and he could the better judge
how he liked my preaching, and determine whether
I should leave a future appointment. He agreed to
the proposition, and called all in. I sung and prayed,
took my text, and preached to them about an hour
as best I could. The colored people wept; the white
people wept; the man of the house wept; and when

176 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

I closed, he said, " Do leave another appointment,
and come and .preach to us, for we are sinners, and
greatly need preaching." I left an appointment, but
before I came round, the devil stirred up opposition.
One man told the gentleman at whose house I
preached, that if he let the Methodist preachers
preach at his house, it would not be long before they
would eat him out of house and home. He said his
father had taken in Methodist preachers, and in a
few years they ate him out, and brought him to poverty; and, besides, these Methodist preachers were a
very bad set of men. Mr. B. told this man that he
thought he could stand it a while, and if he found
there was any danger of being eaten out, he would
send us adrift.

When I came to my appointment there was a large
congregation; the house and porch were literally
crowded. I preached to them with great freedom,
and almost the whole congregation were melted into
tears. I sung, prayed, and went through the congregation, and shook hands with a great many of
them. When I came to the man of the house, he
wept, and fell on his knees, and begged me to pray
for him. Soon his wife and children, and several
others, knelt by his side, and cried aloud for mercy.
It was late at night before our meeting closed, and

~ not until-‘the swelling shouts of five or six went to

heaven that the dead were alive and the lost were
found. I opened the doors of the Church for the reception of members, and some ten persons joined, the
man of the house, his wife, two children, and two
servants. This was the first-fruits of a gracious revival, and a large society in this neighborhood; and
while I lived in that country, we held a sacramental
meeting at this place every year. After the fimt

PETER cmvrwnrenr. 177

sacrament we held. there, Brother B. rose and addressed the largeuassembly. iHe said, " Some of you
kindly warned me not to take in these Methodist
preachers. You said they would eat me out and
bring me to poverty; but, neighbors, I have raised
more corn, more wheat, more hemp, more tobacco,
and never lived as well and plentifully in all my life.
I could feed a regiment of Methodist preachers all
the time, and then get rich, for God blesses me in my
basket and in my store."

During this year, while on this circuit, something
like the following occurred? An Englishman, a‘Wesleyan Methodist, moved into a very wicked and highstrung predestinarian settlement. He came several
miles, and made himself known. He invited me to
preach at his house. I told him the people were so prej'udiced against the Methodists that we could not get

them out to hear on a week-day; but he insisted, and I
gave him an appointment. When I came there were
only five besides the family. I preached; two of the
little company wept. I left another appointment. For
several times that .I preached to them, my congregation increased, and were orderly and somewhat
affected. At length the Englishman, being wealthy,
told me he was going to build a church. I tried to
dissuade him from it. I told him he could get no
help to build; that there was no society, and not
much probability that there would ever be a Methodist society there; but, he said, he thought a man
lived to very little purpose in this world, if he did
not live so as to leave his mark, that would tell when
he was dead and gone. "Now," said be, "if you will
promise me that you will hold a protracted meeting,
and give us a sacrament, and get some help, and come

and dedicate the church, it shall be up and finished
l2

178 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

in eight or ten weeks.". I told him I would do so, if
spared; in the meantime, while the church was in
process of building, we had two or three conversions
at our little meetings. The church being finished, I
got the help needed, appointed a protracted sacramental meeting to dedicate the church, and invited
people far and near to attend; and it being a new
thing in the settlement, when the day came there was
a very large concourse of people. The first sermon
on Saturday was attended with great power; that
night there were several mourners and two sound
conversions. On Sunday, under the sermon of dedication, the word was attended with great power;
many fell under the mighty power of God. Our
meeting lasted all that day and night, with very little
intermission, and about twenty were converted.

Our meeting continued several days and nights;
many were the happy conversions to God, and forty
joined the Church. My Englishman was so happy,
he hardly knew whether he was in the body or out of
it. Methodism was firmly planted here. Long since
my English brother died in great peace, and rests in
heaven from his labors, and his works do follow him;
but surely he made his " mark," and it will be owned
in heaven.

From the earliest of my recollection, up to this
time, 1816, there were scarcely any books of any kind
in this now mighty West ; but especially was there 3
great scarcity of Bibles and Testaments. We were
young and poor as a nation ; had but a few years
gained our liberty; had hardly begun to live as
a republic after a bloody and devastating war
for our independence; and although Congress, the
very first year after the declaration of our independence, had wisely taken steps for furnishing the strugpntrmn OARTWBIGHT. 119

gling infant for independence with the word of God,
and did order that precious book, yet there was a
great lack of the Bible, especially in the wilderness
of the West; but this year the Lord put it into the
heartsof some of his people to organize a Bible Society, which was done on the 11th of May, 1816; and
although at first it was a feeble concern, yet God has
prospered it, and millions upon millions of this pre‘cious book have been printed and circulated, and it
is pouring streams of light, life, and knowledge upon
almost every nation of this sin-stricken world. The
man of sin has quailed before it; the false religion
of the God-dishonoring prophet is tottering before
its mighty truths; the dying idolatrous pagan millions are receiving its soul-converting truths, and we
hope for its universal spread till every crowned head
shall be brought down to the dust, every oppressive
yoke broken, universal civil and religious liberty enjoyed by our fallen race, and the benefits of the redeeming stream be enjoyed by all mankind.

Nothing but the principles of the Bible can save
our happy nation or the world, and every friend of
religion ought to spread the Bible to the utmost of
his power and means. Then let us look for the happy
end of the universal spread of truth, when all flesh
shall see the salvation of God.

180 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

CHAPTER XV.

EARTHQUAKE IN THE SOUTH.

THE Conference was held in Franklin, Tennessee, ‘

October 30th, 1817. I was appointed to travel on
the Christian Circuit, Green River District, James
Axley presiding elder. Our increase this year was
5,163 members, and 7 preachers, in the four conferences. In the winter of 1812 we had a very severe
earthquake; it seemed to stop the current of the Mississippi, broke fiat-boats loose from their moorings, and
opened large cracks or fissures in the earth. This
earthquake struck terror to thousands of people, and
under the mighty panic hundreds and thousands
crowded to, and joined the different Churches. There
were many very interesting incidents connected with
the shaking of the earth at this time; two I will name.
I had preached in Nashville the night before the second
dreadful shock came, to a large congregation. Early
the next morning I arose and walked out on the hill
near the house where I had preached, when I saw a
negro woman coming down the hill to the spring, with
an empty pail on her head. (It is very common for
negrees to carry Water this way without touching the
pail with either hand.) When she get within a few
rods of where I stood the earth began to tremble and
jar; chimneys were thrown down, scaffolding around
many new buildings fell with a loud crash, hundreds
of the citizens suddenly awoke, and sprang into the
streets; loud screaming followed, for many thought

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 181

the day of judgment was come. The young mistresses
of the above-named negro woman came running after
her, and begging her to pray for them. _She raised the
shout' and saidto them, "My Jesus is coming in the
clouds of heaven, and I can't wait to pray for you
now; I must go and meet him. I told you so, that he
would come, and you would not believe me. Farewell.
Halleluiah! Jesus is coming, and I am ready. Halleluiah !' Amen." And on she went, shouting and clapping her hands, with the empty pail on her head.
Near Russellville, Logan County, Kentucky, lived
old Brother Valentine Cook, of very precious memory,
with his wife Tabitha. Brother Cook was a graduate
at Cokesbury College at an early day in the history of
Methodism in these United States. He was a very
pious, successful pioneer preacher, but, for the want
of a sufficient support for a rising and rapidly-increasing family, he had located, and was teaching school at

the time of the above-named earthquake. He and
Wife were in bed when the earth began to shake and

tremble. He sprang out of bed, threw open the door,
and began to shout, and started, with nothing on but
his night-clothes. He steered his co1u°se east, shouting
every step, saying, "My Jesus is coming." His wife
took after him, and at the top of her voice cried out,
" 0 Mr. Cook, don't leave me."

" O Tabby," said he, "my Jesus is coming, and I
cannot Wait for you ;" and on he Went, shouting every
jump, "My Jesus is coming; I can't wait for you,
Tabby."

The years of the excitement by these earthquakes
hundreds joined the Methodist Episcopal Church, and
though many were sincere, and stood firm, yet there
were hundreds that no doubt had joined from mere
fright. My predecessors had for several years held _

182 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

the reins of discipline with a very loose hand, and
when Bishop M'Kendree told me privately he wished
me to go to the Red River Circuit at the Conference
of 1817, my heart was troubled within me, for I knew
the state of the circuit. There were many wealthy,
fashionable families in the Church; slavery abounded
in it, and the members had been allowed to buy and
sell without being dealt with; moreover, these were
the days of common, fashionable dram-drinking, before
the great temperance reformation was started; and extravagant dressing was the unrestrained order of the
day ; and there were about twenty talented local
preachers in the circuit, many of them participators
in these evils, and I dreaded the war that must follow.
Under this conviction I begged Bishop M'Kendree
not to send me there. He very gravely replied: " There
are many members in that circuit that may be saved
by a firm, judicious exercise of discipline, that otherwise will be lost, and I wish you to go and do for
them the best you can."

" Enough said," replied I; " I'll go."

At the upper end of the circuit, not more than
eight or nine miles from Nashville, there was a large
society and a meeting-house. My predecessor had
left a conditional appointment for his successor. I
was a total stranger in this region. The day of my
conditional appointment was a dark day, misting
with rain, but I got there in due time. After Waiting
till half past twelve o'clock one man came, who had
had the misfortune to lose one of his eyes. We sat
a little while, and I asked him if there was not an
appointment for preaching that day.

" Yes," said he; " but there will be no preacher or
people, I suppose." I saw from his answer he did not

- suspect me for the preacher.

rnrnn ouvrwnromx 183

He further said: " As it is late, and no preacher
nor people, we had as well go. Come, go home with
me and get some dinner."

" N 0," said I, " we must have meeting; and if you
will preach, I will conclude after you."

" No, no," said he; "if you will preach, I will conclude after you." ‘

" Agreed," said I, and up I rose in the stand, sung
and prayed, took my text, and preached as best I
could for forty-five minutes, and then called on him,
and he rose, sung and prayed, and prayed well.

I went home with my one Inan, my entire congregation, and found him to be a pious, religious elder
in the Presbyterian Church. From the novelty of the
effort of the day, my friend professed to think it was
one of the greatest sermons he had ever heard in all

his life.

I left another appointment, and went on my way '

round the circuit. For weeks my one-man congregation proclaimed and circulated my next appointment,
telling the people what a great preacher had come to
the circuit; and when I came to my next appointment, the whole hill-side was covered with horses and
carriages, and -the church crowded to overflowing.
My heart almost fainted within me for fear I should
not meet the expectations of the people; but the Lord
helped me, and we had a mighty shaking among the
dry -bones, and a blessed revival broke out. Our
meeting lasted several days and nights, and many
souls were happily converted to God and joined the
Church on my first round on this circuit.
When I got to the lower end of the circuit I found a
large society, a fine class-leader, and a very pious, old,
' superannuated traveling preacher. He told me the
society was in a most wretched condition; that there

wrong to do so."

184 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

was a very popular local preacher in the society, who
married a great many_ people, and was in the habit
of drinking too much at almost every wedding he attended; and that he had a large connection, all in the
Church, and that for years the preachers were afraid
to do anything with him.

The next day, which was Sabbath, We had a large
congregation, and after preaching, as my uniform custom was, I met the class. My popular local preacher
was present. In examining the leader of the class I,
among many other questions, asked him if he drank
drams. He promptly answered me, N 0, he did not.

" Brother," said I, " Why do you not ?" He hesitated; but I insisted that he should tell the reason
why he did not.

" Well, brother," said he, "if I must tell the reason
why I do not drink drams, it is because I think it is

" That's right, brother," said I; " speak it out, for
it is altogether wrong for a Christian; and a classleader should set a better example to the class he
leads, and to all others."

When I came to the local preacher I said, "Brother
W., do you drink drams ?"

" Yes," said he.

" What is your particular reason for drinking
drams ?" I asked him.

" Because it makes me feel well," he answered.

" You drink till you feel it, do you i" said L

" Certainly," said he.

" Well, how much do you drink at a time 3"

He replied, grufiy, that he never measured it.

" Brother, how often do you drink in a day 3"

" Just when I feel like it, if I can get it."

" Well, brother, there are complaints that you

PETER GARTWBIGHT. 185

drink too often and too much; and the Saturday before my next appointment here you must meet a
committee of local preachers at ten o'clock, to investigate this matter; therefore prepare yourself for
trial."

" O I" said he, "if you are for that sort of play,
come on; I'll be ready for you."

I had hard work to get -a committee that were not
dram-drinkers themselves. The trial came on; the
class-leader brought evidence that the local preacher
had been intoxicated often, and really drunk several

' times. The committee found him guilty of immoral

conduct, and suspended him till the next quarterly
meeting; and then the quarterly meeting, after hard
debate, expelled him. The Whole society nearly were
present. , C

After his expulsion, and I had read him out, his
wife and children, and connections, and one or two
friends, to the number of thirteen, rose up and withdrew from the society. I told the society if there was
anything against their moral character, they could
not withdraw Without an investigation; but if there
was nothing against their moral character, they could
withdraw. The leader said there was nothing, immoral against them, so I laid down the gap and let
them out of the Church. They then demanded a
letter. I told them there was no rule by which they
had a right to a letter, unless they were going to move
and join some other society of the Methodist Episcopal Church. They said they never intended to join
the Methodist Episcopal Church again. I then told
them that they came to us Without a letter, and must
go Without a letter. I then read the rules; exhorted
the leader to be punctual, faithful, and pious; the
members I urged to attend all the public and private

186 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

means of grace, especially class-meetings, love-feasts,
and the sacraments, and to bring and dedicate their
children to God, by having them baptized.

From this very day the work of religion broke out
in the society and settlement, and before the year
closed I took back the thirteen that withdrew, and
about forty more joined the Church, and not a dramdrinker in the whole society; but the poor local
preacher who had been expelled, I fear, lived and
died a drunkard.

This was a four week's circuit, and I had no helpers; and on examination of the class papers I found
over one hundred and fifty delinquent members;
some, yea, many of them had not been in a class
meeting for one, two, and three years. I determined,
with a mild and firm hand, to pull the reins of our
discipline, and by the aid of the leaders, and by my
personally visiting the delinquents, we managed to
see every one of them, and talk to them.

Through the blessing of God upon our labors, we
saved to the Church about sixty of them; the others
we dropped, laid aside, or expelled. This was awful
work, to turn out or drop ninety persons in about nine
months; it bowed me down in spirit greatly; it
looked like as if a tornado had fearfully swept over

the Church ; but there was a stop put to trading in slaves, and the dram-drinkers became very few, and
many threw off their jewelry and superfluous dressing; prayer-meetings sprung up, class-meetings were
generally attended, our congregations increased, our
fasts were kept. Toward the last quarter of the year
I beat up for a general camp—meeting, and there was
a general rally. We had a large camp ground, seats
for thousands prepared, a large shed built over the
altar and pulpit that would shelter more than a thenrnrmz CABTWRIGHT. 18?

sand people. ‘The square of our camp ground was
well filled. The camp-meeting lasted eight days and
nights; the preachers preached, the power of God attended, sinners by the score fell; the altar, though
very large, was filled to overflowing; and while
many managed and labored in the altar with mourners, we erected another stand at the opposite end of
the encampment, and there the faithful minister proclaimed the word of life. The power of God came
there as the sound of a mighty, rushing wind; and
such was the effect, that crowds of mourners came
forward and kneeled at the benches prepared, and,
indeed, the work spread all over the encampment and
almost in every tent. There were two hundred and
fifty who professed religion, and one hundred and
seventy joined the Church, besides about forty colored
people. Glory to God! Zion travailed, and brought
forth many sons and daughters to God.

Many of these converts and accessions to the Church

‘were from different and distant circuits around ; for

people in those days thought no hardship of going
many miles to a camp-meeting. I was continued two
years on this circuit: the first year J. Axley, presiding elder; the second year M. Lindsey was my
presiding elder. There were many interesting incidents that occurred during my stay on this circuit.
A few I will name.

At Mount Zion Meeting-house there was a good
class of poor, simple-hearted Methodists that desired to
hold class-meetings according to rule with closed doors,
admitting persons not members of the Church only
two or three times, unless they intended to join.
There was an old lady in the settlement, 9. New Light
by profession, who hated the Methodists and despised
class-meetings with closed doors, but would stay in in

188 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

spite of the leader. She would take her seat near
the door, and open it while the leader was speaking
to the class. They had tried to stop her many ways,
but did not succeed. When I came round the leader
complained to me, alleging that they were greatly
annoyed by her disorderly conduct. I preached,
then read the rules, then requested all to retire but
the class, or such as desired to join the Church, and
then closed the door, and proceeded to examine the

class. I knew this lady was in, and sat near the dooras usual. I asked the leader if there were any in but

members. He answered, " Yes, there are three that
are not members." I told him to take me to them
first. He did so. The first was a man. I asked him
his intention in staying in class-meeting. He told
me he wanted to serve God, and join the Church.
" Very well," said I. The next was a woman, whom I
questioned, and who answered in the same way.
While I was talking to her my New Light got up and
opened the door, and took her seat close by it. I approached her, and asked her what was her motive for
staying in class-meeting. A

She said she Wanted to be with the people of
God.

" Do you wish to join our Church?"

" No, I don't like the Methodists."

"Madam, you ought not to violate our rules."

"Indeed, I do not care a fig for your rules; I have
stayed in class-meetings many times, and will stay in
when I please." ' ‘

" You must go out."

"I will not, sir."

"Then I will put you out."

" You can't do it," she replied; and sprung to her
feet, and began to shout and clap her hands; and as

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 189

she faced to the door, I took hold of her arms behind
her shoulders, and moved her toward the door. She
threw up her hands against the cheek of the door,
and prevented me from putting her out. I saw a
scuffle was to take place, and stooped down and gathered her in my right aim, and with my left hand
jerked her hand from the cheek of the door, and lifted
her up, and stepped out and set her on her feet. The
moment I set her down she began to jump and shout,
saying, "You can't shut me out of heaven." I stemly
ordered her to quit shouting, for, said I, you are not
happy at all, you only shout because you are mad
and the devil is in you. When she quit shouting,
I said, "I knew you were not happy, for if God
had made you happy I could not have stopped
it; but as it was the devil in you, I have soon stopped your shouting." I then stepped back and
shut the door, and met my class standing against
it; and we had a very good time, and ‘effectually
foiled our old New Light tormentor, and she never
troubled me any more during my two years on this
circuit. ‘

The Tennessee Conference sat in Nashville, October 1st,'1818, when I was reappointed to Red River.
Our increase this year, in the four Western Conferences, was five thousand one hundred and sixtyfour. Our increase of traveling preachers was only
nine. .

At the Nashville Conference an incident occurred substantially, as well as my memory serves
me, as follows: The preacher in charge had risen
from very humble beginnings, but was now a
popular, fashionable preacher. We talk about
" Young America" these times; but Young America
was as distinctly to be seen in those days, an: ong

‘190 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

our young, flippant, popularity-seeking preachem, as
now.

Brother Axley and myself, though not very old,
were called old-fashioned fellows ; and this popular
young aspirant was afraid to appoint Brother Axley or
myselfto preach at any popular hour for fear we would
break on slavery, dress, or dram-drinking. But at
length the old staid members and the young preach:
ers began to complain that Axley and Cartwright
were slighted, and an under-current of murmuring became pretty general. The city preacher had been
selected to appoint the time and place where we
were to preach. Brother Axley and myself had our
own amusement. At length, on Saturday of the
Conference, this preacher announced that Brother
Axley would preach in the Methodist church on Sunday morning at sunrise, thinking there would be but
few out, and that he could do but little harm at that
early hour. ,

When we adjourned on Saturday afternoon, I rallied the boys to spread the appointment; to rise early
and get all out they could. The appointment circulated like wildfire, and sure enough, at sunrise the
church was well filled. Brother Axley rose, sung, prayed, took his text: "Be not conformed to this world,
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds ;"
and if the Lord ever helped mortal man to preach, he
surely helped Brother Axley. First he poured the thunders of Sinai against the Egyptians, or slave oppressors; next he showed that no moderate dram drinker
could enter heaven; and then the grape-shot of truth
rolled from his mouth against M'/ngs, ruffles, and all kind
of ornamental dress. Dr. Bascom was sitting right before him. He had a gold watch-chain and key, and two
very large gold seals. The Rev. H. B. was so excited

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 101

that unconsciously he took up one of the seals, and he
began to play with the other seal with his right hand.
Axley saw it, stopped suddenly, and very sternly said
to him, " Put up that chain, and quit playing with
those seals, and hear the word of the Lord. " The
claret rushed to the surface of his profile.

The sermon went off admirably, and really it seemed as though a tornado had swept the ruflies and
vails; and the old members of the Church shouted
for oy. Having achieved another signal victory
over error and pride, the ministers and ruling elders
of other sister Churches had opened their pulpits, and
invited us to preach to their people during Conference. Among the rest, Dr. Blackbourn had opened
his church. Dr. Blackbourn was a strong, popular
Presbyterian minister. '

In the course of the Sabbath, the city preacher informed me that I was to preach on Monday evening
in Dr. Blackbourn's Church, and charged me to be
sure and behave myself. I made him my best bow,
and thanked him that he had given me any appointment at all; and I assured him Iwould certainly behave
myself the best I could. " And now," said I, "Brother
Mac, it really seems providential that you have appointed me to preach in the doctor's church, for I
expect they never heard Methodist doctrine fairly
stated and the dogmas of Calvinism exposed; and
now, sir, they shall bear the truth for once." Said the
preacher, " You must not preach controversy." I replied, "If I live to preach there at all, I'll give Calvinism one riddling." "Well," said the preacher, "I
recall the appointment, and will send another preacher there; and you must preach in the Methodist
Church Monday evening, and do try and behave yourself." "Very well," said I; " I'll do my best."

192 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or '

'l‘he preacl1er's conduct toward me was spread
abroad, and excited considerable curiosity. Monday
evening, came; the Church was filled to overflowing;
every seat was crowded, and many had to stand. After singing and prayer, Brother Mac took his seat in
the pulpit. I then read my text: " What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own
soul? " After reading my text I paused. At that moment I saw General Jackson walking up the aisle; he
came to the middle post, and very gracefully leaned
against it, and stood, as there were no vacant seats.
Just then I felt some one pull my coat in the stand,
and turning my head, my fastidious preacher, whispering a little loud, said: "General Jackson has come
in ; General Jackson has come in." I felt a flash of
indignation run all over me like an electric shock,
and facing about to my congregation, and purposely
speaking out audibly, I said, "‘ W110 is General Jackson? If he don't get his soul converted, God will
damn him as quick as he would a Guinea negro!"

The preacher tucked his head down, and squatted
low, and would, no doubt, have been thankful for leave
of absence. The congregation, General Jackson and
all, smiled, or laughed right out, all at the preacher's
expense. When the congregation was dismissed, my
ci -stationed preacher stepped up to me, and very
sternly said to me: "You are the strangest man I ever
saw, and General Jackson will chastise you for your
insolence before you leave the city." ‘ "Very clear of
it," said I, " for General Jackson, I have no doubt, will
applaud my course; and if he should undertake to
chastise me, as Paddy said, ‘There is two as can play

. at that game.' "

General Jackson was staying at one of the Nashville
hotels. Next morning, very early, my city preacher

PE TE R c A BT-W 12.1 our. .--198

went down to the hotel to make an apology to General Jackson for my conduct in the pulpit the night
before. Shortly after he had left, I passed by the
hotel, and I met the general on the pavement; and
before I approached him by several steps he smiled,
and reached out his hand and said:

" Mr. Cartwright, you are a man after my own
heart. I am very much surprised at Mr. Mac, to
think he would suppose that I would be offended at
you. No, sir; I told him that I highly approved of
your independence; that a minister of Jesus Christ
ought to love everybody and fear no mortal man.
I told Mr. Mac that if I had a few thousand such
independent, fearless ofiicers as you were, and a welldrilled army, I could take old England."

General Jackson was certainly a very extraordinary man. He was, no doubt, in his prime of life, a
very wicked man, but he always showed a great
respect for the Christian religion, and the feelings of
religious people, especially ministers of the Gospel.
I will here relate a little incident that shows his respect for religion.

I had preached one Sabbath near the Hermitage,
and, in company with several gentleman and ladies,
went, by special invitation, to dine with the general.
Among this company there was a young sprig of a
lawyer from Nashville, of very ordinary intellect,
and he was trying hard to make an infidel of himself.
As I was the only preacher present, this young
lawyer keptpushing his conversation on me, in order
tn get into an argument. I tried to evade an argument, in the first place considering it a breach of
good manners to interrupt the social conversation of

the company. In the second place I plainly saw

that -his head was much softer than his heart, and
I 13

194 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

that there were no laurels to be won by vanquishing
or demolishing such a combatant, and I persisted in
evading an argument. This seemed to inspire the
young man with more confidence in himself; for my
evasiveness he construed into fear. I saw General
Jackson's eye strike fire, as he sat by and heard the
thrusts he made at the Christian religion. At length
the young lawyer asked me this question:

"Mr. Cartwright, do you really believe there is
any such place as hell, as a place of torment?"

I answered promptly, ‘_‘ Yes, I do." ‘

To which he responded, " Well, I thank God I
have too much good sense .to believe any such
thing."

I was pondering in my own mind whether I would
answer him or not, when General Jackson for the
first time broke into the conversation, and directing
his words to the young man, said with great earnestness:

"Well, sir, I thank God that there is such a place
of torment as hell."

This sudden answer, made with great earnestness, seemed to astonish the youngster, and he exclaimed: "Why, General Jackson, what do you want with
sucha place of torment as hell ?"

T To which the general replied, as quick as lightning,

"To put such d——d rascals as you are in, that oppose ‘and vilify the Christian religion."

I tell you this was a poser. The young lawyer
was struck dumb, and presently was found missing.

In the fall of 1819, our Tennessee Conference sat
again in Nashville. This year the Minutes show an
increase of members in the four Western conferences
of 5,085; of traveling preachers, 38: our whole

I

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 195

membership in the West, 56,945; our traveling
preachers, 194. Our Tennessee Conference lay partly in Tennessee and partly in Kentucky. In Kentucky our rules of Discipline on slavery were pretty
generally enforced, and especially on our preachers,
traveling and local. Whenever a traveling preacher
became the owner of a slave or slaves, he was required to record a bill of emancipation, or pledge
himself to do so; otherwise he would forfeit his ministerial ofiice. And under no circumstances could a
local preacher be ordained a deacon or an elder if he
was a slaveholder, unless he gave the Church satisfactory assurances that he would emancipate at a
proper time. In Tennessee some of our prominent
preachers fell heir to slaves. They were unwilling
to emancipate them, and they sought refuge in the
plea of their disabilities, according to the laws of the
State.

At this conference I complained of some of our
strong preachers living in constant violation of the
Discipline of the Church. They tried to make out a
fair excuse, and to show that it was impracticable,
according to the laws of the State, and I, in order to
sustain my charges of violating the Discipline of the
Church, had to show that they could at any time
emancipate their slaves by becoming surety that
their negroes, when emancipated, did not become a
county charge.‘ They employed a distinguished
lawyer, F. Grundy, and I went to General Jackson
for counsel. The case was fairly stated and explained in open conference, and these preachers were required to go to court and record a bill of emancipation.

When the great Southern secession took place in
1844-45, Dr. Bascom wrote a pamphlet, and there
represents the circumstance above alluded to as a

196 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

great abolition move. Now there is nothing more
foreign fi°om the truth. Ultra abolition was not then
known among us in the ‘West; and if it was, we never
meddled politically with slavery, but simply required
our preachers and members to emancipate their
slaves whenever it was practicable, according to the
laws of the state in which they lived, and which permitted the liberated slave to enjoy freedom.

The discussion on the subject of slavery waked up
some bad feeling, and as we had at this conference to
elect our delegates to the General Conference, which
was to hold its session in Baltimore in May, 1820,
these slaveholding preachers determined to form a
ticket, and exclude every one of us who were for the
Methodist Discipline as it was, and is to this day.
As soon as ever we found out their plan we formed
an opposite ticket, excluding all advocates of slavery,
and, on the first ballot, we elected every man on our
ticket save one, and he was a young preacher who
had only traveled six years. He and their strongest
man tied in the vote. Of course, we had to ballot
again, but on the second ballot we elected our man
by a large majority. Th-is triumph made the slavery
party feel very sore. They then went to work and
wrote a very slanderous pamphlet, in which they

misrepresented us, and sent a copy of it to each

member of the General Conference. But they missed
their mark, for instead of lowering us in the estimation of the members of the General Conference, that
body approved our course fully. '

It was at this General Conference of 1820, in Bal
timore, that radicalism threatened to shake the foundations of the Church, but as I have freely spoken of
these trying scenes to the Church elsewhere in this
sketch, I forbear making any further remarks. At

‘1-ijran oanrwnrenr. 197

this Gefieral Conference, the Kentucky Conference
was organized, which made five annual conferences
out of the old Western Conference, namely:

1. Ohio Conference, composed of the following
presiding-elder districts: Ohio, Muskingum, Lancaster, Scioto, Lebanon, and Miami; with a membership
of thirty-four thousand one hundred and seventyeight, and eighty-seven traveling preachers.

2. Missouri Conference, with the following districts:
Indiana, Illinois, Cape Girardeau, and Arkansas; with
a membership of seven thousand four hundred and
fifty-eight, and thirty-nine traveling preachers.

3. Kentucky Conference, with five districts: Kenhawha, Kentucky, Salt River, Green River, and Cum_ berland; with a membership of twenty-three thousand seven hundred and twenty-three, and eightyfour traveling preachers.

4. Tennessee, composed of Nashville, Tennessee,
French Road, Holston, and Duck River Districts;
seventeen thousand six hundred and thirty-three
members, and fifty-one traveling preachers.

5. Mississippi, with Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama Districts; four thousand one hundred and fortysevenmembers, and nineteen traveling preachers.

Making in 1820-21 our membership, eighty-seven
thousand one hundred and thirty-nine, and our traveling preachers two hundred and eighty. See what
God has done for our "fa/r West." From the time I
had joined the traveling ranks in 1804 to 1820-21, a
period of sixteen years, from thirty-two traveling
preachers, we had increased to two hundred and
eighty; and from eleven thousand eight hundred and
seventy-seven members, we had now over eightyseven thousand; and there was not a single literary
man among those traveling preachers. ‘

198 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

In the fall of 1820, our Conference sat in Hopkinsville, Kentucky. I was reappointed to the Christian

Circuit, M. Lindsey presiding elder. About this time, '

owing to my having reprinted and circulated two
small pamphlets, one called, "The Dagon of Calvinism," and the other, "A Useful Discovery," both of
them satires on Calvinism, some Presbyterian clergymen, judging me to be the author of these pamphlets, and not being willing publicly to debate the
points at issue between us, concluded to take satisfac
tion of me by writing me a letter in the name of the
devil, complimenting me for promoting the interests
of his Satanic majesty's kingdom, by spreading the
Arminian doctrine. Whereupon I wrote a rejoinder
and both these letters, the one to me and my answer,
were published in pamphlet form, and created a considerable buzz for a while. Those clergymen called
a council in order to answer me, but considering prudence the better part of valor, realizing that

" He that lived to run away,
Might live to fight another day,"

so they abandoned the project of answering me altogether. This was regretted by many of my friends,
who wanted them to speak out in their own proper
names, and not skulk behind the name of the devil
to hide their errors or malice. And perhaps it was
best that they did not answer back again.

PETER 0.4~13-rwmenw. 199

CHAPTl_ER XVI.

THE MOUNTAIN PREACHER.

I WILL now relate an incident or two that occurred in 1820-24.

Old Father Walker, of excellent memory, and myself, set out in the month of April, 1820, to the General Conference, in Baltimore, on horseback. We traveled hard all the week. Late on Saturday afternoon
we came to the spurs of the Alleghany Mountains,
and were within a few miles of the toll-gate, when a
gentleman overtook us. We inquired of him if he
knew of any quiet tavern on the road near by, where
two weary travelers could rest over Sabbath, as we
did not intend traveling on that day. He said there
was no such house on the road for many miles; but
if we would turn off the road a mile or such a matter,
he could take us to a good, quiet, religious family,
where we could rest till Monday very comfortably;
for he, being a local preacher, had an appointment
next day. We thankfully consented to go with this
local brother, and following him, we soon came to a
poor but decent house and family and were made
very welcome. The brother, on learning that we
were preachers, insisted that we should preach for
the people in the morning and evening, to which we
consented. At eleven o'clock, Brother Walker held forth.
The people were all attention, but there was no excitement. At night I tried to preach, and although

200 A‘t3'1'o3I‘-6'63-A'1>nvl or

I had profound attention from a cabinful of these mountaineers, yet the preaching did not seem to have any
effect whatever. When I closed, I called on our
kind local preacher to conclude. He rose and began
to sing a mountain song, and pat his foot, and clap
his hands, and ever and an-on would shout at the top
of his speech, "Pray, brethren." In a few minutes
the whole house was in an‘ uproarious shout. When
Brother Walker and I got a chance to talk, I said:
"Well, sir, I tell you this local preacher can do more
in singing, clapping, and stamping, than all our
preaching put together."

" Verily," said Walker, " he must be a great man,
and these are a great people living here in these poor
dreary mountains."

In passing on our journey going' down the mountains, on Monday, we met several wagons and carriages moving west. Shortly afier we had passed
them, I saw lying in the road a very neat pocketpistol. I picked it up, and found it heavily loaded
and freshly primed. Supposing it to have been
dropped by some of these movers, I said to Brother
Walker, "This looks providential;" for the road across
these mountains was, at this time, infested by many

robbers, and several daring murders and robberies
had lately been committed. Brother Walker's home

was a tolerably good one, but my horse was a stout,
fleet, superior animal. As we approached the foot

of the mountains, and were about two miles fmm
the public- house, where we intended to lodge that

night, the sun just declining behind the western
mountains, we overtook a man walking with a large
stick‘ as a walking cane, and he appeared to be very
lame, and -‘was limping along at a very slow rate.
He spoke' to us, and said he was traveling, and a

PE-Tnit C Auirwalo HT. ' Q01

poor cripple, and begged us to let him ride a little way, as he was nearly given out, and was~fea.rfu1
he could‘ not reach the tavern that night.

Brother Walke1' said, " 0 yes," and was in the attitude of dismounting and letting him ride his horse.
Just then a thought struck me, that this fellow's lameness was feigned, and that it was not safe to trust him.
I said to Walke1': "Keep your horse; we are a long
way from home, have along journey before us; under
such circumstances trust no man," and we trotted on
down the hill, and thought We had left our lame man
more than a hundred yards behind. "Talker was
rather ahead of me. All at o11ce my horse made aspring
forward; I turned to see what was the matter, and lo!
and behold, here was my lame man, Within a few steps
of me, coming as fleet as a deer. I grasped my pistol,
which was in my over-coat pocket, cocked it, vvheeled
about, and rushed toward him; he faced about, and
in a few jumps more I should have been on him, but
he plunged into the thick brush, and I could not follow
him. When We got to the tavern the landlord said We
had made a very fortunate escape, for these robbers
in this way had decoyed and robbed several travelers
lately.

Brother Walke1' being the oldest man and rather
infirm, we had agreed that he should conduct all religious ceremonies, and that I should call for lodging,
attend to horses, pay off bills, etc. W]1e11 We had
gotten down into Virginia some distance, we called
one evening at a Mr. Baly's, who kept a tavern on the
road; his Wife and daughters were very kind and
clever, but the man of the house was a drunken Universalist. He was not sober when We called, but
granted us the liberty to stay all night. While I was
out seeing to the horses, Brother Walke1' and the

202 AUTOBIOGRAPHY orlandlord got into a strong debate on the universal
restoration plan. Brother Walker was very mild
and easy in debate; the landlord was abrupt and insulting, as well as very profane. I stood it a good
while, but at length I got tired of it, and said to
Brother Walker that the way he debated was of no
use; that it was casting pearls before swine. The old
landlord at this let loose a volley of curses on me. I did
not attempt any debate, but shook my brimstone wallet over him till he was sick and tired of it. The old
lady and daughters were very much mortified at their
husband and father. By this time it became proper
that we should retire to bed. Brother Walker told
the landlord that we were preachers, and asked leave.
to pray in the family before we went to bed. The landlord flatly denied us that privilege, and swore he
would have none of our praying about him, saying

he knew we only wanted to pray ofl? pur bill. Brother

Walker mildly expostulated with him, and insisted
on having the privilege to pray; but all in vain. He
said he would have no praying about his house. I
then asked him if he did not keep a house of public
entertainment. He replied, "Yes."

"Then," said I, " do you not allow men to curse
p.;dits‘v?s,r,<ear,'and get drunk in your house, if they pay

He said, "Yes."

"Well, then, we have as good a right to pray and
serve God in your house, if we pay for it, as they
have to serve the devil and pay for it; and I insist
that we have our rights. _ We have plenty of money,
and don't wish to pray off our bill." So said I to
Brother Walker, " Go to prayer, and if he cuts up any
capers I'11 down him, and hold him still till you are

PETER canrwnxenr. 208

done praying; for," said I, " ‘the kingdom of heaven
suifereth violence, and the violent take it by force.' "
So Brother W. prayed, and I watched the old landlord, who sat very quiet and looked sullen. After this
we retired to bed, and his wife and daughter made
many apologies for him, and hoped we would not be
offended. I told them no, not at all; that he was
heartily welcome to all he had made of us. They
laughed, and said they had never seen him so completely used up before.

In the morning we rose early; our horses were fed,
and breakfast on the table. We prayed and took our
meal, the old man still in bed. I then asked the landlady for our»bill. She frankly said she would not have
anything; that we were welcome to all we had from
them, and invited us to call and stay with them as we
returned. I insisted that she should receive pay; "for
you know," said I, " the old gentleman said we wanted

I to pray off our bill ;" but she utterly refused. So we

bade farewell, and went on our way rejoicing, for we
had said our prayers and prayed off our bill in the
bargain.

On our return from the General Conference in
Baltimore, in 1820, in the month of June, which was
very warm, and we having to travel on horseback, it
may be supposed that our journey in this way for a
thousand miles was very- fatiguing. When we got to
Knoxville, East Tennessee, the following incident in
substance occurred:

Brother Walker and myself had started early in the
morning, had traveled about twenty-five miles, and
reached Knoxville at noon. We rode up to a tavern
with a view of dining, but finding a great crowd of
noisy, drinking, and drunken.persons there, I said to
Brother Walker : "This is a poor place for wea/ry I/ra/vel204 Auroaroerurn-Y or

era, and we will not stop here." We‘ then rode to
another tavern, but it was worse than the first, for
here they were in a real bully fight. I then proposed
to Brother Walker that we should go on, and said we
would soon find a house of private entertainment,

‘ where we could be quiet; so on we went. Presently

we came to a house with a sign over the door of
"PM/vate Entertainment, and New Oider." Said I,
" Here's the place; and if we can get some good_ light
bread and new cider, that's dinner enough for me."

Brother Walker said: "That is exactly what I want."

We accordingly hailed. The old gentleman came
out. I inquired if we could get our horses fed, and
some light bread and new cider for dinner.

" 0 yes," said the landlord; " alight, for I suspect
you are two Methodist preachers, that have been to
Baltimore, to the General Conference."

We replied we were. Our horses were quickly
taken, and well fed. A large loaf of good light bread
and a pitcher of new cider were quickly set before us.
This gentleman was an Otterbeein Methodist. His
wife was very sick, and sent from the other room for
us to pray for her. We did so, and then returned to
take our bread and cider dinner. The weather was
warm, and we were very thirsty, and began to lay in
the bread and cider at a pretty liberal rate. It, however, seemed to me that our cider was not only new
cider, but something more, and I began to rein up my
appetite. Brother Walker laid on liberally, and at
length I said to him: " You had better stop, brother;
for there is surely something more than cider here."

" I reckon not," said he.

But as I was not in the habit of using spirits at all, I
knew that a very little would keel me up, so I forbore;
but with all my forbearance presently I began to feel

PETER CARTW._RI~GHT. 205

light-‘headed. I instantly ordered our horses, fearing
we were snapped for once.

I called for our bill; the old brother would have
nothing. We mounted, and started on our journey.
When we had "rode about a mile, being in the rear,
1 saw Brother Walker was nodding at a mighty rate.
After riding on some distance in this way, I sud
denly rode up to Brother Walker, and cried out,
" Wake up! wake up 1" He roused up, his eyes
watering freely. "I believe," said I, " we are both
drunk. Let us turn out of the road, and lie down
and take a nap till we get sober." But we rode on
without stopping. We were not drunk, but we both
evidently felt it flying into our heads; and I have
thought proper, in all candor, to name it, with a view
to put others on their guard. _

We journeyed on till we came tothe Crab Orchard,
where was kept a toll-gate. This gate was kept at
this time by two very mean men; they also kept a
house of entertainment; and, it being late, we concluded to tarry all night. The fare was very indifferent. We asked the privilege to pray with them. It
was granted, and we prayed with them night and
morning; took breakfast, and then asked our bill.
The landlord told us, and I drew out my pocket-book,
in which I had several hundred dollars in good current bank bills. He told me he would not take any
of them; he must have silver. I told him I had no
silver, and no coin but a few cents. He very abruptly swore he knew better; he knew I had the
silver. I assured him again that I had no silver, but
he persisted in swearing he knew I had, and that we
'.COI11d not leave or pass the toll-gate till We paid our
bill of fare. Our horses were all ready to mount, and
I had fresh loaded my pistol over night, for I did

206 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

not like the signs about the house; and as I had a
good deal of money in bills about fne, I had determined I would not be robbed without leaving my mark.
Brother Walker tried to reason the case with him,
but to no purpose. I then threw down the amount
of his charge, and told him he had to take that or
nothing, and mounted my horse and started. He
ordered one of his servants to shut and lock the tollgate, and not let me through. I spurred my horse,
and was at the gate nearly as quick as his servant,
and drew my horsewhip, and told the negro, if he
attempted to close the gate I would down him. The
negro took fright, and let go the gate, and took to his
heels for safety. The moment I passed through the
gate I wheeled my horse, and called for Brother
Walker to come on; I would bear him harmless. The
landlord called for his pistols, swearing he would follow me. I told him to come on, and wheeled my
horse, and started on my way independently. But
he took the "second, sober thought," and declined
pursuing me. This was to me a pretty trying and
tempting circumstance, but I survived it.

Shortly after this Brother Walker left me to visit
some of his old friends and relatives in West Tennessee, and I journeyed on toward my home in Christian
County, Kentucky. Saturday night came on, and
found me in a strange region of country, and in the
hills, knobs, and spurs of the Cumberland Mountains.
I greatly desired to stop on the approaching Sabbath,
and spend it with a Christian people; but I was now
in a region of country where there was no Gospel
minister for many miles around, and where, as I
learned, many of the scattered population had never
heard a Gospel sermon in all their lives, and where
the inhabitants knew no Sabbath only to hunt and

PETER C'ARTWRIGH'I‘. I 207 _

visit, drink and dance. Thus lonesome and pensive,
late in the evening, I hailed at a tolerably decent
house, and the landlord kept entertainment. I rode
up and asked for quarters. The gentleman said I
could stay, but he was afraid I would not enjoy myself very much as a traveler, inasmuch as they had
a party meeting there that night to have a little dance.
I inquired how far it was to a decent house of entertainment on the road; hesaid seven miles. I told him
if he would treat me civilly and feed my horse Well,
by his leave I would stay. He assured me I should
be treated civilly. I dismounted and Went in. The
people collected, a large company. I saw there was
not much drinking going on.

I quietly took my seat in one corner of the house,
and the dance commenced. I sat quietly musing, a
total stranger, and greatly desired to preach to this
people. Finally, I concluded to spend the next day
(Sabbath) there, and ask the privilege to preach to
them. I had hardly settled this point in my mind,
when a beautiful, ruddy young lady walked very
gracefully up to me, dropped a handsome courtesy, and
pleasantly, with Winning smiles, invited me out to
take a dance with her. I can hardly describe my
thoughts or feelings on that occasion. However, in
a moment I resolved on a desperate experiment. I
rose as gracefully as I could; I will not say with
some emotion, but with many emotions. The young
lady moved to my right side; I grasped her right
hand with my right hand, while she leaned her left
arm on mine. In this position We walked on the
floor. The Whole company seemed pleased at this
act of politeness in the young lady, shown to a
stranger. The colored man, who was the fiddler,
began to put his fiddle in the best order. I then

208 , A{J!l‘.0B-»I.OG-B.A~PH-Y or

spoke to the fiddler to hold a moment, and added
that for several years I had not undertaken any matter of importance without first asking the blessing of
God upon it, and I desired now to ask the blessing of
God upon this beautiful young lady and the whole
company, that had shown such an act of politeness to
a total stranger.

Here I grasped the young 1ady's hand tightly, and
said, "Let us all kneel down and pray," and then instantly dropped on my knees, and commenced praying with all the power of soul and body that I could
command. The young lady tried to get loose from
me, but I held her tight. Presently she fell on her
knees. Some of the company kneeled, some stood,
some fled, some sat still, all looked curious. The
fiddler ran off into the kitchen, saying, "Lord a
marcy, what de matter? what is dat mean '3"

While I prayed some wept, and wept out aloud,
and some cried for mercy. I rose ‘from my knees .and
commenced an cxhortation, after which I sang a
hymn. The young lady who invited me on the floor
lay prostrate, crying earnestly for mercy. I exhorted
again, I sang and prayed nearly all night. About
fifteen of that company professed religion, and our
meeting lasted next day and next night, and as many
more were powerfully converted. I organized a
society, took thirty-two into the Church, and sent
them a preacher. My landlord was appointed leader,
which post he held for many years. This was the
commencement of a great and glorious revival of religion in that region of country, and several of the
young men converted at this Methodist preacher
dmce became useful ministers of Jesus Christ.

I recall this strange scene of my life with astonishment to thisday, and.do not permit myself .to reason

rnrmz carvrwnxenr. 209

on it much. In some conditions of society, I should
have failed; in others I should have been mobbed;
in others I should have been considered a lunatic.
So far as I did permit myself to reason on it at the
time, my conclusions were something like these:
These are a people not Gospel taught or hardened.
They, at this early hour, have not drunk to intoxication, and they will at least be as much alarmed at
me and my operations, as I possibly can be at theirs.
If I fail, it is no disgrace; if I succeed, it will be a fulfillment of a duty commanded, to be "instant in seasonand out of season." ' Surely, in all human wisdom, it
was out of season, but I had, from some cause or
other, a strong impression on my mind, from the beginning to the end of this affair, (if it is ended,) that
I should succeed by taking the devil at surprise, as
he had often served me, and thereby be avenged of
him for giving me so much trouble on my Way to
General Conference and back thus far.

The actions prompted by those sudden impressions
to perform religious duty, often succeed beyond all
human calculation, and thereby inspire a confident
belief in an immediate superintending agency of the
Divine Spirit of God. In this agency of the Holy
Spirit of God I have been a firm believer for more
than fifty-four years, and I do firmly believe that if
the. ministers of the present day had more of the
unction or baptismal fire of the Holy Ghost prompt.ng,_ their ministerial efforts, we should succeed much
oetter than we do, and be more successful in winning
souls to Christ than We are. If those ministers, or
young men that think they are called of God to minister in the Word and doctrine of Jesus Christ, were
to cultivate, by a holy life, a better knowledge of

this supreme agency of the Divine Spirit, and depend
'° 14

210 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

less on the learned theological knowledge of Biblical
institutes, it is "my opinion they would do vastly more
good than they are likely to do; and I would humbly
ask, is not this the grand secret of the success of all
early pioneer preachers, from John Wesley down to
the present day ?

Now I say for one, who has been trying to preach
in the Wilderness for more than fifty years, that I
take no flattering unction to my soul from those who
pretend to speak in such lofty terms of the old and
early pioneers of Methodism, for in the very next
breath they tell us that such preachers and preaching will not do now, and at one fell swoop sweep us,
as with the besom of destruction, from the face of
the earth. .

I am often reminded by the advocates of learned
and theologically-trained preachers, of a circumstance
that occurred years gone by in Kentucky, after the
wilderness state of the country had passed away, and
the people had grown up into improved life, and
many of them had become wealthy.

In the region alluded to there was a large and
wealthy Presbyterian congregation that, by growing
tired of their old and early preacher, had become
vacant. They sought a popular successor, one that
was up with the improved and advanced state of the
times. They finally, by the offer of a large call, or
salary, succeeded in engaging ‘a very pious young
minister as their pastor. At his first appointment,
he took for his text, " Repent ye, therefore, and
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord." Acts iii, 19. He preached
an excellent sermon from this passage, in the judgment of the congregation, and they were very much

PETER cxmrwaxenr. 211

delighted. The next Sabbath rolled on. Their new
pastor rose in the pulpit and took the same text, and
delivered substantially the same sermon. This produced a little whispering. among their wise and knowing elders; but they attributed it all to absence of
thought. The third Sunday rolled on, and up rose
the preacher, reading off the same text and preaching
the same sermon. Well, the elders concluded that
this was outrageous and insufferable, and that
they must really talk to him and put a stop to this
way of preaching. So they called on their young
pastor, and tabled their complaints very feelingly
before him, asking him if he really had but the one
sermon. If so, they must call the congregation together and dismiss him. To all of which the pastor
responded, the Bible was full of as good texts as the
one he had preached from, and he had an abundance
of good sermons ready; but he thought that as the
signs of this improved age, and state of society, required an improved and advanced ministry, so did
the advanced age require that the congregation
should fully keep up with an improved ministry;
" and," said the minister, "do you really think the
congregation has complied with the requirements of
my sermon? If you think they have, and you shall
be the judges, I am ready at all times to take another
text and preach a new sermon."

The elders, at that moment, were possessed of a
dumb devil, and they never afterward called their
minister to chide with him. As the old truths of the
Gospel were behind the times, the Lord did signally
own and bless the labors of this young minister, and
made him a savor of life unto life to many of his

hearers, giving ample evidence that he will own and
bless his word

212 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

A few more incidents will close this chapter. It is
very astonishing how easily and generally mankind
fall into idle and sinful habits. I have often been astonished at the far-seeing wisdom of John Wesley. In
the General Rules of his United Societies he interdicts
dram-drinking; and while the whole religwus world,
priests, preachers, and members, rushed into this demoralizing practice, Mr. Wesley made desisting from
dram-drinking a condition of membership in the
Methodist societies; and although the Methodist Episcopal Church, in her organization, as a wise provision
in her General Rules, forbids dram—drinking, yet how
often and how long did it remain a dead letter! From
my earliest recollection drinking drams, in family and
social circles, was considered harmless and allowable
socialities. It was almost universally the custom for
preachels, in common with all others, to take drains;
and if a man would not have it in his family, his
harvest, his house-raisings, log-rollings, weddings, and
so on, he was considered parsimonious and unsociable ;
and many, even professors of Christianity, would not
help a man if he did not have spirits and treat the
company'. I recollect, at an early day, at a court
time in Springfield, Tennessee, to have seen and heard
a very popular Baptist preacher, who was evidently
intoxicated, drink the health of the company in what
he called the health the devil drank to a dead hog—
Boo! I have often seen it carried and used freely at
large baptizings, where the ordinance was administered by immersion.

In 1821, the last year I traveled the Christian Circuit,
I took in a preaching-place in a densely-populated
settlement that was long destitute of the Gospel, and
had many notorious drunkards in it. Here the Lord
owned and blessed my labors ; religion spread through

PETER GABTWRIGHT. 213

the settlement. Among the rest there was one interesting family ;' the man was a drunkard; the family
became deeply- interested about religion and joined
the Church, and were remarkably friendly to me;
the old man was also very friendly. On a certain
occasion I met him in a store in Hopkinsville, and——
although I was never intoxicated but once in my life,
yet I had wholly abandoned the social glass, for, according to my best conviction, it was a bad and dangerous habit, and that the rules of the Methodist

Church required it-—this drinking gentleman called.

for some cherry-bounce, and sweetened it for me expressly, out of pure love to me, as he said, and then
invited me to drink with him. I declined. He urged
me. I refused. I told him I had wholly given up
the practice. Nothing would satisfy him; he said, if
I did not drink with him, I was no friend of his, or
his family, and he would never hear me preach again.
I told him that it was all in vain to urge me; my principles were fixed, and that I would not violate my
principles for the friendship of any man or mortal.
He flew into a violent rage, and cursed and abused me.
I walked off and left him in his glory. He never forgave me, I suppose, and made his family leave the

Church, and would not let them come to hear me

preach, and he lived and died a drunkard.

In 1824, Jesse Walker, Samuel H. Thompson,
F. S., and myself, were elected delegates to the
General Conference in Baltimore : the first three from
Missouri, myself from .Kentucky. We started on
horseback, and traveled together. Two of the company would call for spirits when we stayed at public
houses. Brother Thompson and myself would not
drink spirits at all. We made it a rule to pray in
families wherever we stayed, if it was agreeable. I

214 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

felt hurt that two Methodist preachers, delegates to
the General Conference, and our traveling companions,
would call for and drink spirits in those public houses.
Thompson and myself remonstrated with them. They
defended the practice. I told them at length that if

they did not quit the practice I would not travel with
them, and in this Thompson joined me. Brother

Walker was a good man, and for our sakes he agreed
to, and did quit it altogether, and we got along much
better.

In the fall of 1821 our conference was held in Lexington, Kentucky, and I was appointed, by Bishop
M'Kendree, to Cumberland District, containing the
following appointments, namely: Green River, Somerset, Wayne, Roaring River, Goose Creek, Fountain
Head, Barren, and Bowling Green Circuits; it lay
partly in Kentucky and partly in Tennessee, and was
a large and populous district, containing between five
and six thousand members, many of whom had grown
wealthy; there was also a great number of talented
local preachers.

On my first round of quarterly meetings—I was
on my way to Somerset Circuit, had rode, on Friday,
about fifty miles, and my horse and myself were
both very much tired——I called at several houses on
the public highway, and asked to stay all night, but
was denied. About dusk I hailed another house, and
asked leave to stay. The man said I could not stay.
I inquired how far to the next house where he thought
they would take me in. He said, "Seven miles."
Said I, "My dear sir, I have rode to-day fifty miles,
and I cannot go seven more. If you will give me a
fagot of fire, I will camp out rather than go any
further." "

He stepped into a little kitchen hard by for the fin,

PETER OADTWRIGHT. 215

and I heard his old lady say to her husband. "You
had better let that man stay. If he gets the fire he
will burn up the barn because you turned him off."
And as she spoke out loud, I replied, equally as loud,
"Yes, you had better let me stay; if you don't, some
mischief will befall you before morning."

He threw down his chunk of fire, and said, " Well,
I suppose you must stay."

Down I got, stepped to the kitchen door, and said,
" Good lady, will you give me supper quick? for I could
get no dinner on the road to-day."

" 0 yes," said the old lady.

My horse put up, my supper eaten, I felt much
better. Presently I began to inquire about religion
and religious denominations. I soon found out that
the old gentleman and old lady were real high-toned
Predestinarian Baptists. The old gentleman informed
me that, a few miles off, most all the people were
Methodists, and that he was really afraid they would
take the country, and that they had a quarterly meeting the next day, (Saturday,) a few miles from there.

Said I, "A quarterly meeting; what sort of a meeting is that '1'!" He did not know, he replied.

Said I, ." What did you call the name of this religious
sect '1"

Said he, " Methodist."

" Methodist," said I; " what's that? What sort of

people are they ?"

" Ah," said he, " they are the strangest people you
ever saw ; they shout and halloo so loud you may hear
them for miles; they hold that all will be saved, and
a man can live without sin in this life, and yet that
a Christian can fall f1‘az_ng'race; and .811 this," said he,
"is not half; they are the worst people you ever saw.
They had a camp-meeting just over here last year,

216 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

and they had a tent they called the preachers' tent,
and there, by night and day, the preachers carried on
all sorts of wickedness; and," said he, " they are begs
ging and taking all the money out of the country."

"Mercy defend us!" I exclaimed; " why don't you
raise a company and drive them out of the country 3"

"O!" said he, "they are too strong for us; if we
were able to drive them they should soon go, you may
depend."

Said I, " What a wretched set they must be; but it
may be they are misrepresented, and are not as bad
as you say."

" No, sir," said he; "I was there at the camp-meeting, and their bad conduct I saw with my own eyes."

" Well," said I, "if these things be so, it is too bad
for a civilized country." By this time they thought
that it was near bedtime, and he said, " If you wish
to lie down, there is a bed."

" But," said I, "my friend, I learn you are a professor of religion, and religious people ought always
to pray with their families. I am a friend to religion,
and hope you will pray with us before we go to bed."

"Ah I" said he, "I am a poor weak creature, and
can't pray in my family."

" O I" said I,, " you must certainly pray for us; you
ought to pray for the benefit of these interesting children of yours."

" No," said he; "I can't do it."

"Well, sir," said I, " we must have prayers before
we lie down, and I am a weak creature, too; but if
you will not pray, may I ?"

"Do as you please," said he.

So I read a chapter, rose, gave out a hymn, and
commenced singing. There were two young ladies
present, one a daughter, the other a niece, of the old

rerun oanrwnrenr. "217

man; they both rose and sung with me. Finally, I
knelt down, and so did the girls; I prayed, but the
old man and old lady kept their seats all the time.
In prayer I told the Lord what a poor weak old man
lived there, and asked the Lord to give him strength

and grace to set a better example before his family. I
also prayed the Lord to have mercy on those deluded

' Methodists, if they were half as bad as my old friend

had represented them; but if he had misrepresented
them, to forgive him, and prosper them. As soon as
«prayer was over the old gentleman and lady went into
the kitchen, and the niece said to me, " You need not
believe a word uncle has said about the Methodists,
and the doings at their camp-meeting, for I was there,
and they are a good people, and my uncle is prejudiced." His daughter said the same. Presently I
stepped out at the door, and I heard the old lady say
to her husband, " He is a Methodist preacher."

The old man said, " No, he is not."

"Well," said she, "he is, and you have done it
now."

The old man said, " I don't care if he is; it's good
enough for him." Shortly after this I retired to bed, and the two
young ladies began to sing some of the Methodist
camp-meeting songs, and really they sang delightfully.
I rose early next morning, and went on to my quarterly
meeting, and we had a real good one.

I will just say here, in this connection, the next
summer I held a large and splendid camp—meeting on
the ground where this old gentleman had told me there
was such bad conduct, and he and his family were
out; and right in their presence I told the congregation what this man had said about them to me. The
old man could not face it, and slunk oil' and went

818 Auronoelurnr or

home. His daughter and niece both were powerfully
converted, and joined the Methodist Church.

When I got over on the southern part of my district-,
the summer following, to a camp-meeting in the Rearing River Circuit, having been detained a little by
affliction in my family, and not being able to reach
my camp-meeting till Sunday, Brother Simon Carlisle
was in the stand preaching. He was a real Boanerges,
an able and successful New Testament preacher. The
congregation was large and very disorderly. Brother
Carlisle reproved them sharply, but they behaved very
rudely. When he closed, I rose to preach, but the congregation was so disorderly that I found it would be
very difiicult for me to proceed; so at length I told the
vast crowd if they would give me their attention a few
moments, I would relate an incident or two worthy
of their attention. I commenced by relating several
short anecdotes. They began to draw up nearer, and
nearer still; the anecdotes were well calculated to
excite their risibilities. Right before me sat an old,
gray-headed man, with straightbreasted coat; he did
not like the laughter that my anecdotes produced, and
he spoke out loudly to me and said, " Make us cry-—
make us cry; don't make us laugh."

As quick as thought I replied to him thus:

"I don't hold the puckering strings of your mouths,
and I want you to take the negro's eleventh commandment; that is, Every man mind his own business."

" Yes, sir; yes, sir," said the old man, and sank
down perfectly still.

This produced considerable mirth in the congregation, but by this time the vast crowd had gafliered
up as close as they well could, and were all eyes and
ears. I then announced my text: "To the unknown
God, whom ye ignoransy worship, him declare I unto

PETER cuvrwnrenr. 219

you." And for two hours I held listening thousands
spell-bound, while,to the very best of " my abilities, I
defended the supreme Divinity of Jesus Christ, and
riddled Arianism as best I could. Arianism was rife
through all that country, although they called themselves "Christians," and were called by the world, New
Lights, Marshallites, or Stoneites. (These were two
leading Presbyterian ministers, that in the time of a
great revival in Kentucky, were disowned by the
Synod of Kentucky. They headed the New Light
party, and gratuitously assumed the name of Christian, yet they evidently imbibed the Arian sentiment,
and spread their errors, and did great mischief in corrupting the Scriptural doctrine of the true Divinity of
Jesus Christ.) The two Baptist preachers that would
not receive me into the Baptist Church without rebaptizing, in Stogden's Valley, at an early day, elsewhere stated in this narrative, were present on this
occasion. The circumstance of that encounter was
one of the incidents that I had just related to gain
audience with the people, and the old man with strait
coat that bade me make them cry and not laugh,
whom I had taken to be a Methodist from his strait
coat, proved to be an old Baptist man that had long
been in the habit of speaking out to the preachers
in time of preaching; but, alas for these Baptist
preachers! they, with many more of their co-laboring
ministerial brethern, had been carried ofi" into the
whirlpool of Arianism. While I was preaching, I
not only gained audience, but there was solemn
silence and profound attention; for, by the blessing of
God, I succeeded in interesting the whole congregation in the sublime subject under discussion. And
when I came to show that if Jesus Christ was not the
supreme God, that all heaven and earth was filled

220 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

with idolatrous devotions, and that angels and men,
and redeemed spirits had been, were now, and eter
nally would be, nothing more or less than gross
idolators: "Now," said I, "if there is a single man,
minister, woman, or child, in this assembly, that
will dare to ascribe Divine honors to Jesus Christ and
not believe in his supreme Divinity, let them show it
by raising their hand."

I then paused, but not one hand went up. It waa.
an awful solemn time; every soul seemed to feel that
the supreme Divinity brooded over the assembly. I
then said, I wanted one more triumphant testimony
of our holy religion that should overwhelm all the
legions of devils that rose from the stagnant pools
of Arianism, Unitarianism, and Socinianism. I then
desired that every one in that vast crowd that believed that Jesus Christ was justly entitled to supreme
honor and glory, and expected to get to heaven
through his merits alone, to give me the sign by raising their right hand; the hands went up by the thousand, and with hands, triumphant shouts of glory
ascended by hundreds, and many sinners were seen
with streaming eyes, and even exulting shouts, giving
glory to Jesus Christ. The vast multitude fell almost
in every direction, and I sat down under a deep
sense that God was there. Mourners were found all
through the crowd, to be numbered by the hundred.
Many of the Arians recanted; and after the legions
that had distracted them for years were cast out,
came to their right minds, were clothed, and once
more esteemed it their highest honor to sit at the feet
of Jesus Christ. There was no more preaching for that
day and the next. The cries of the penitents, and
shouts of the young converts and the old professom,
went up without intermission; day and night. Two

PETER GARTWBIGHT. 221.

hundred professed religion, and one hundred and
seventy joined the Methodist Episcopal _Church before the close of the camp-meeting, and it was
remarked by many, that it seemed the easiest thing
for sinners to get religion here of any place or time
they ever saw, and they could not account for it;
but I told them that it was plain to me the Lord had
given marching orders to the legions of little Arian
devils to the lake, as he had done to the swine in the
days of old, and when these were cast out it was quite
easy to come to their right minds. Perhaps there
never was a more manifest display of God's saving
mercy on a small scale than on the present occasion,
since the confounding of tongues at the building of
the tower of Babel. Many Arians returned to their
old folds, perfectly tired of their wanderings, and having cast anchor once more in a safe harbor, they gave
their wanderings o'er. Those that remained among
the New Lights so called, split into many factions, and
fought each other till they ate each other up all to
the tail, and that was immersion. This remains, and
perhaps will, until the millennial glory shall inundate the whole world. A remarkable incident occurred on this occasion which I must not omit re‘ lating.

There was a very confirmed Arian lady in the
congregation who denied the supreme Divinity of
Jesus Christ. Late on Monday, she professed to get
very happy, and shouted out aloud; but said, whi.e
shouting, among other things, she knew I was wrong
in my views of Jesus Christ, but she desired some
one to go and bring me to her, for she wanted to
show me, that though I was in error, she could
love her enemies and do good for evil. At first I
refused to go; but she sent again. I then thought of

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

the unjust judge, and lest by her continual coming

she might weary me, I went.
She told me she knew I was wrong, and that she

was right, and that God had blessed her and made
her happy.

Said I, " Sister, while I was preaching, did you not
get mad 3" '

She answered, "Yes, very mad; I could have cut
your throat. But I am not mad now, and love you,
and God has blessed me."

Said I, " I fear you are not happy; you have only
got in a little better humor, and think this is happiness. But we will test this matter. Let us kneel
down here, and pray to God to make it manifest who
is wrong."

" But," said she, "I don't want to pray; I want to
talk."

" Well," said I, " I have no desire to talk; I always
go to God in prayer; and I now believe God, in answer to prayer, will recover you out of the snare of
the devil, for you certainly are not happy at all."

So I called upon all around (and they were many)
.o kneel down and help me to pray God to dislodge
the lingering Ariau devil that still claimed a residence in this woman's heart. We knelt, and by the
score united in wrestling, mighty prayer; and while
we prayed it seemed that the bending heavens came
near; and if the power of God was ever felt among
mortals, it was felt then and there. The woman lost
her assumed good feelings, and sunk down into sullen,
dumb silence, and so she remained during the meeting; and for weeks afterward many of her friends
feared she would totally lose her balance of mind.
She became incapable of her business till one night
she had a dream or vision, in which she afterward

rnrnn cnnrwmsnr. 228

declared she saw her Saviour apparently in all his
supreme glory, and he told her she was wrong, but he
frankly forgave her; and when she came to herself,
or awoke, she was unspeakably happy, and never
afterward, for one moment, doubted the supreme Divinity of Jesus Christ. She joined the Methodists,
and lived and died a shining and shouting Christian.

There is another circumstance I wish to state before I close this chapter.

The brother, Simon Carlisle, before mentioned, had
been a regular circuit preacher somewhere down
South, and there was a wealthy family at or near
one of his appointments. The old gentleman and
lady were members of the Church; but they had a
very profligate son, who behaved disorderly at one of
Carlisle's appointments, and Carlisle sharply reproved
him for his disorderly conduct, at which the young
man took great umbrage, and swore he would have
satisfaction out of Carlisle. The house of the father of
this young man was the preacher's home. VVhen Carlisle came round next time he was, as usual, invited by
this old brother home with him. Brother Carlisle
said, as he had offended his son, perhaps he had
better not go ; but the old brother and sister insisted
he should go ; for they knew their son was to blame
altogether, and that Carlisle had done nothing but his
duty in reproving him ; so he went. This young man
was at home, but slunk about, and would not be
social with Carlisle; and next morning, while Carlisle was fixing his horse to ride on to his next appointment, he took a brace of pistols, and slipped
into the room where Carlisle's saddle-bags were lying,
and put those pistols in the bottom of his saddle-bags,
unperceived and unsuspected by Carlisle, or anybody
else. Shortly after Carlisle started, the young man

£4

pretended to miss his pistols, and declared he knew?
that Carlisle had stolen them. The old people remonstrated against any such imputation; but-he persisted
in afiirming he knew that the preacher had stolen his
pistols, and 011' he started, got a writ, and an oificer,
and pursued Carlisle, and before he reached his next
appointment they overtook him. The officer informed
him of the allegation, and that he had a writ for him,
and that he was his prisoner.
his innocence, told the officer that he was welcome to
search him, and handed over his saddle-bags, when,
lo and behold,' there were the pistols at the bottom
of them. What could he say? He protested his

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF

Carlisle, conscious of .

innocence, but submitted -to the law, was foundguilty, and only escaped being incarcerated in prison '

by the father of this mean young man
till further trial.

We will not narrate the trouble and cost Carlisle
was put to before he got clear of this malicious prose-*
Suflice it to say, during the pendency of this
prosecution, the Annual Conference came on, and.

cution.

Carlisle had to answer to this criminal charge; but
what could he say? He had no evidence of his innocence, and by possibilityl could have none. The
Conference did not believe him guilty, but his guilt
was sworn to by this young man. In this dilemma,
into which the Conference was thrown, Carlisle rose
and requested the Conference, for the honor of the
cause of God, that they would expel him until God
should, in some way, vindicate his innocence. He
affirmed he was innocent, and that he believed God
would shortly make his innocence manifest to all.
The Conference very reluctantly, and by a bare
majority, expelled him. Able counsel, believing in
his innocence, volunteered in his defense. He was

going his bail

1+1-:'rI;a. oaarwmenr. £6

cleared. Believing it to be his duty and privilege, he
married, and when I saw him he had an interesting
rising family. The Church restored him to his former
standing, offered him a circuit, but for the present he
declined traveling, and went to Work to support his
family, and did it with credit to himself and them.
But the circumstance that triumphantly vindicated
his innocence remains yet to be told. The young
man who pursued him so maliciously, in about nine
months after Carlisle was arrested, was taken down
with a fever common to that region of country. The
best medical aid was called in; he was faithfully attended and administered unto. His parents were
much alarmed for his safety and his salvation. He
was talked to and prayed with, but to no purpose.
His physicians told him he must die. He then said
he could not die until he disclosed one important matter. His parents were called in, and he frankly told
them and others that he put his pistols in C‘arlisle's
saddle-bags himself; and shortly after the disclosure

he expired, without hope of mercy.
15

Q uwonxoenunr or

CHAPTER XVII.

SERMON ON BAPTISM AT CAMP-MEETING»

THERE was, in the bounds of the Goose Creek 
cuit, a Baptist minister, who was a tolerably smart
man, and a great proselyter from other Churches,
and who almost always was harping on immersion as
the only mode of Christian baptism, and ridiculing
what he called " baby sprinkling." We had an appointment for a camp-meeting in this circuit, in what
was called Poplar Grove. There was a fine little
widow woman, a member of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, lived here; and this Baptist preacher tried
his best to proselyte her, and make a Baptist of her.
She at length got tired of his water talk, and told
him if he would come to the camp-meeting, and
patiently hear the presiding elder, Peter Cartwright,
preach one sermon on baptism, on Sunday, she would
give him a new suit of clothes, out and out. He
agreed to it; but he was to sit patiently, and hear
the sermon through; if he did not, then he was not to
have the suit of clothes.

When I got to the camp-ground, my little spunky
Methodist widow was tented on the ground. She
came and invited me to her tent, and then told me
the proposition she had made to Mr. W., the Baptist
preacher. "And now," said she, " do your best; if
he runs, the suit of clothes is yours; and if he stands
his ground, and you do your very best, you shall have
as good a suit, any how."

PETER CARTWRIGHT. W

This was a very large encampment, well arranged;
and there were about twenty strong, talented Methodist
preachers, from the traveling and local ranks, present.
The meeting commenced and progressed with great
interest, and there were many melting Gospel sermons
preached. Many sinners were awakened and con‘ verted, both among the whites and colored people.

Sunday morning came, and my Baptist preacher
arrived; and we were soon made acquainted. He
proposed that he, if he felt like it, should have the

privilege of replying to me. "Certainly," said I, U

" with all my heart."

Eleven o'clock arrived, the hour appointed me to
commence my sermon on baptism. It was supposed
that there were ten thousand people on the ground.
My heart rather quailed within me, but I prayed for
light, a ready mind, and success. I took no text in
particular, but submitted the four following propositions for discussion:

First. The design and intent of water baptism.

Second. Who were the Divinely-appointed administrators of water baptism.

Third. The proper mode of water baptism.

Fourth. Who were the qualified subjects of baptism.

My Baptist minister took his seat in the altar, in
front of me. He listened with tolerable attention
while I was on the first and second propositions. As
I approached the third point, the galled jade winced
a little; but when I came to the fourth point, and
took my position that all infants had the first and
only indisputable title to baptism, and that all adults
must become conxerted, and be like little children,

before they could claim any valid title to water bap- I

tism, my preacher became very restive. Finally, I

228 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

propounded this question: " Is not that Church
which has no children in it more like hell than
heaven?" I then added, " If all hell was searched,
there would not be a single child found in it; but all
children are in heaven; therefore, there being no

‘children in the Baptist Church, it was more like hell
than heaven."

The Baptist preacher here rose to his feet, and
started. I called out to him to stop and hear me out;
but he replied he could not stand it, and kept on and
cleared the ground; so he lost his suit of clothes, and
I gained one. But what was much better than all
this, I was listened to for three hours; and the attention
of the multitude seemed not to falter, but they heard
with profound interest, and it was the opinion of hundreds that this discussion did a vast amount of good.

Our camp-meeting progressed with increasing in-terest; many were awakened, and about forty were

converted and added to the Church.
In the course of the summer of 1822, we held a

‘camp-meeting in Logan County, Kentucky, the county

in which I was chiefly raised. At this meeting there
came a strange kind of preacher among us, who held
that a Christian could live so holy in this life, that he
would never die, but become all immortal, soul, body,

and all. He seemed like a good, innocent, ignorant'

kind of creature. He asked of * me the liberty to
preach; but I told him that was altogether out of the
question; that as the manager of the meeting, I felt
myself accountable to the people as Well as to the
Lord, for the doctrines advanced from the stand,

One night, while I was outside of the encampment

- settling some rowdies, he thought,J suppose, he would

flatter my vanity a little; and stepping up to me, he
told me he had a heavenly message for me.

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 229

"Well," said I, " what is it 3"

He said it had just been revealed to him that I was
never to die, but to live forever. .

" Well," said I, " who revealed that to you 3"

He said, "An angel."

" Did you see him ?" I asked.

" 0 yes," was the reply; "he was a white, beautiful, shining being." .

~ " Well," said I, " did you smell him 3"

This stumped him, and he said he did not understand me.

"Well," said I, " did the angel you saw smell of
brimstone?" He paused, and I added, "He must
have smelled of brimstone, for he was from a region
that burns with fire and brimstone, and consequently
from hell ;. for he revealed a great lie to you, if he
told you I was to live forever!"

At this he slipped off, and never gave me any more
trouble during the meeting.

There were a great many people in attendance at
this meeting, and among the rest, some youngsters
who called themselves gentlemen; some from the
country, and some from Russellville. These fellows
would occupy the seats We had prepared for the
ladies. I announced from the stand that the gentle' men and ladies were to sit apart, and requested every

gentleman to remove to the seats on the left, prepared
for them. ‘

There were some twenty who did not move. Said
I, "We request every gentleman to retire from the
ladies' seats, that I may see how many country
clowns and town fops there are, for these will not
move!" All then left but five, and I began to
count them; they then left in a hurry, but were

very angry.

I30 xuronroansrnv or ,

Among them was a young sprig of the bar, the son
of a Major L. He was in a mighty pet, and told his
father, who happened not to be present. His father
and I dined together that day at a friend's house. He
brought up the subject, and said I was wrong; that
many young men did not know any better; and that
he thought hard of me for exposing his son.

Said I, " Major, do you not believe if a company
of Shawnee Indians were to come into one of our religious assemblies, and see all the women seated on one
side and most of the men on the other side, that they
would have sense and manners enough to take their
seats on the men's side ?"

He answered me abruptly, " No; I don't believe
they would."

" Well," said I, "it is my opinion they would, and

that they have more manners than many of the pre- tended young gentlemen of the day."

He flew into a violent passion, and said if we were
not in the presence of ladies he would abuse me. I told
him if he thought to abuse and frighten me from doing
my duty in keeping order in the congregation, he was
very much mistaken, and I would thank him to mind
his own business, and I would most assuredly attend
to mine. Here the subject dropped for the present. I
returned to the camp ground. Presently he sent for
me to talk the matter over. I told the messenger,
Brother Cash, 9. local preacher, that I should not go,
for the major was very irritable, and only wanted to
insult and abuse me, and that I was not of a mind to
take abuse. I did not go. Presently Brother Cash
returned, and said that the major pledged his word
and honor that he would not insult me, but that he
wanted to talk the matter over in a friendly way.

I then consented, and went to him with Bra ther

perms oanrwnremr. fll

Cash, and we had passed but a few words when be

commenced a tirade of abuse. Brother Cash tried to
check him, but he would not be stopped. I then
told him that he had forfeited his word and honor,
and therefore was beneath my notice, and turned ofi'.
He flew into a desperate rage, and said if he thought
I would fight him a duel, he would challenge me.

" Major," said I, very calmly, " if you challenge me
I will accept it." .

" Well, sir," said he, " I do dare you to mortal
combat." I

" Very well, I'll fight you; and, sir," said I, " according to the laws of honor, I suppose it is my right
to chose the weapons with which we are to fight ?"

"Certainly," said he.

"Well," said I," then we will step over here into
this lot, and get a couple of corn stalks; I think I can
finish you with one." ,.

But 0, what a rage he got into. He clinched his
fists and looked vengeance. Said he, " If I thought I
could whip you, I would smite you in a moment."

" Yes, yes, Major L.," said I, " but, thank God, you
can't whip me; but don't you attempt to strike me,
for if you do, and the devil gets out of you into me,
I shall give you the worst whipping you ever got in
all. your life," and then walked off and left 

His wife was a good, Christian woman, and the family was tented on the ground. At night, after meeting was closed, I retired to bed, and about midnight
there came a messenger for me to go to Major L.'s tent
and pray for him, for he was dying. Said I, " What is
the matter with him ?"

"O, he says he has insulted you, one of God's ministers, and if you don't come and pray for him, he will
die and go to hell."

232 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

" Well," said I, " if that's all, the Lord increase his
pains. I shall not go; let him take a grand sweat ;, it
will do him good, for he has legions of evil spirits in
him, and it will be a long time before they are all
cast out." '

I did not go nigh him at that time. After an hour‘
or two he sent for me again. I still refused to go.
By this time he got into a perfect agony; he roared
and prayed till he could be heard all over the camp
ground. Presently his wife came and entreated me,
for her sake, to go and pray for and talk to the major.
So I concluded to go, and when I got into the tent,
there he was lying at full length in the straw, and
praying at a mighty rate. I went to him and said,

" Major, what is the matter 3"

"O 1" said he, "matter enough; I have added to
my ten thousand sins another heinous one of insulting
and abusing you, a minister of Jesus Christ, for laboring to keep order and do good. 0 will you, can you,
forgive me ?"

_ " Yes, major, I can and- do forgive you; but rememi
ber, you must have forgiveness from God, or you are
lost and ruined forever."

" Can you possibly forgive me," said he, " so far as
to pray for me; if you can, do pray for me, before I
am swallowed up in hell forever."

I prayed for him, and called on several others to
pray for him. He continued in great distress all the
next day, and some time the following night it pleased
God to give him relief‘, and he professed comfort in
believing.

This case plainly shows how the devil often overshoots his mark; but, perhaps, it more clearly shows
how God, in his "infinite goodness and mercy, makes
the wrath of man to praise him. It seems to me that

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 288

at least a legion of very dirty little devils were cast

' out of this Major L.

We had a very interesting quarterly meeting the
past spring in Russellville, and a considerable number
in the higher and wealthier walks of life, especially
among the ladies, gave signs of repentance, and a
disposition to devote themselves to a religious life. I
had given them a special and pressing invitation to
attend our camp-meeting, and accordingly they came,
and there was a glorious work going on in the congregation from time to time. Many came to the
altar as penitents, and sought and found mercy of the
Lord. And although these wealthy ladies would weep
under the word, yet we could not get them to the
altar, and I was afraid it was pride that kept them
back, and frankly told them so, assuring them, if
this was the case, they need not expect to obtain
religion.

They told me that it was not pride that kept them
away, but that the altar was so crowded not only with
mourners, but idle professors and idle spectators, and
that in many instances the mourners were unceremoniously trodden on and abused, and the weather
being very warm, the mourners in the altar must be
nearly suffocated. These were the reasons why they
did not come into the altar as seekers, and not pride;
and I assure the reader I profited very much by these
reasons given by those ladies, for I knew all this and
much more might, with great propriety, be said about
our altar operations. So I determined, at all hazards.
to regulate, renovate, and cleanse the altar of God,
and turn out, and keep out, all idle, strolling, gaping
lookers-on; and when the evening sermon closed, I
rose in the stand, and I told them all these objections
of the ladies, and I deliberately indorsed them as

284 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

valid objections to our altar exercises, and told them
I was going to invite every seeker of religion to
come into the altar, and assured them they should be
protected from these abuses; and in order to a fair
start, I invited all to rise up and retire out of the altar
except seekers; and directed that the avenues leading
to the altar be kept clear at all times; that there was
to be no standing on the seats, and no standing up
around the pales of the altar; that no person whatever
could come into the altar unless invited, and that no
person was to talk to, or pray with,'the mourners uninvited, unless they got very happy. I appointed and
named out my men to keep order. Thus arranged, and
our large altar being cleared, and the aisles kept open,
I invited the mourners to come as humble penitents,
and kneel in the altar, and pray for mercy; and we
all were astonished at the number that distinguished
themselves as seekers. I suppose there were not less
than one hundred, and almost all of them professed
comfort that night, and among the rest, many of
those fine, ‘wealthy ladies from town. It was supposed that this was one among the best camp-meet
ings ever held in Logan County, where there had been
many, very many, glorious camp-meetings, where
camp-meetings started in modern times; and they
had been in progress for twenty-two years, every
year more or less. The fruits of this camp-meeting I
hope to see with pleasure in vast eternity.

The Methodist Church received an impetus and
strength at this meeting, that vastly increased her
usefulness, her members, and religious respectability.
I sincerely hope it is going on and increasing to this
day. And here permit me to remark, from many
years' experience, that sammfied wealth will always
prove a blessing to the Church of God; but 11 nsancrnrnn cuvrwaranr. 285

fified wealth, though poured into the Church by the
million, never fails to corrupt and curse the Church.
If our wealthy people will come themselves and bring
their wealth, and consecrate the whole without any
reserve to God, it is almost incalculable to tell the
instrumental good that can and will result to the
cause of religion; but, on the other hand, if religion
must be defeated, the obligations of the Gospel loosened, the rules of the Church not exacted, a timeserving ministry employed and supported, this is, and
has been, the death-knell to all Churches so far as
inward piety is concerned. Look at the needless, not
to say sinful expenditures in our older cities and districts of country; the unnecessary thousands expended,
not in building needful and decent churches, for this
is right, but ornamental churches, to make a vain
show and gratify pampered pride. Look at the ornamented pulpits, pewed and cushioned seats, organs,
and almost all kinds of instruments, with salaried
choirs, and as proud and graceless as a fallen ghost,
while millions upon millions of our fallen race are
dying daily, and peopling the regions of eternal woe
for the want of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and as
scarce as ministers are in some places in our own
happy country, yet there are thousands that are
ready and willing to go to the utmost verge of this
green earth, and carry the glad tidings of mercy to
those dying millions, if they had the means of support. Would it not the better comport with the obligations of our holy Christianity to refrain from those
superfluous expenditures, and with a liberal hand
and devoted heart apply, or furnish the means to
carry the glad tidings of salvation to those that sit in
the region and shadow of moral death, than to apply
them, as is done in many directions in this Chriffififl

236 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

land? Say, ye professed lovers of Jesus Christ, are
not your responsibilities tremendously fearful? There
is wealth enough in the Churches, and among the
friends of the different Christian denominations in. this
happy republic, if rightly husbanded and liberally
bestowed, to carry the Bible and a living ministry to
every nation on the face of the whole earth. And
may We be permitted to hail with Christian rapture
the rising glory of this liberal spirit, when we shall
see it as the Apocalyptic angel flying in the midst of
heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to
every nation, kindred, and tongue. Say, 0 say!
when shall we see this happy day? May the Lord
hasten it in his time, andwe be co-Workers together
with him. Will the Christian world say, Amen?

During my presidency on this district up to the fall
of 1824, there Was a blessed revival in many parts
of the district, and many joined the Methodist Episcopal Church. There are several interesting incidents,
no doubt, that have clean escaped my recollection;
but there are some I remember, and I will embody
them here as well I can.

At a camp-meeting held in the edge of Tennessee,
a considerable revival took place, and some tall
sons and daughters of Belial were brought down to
cry for mercy. Religion made its mark in several
wealthy families. Persecution was pretty fierce;
the rowdies sent off and got whisky, drank freely,
and disturbed us considerably. We arrested some
of them, and they were fined. Finally, they collected
their forces in the Woods, a short distance from the
camp-ground, and resolved to break up our campmeeting; they then elected their captain and all
other subordinate oflicers. Their plan was to arm
themselves with clubs, to mount their horses, and

rnrnn canrwamnr. 237

ride bravely, through the camp-ground, and break

_down ofiicers, preachers, and anybody else that

would oppose them.

Saturday afternoon was the time appointed for
them to drive us from the ground, but in the meantime we found out their plans, and many of their names._
Their captain called his name Cartwright; all their
oficers assumed the name of some preacher. We
made our preparations accordingly, and were perfectly ready for them. They drank their whisky,
mounted their horses, armed with sticks and clubs,
and then came, almost full speed, into our camp.
As I was captain of the interior, I met the captain of
the Philistines, and planted myself near the opening
between the two tents, Where they were to enter the
inclosure. As the mounted captain drew near the
entering place I sprang into the breach; he raised his
club, bidding me to stand by, or he would knock me
down.

I cried, " Crack away."

He spurred his horse and made a pass at me, sure
enough; but, fortunately, I dodged his stroke. The
next lick was mine, and I gave it to him, and laid him
flat on his back, his foot being in the stirrup. His
horse got my next stroke, which wheeled him " 
about ;" he dragged his ridera few steps and dropped
him, and then gave this redoubtable captain leg bail
at a mighty rate. The balance of the mounted rowdies,
seeing their leader down and kicking, wheeled and ingloriously fled. We took care of the captain, of course,
and fined him fifty dollars. This gave us entire control of the encampment, and peace in all our borders
during our meeting.

Connected with this meeting was another incident
of thrilling interest, something like the following.

238 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

There were two young men in this settlement of
wealthy and respectable parentage, who were distantly related. They both were paying attention to a
very wealthy young lady. Some jealousy about rivalship sprung ‘up between them; they were mutually
jealous of each other, and it spread like an eating
cancer. They quarreled, and finally fought; both
armed themselves, and each bound himself in a

, solemn oath to kill the other. Thus sworn, and

armed with pistols and dirks, they attended camp

meeting. I was acquainted with them, and apprised
of the circumstances of this disagreeable affair. On
Sunday, when I was addressing a large congregation, and was trying to enforce the terrors of the violated law of God, there was a visible power more than
human rested on the congregation. _ Many fell under
the preaching of the Word. In closing my discourse
I called for mourners to come into the altar. Both
these young men were in the congregation, and the
Holy Spirit had convicted each of them; their murderous hearts quailed under the mighty power of
God, and with dreadful feelings they made for the
altar. One entered on the right, the other on the left.
Each was perfectly ignorant of the other being there.
I went deliberately to each of them, and took their
deadly weapons from their bosoms, and carried them
into the preachers' tent, and then returned and labored
faithfully with them and others (for the altar was full)
nearly all the afternoon and night. These young men
had a sore struggle; but the great deep of their hearts
was broken up, and they cried hard for mercy, and
while I was kneeling by the side of one of. them, just
before the break of day, the Lord spoke peace to his
wounded soul. He rose in triumph, and gave some
thrilling shouts. I hastened to the other young man,

PETER cuvrwnronr. 289

at the other side of the altar, and in lessithan fifieen
minutes God powerfully blessed his soul, and he rose
and shouted victory; and as these young men faced
about they saw each other, and starting simultaneously,
met about midway. of the altar, and instantly clasped
each other in their arms. What a shout went up to
heaven from these young men, and almost the whole
assembly that were present. There were a great many
more who were converted that night, and, indeed, it
was a night long to be remembered for the clear conversion of souls. One of these young men made an
able itinerant preacher. He traveled a few years,
had a brilliant career, and spread the holy fire wherever he went. He then fell sick, lingered a little
while, and died triumphantly. There was a remarkable instance of the power of religion manifested
in the change of these two young men. A few hours
before they were sworn enemies, thirsting for each
other's blood, but now all those murderous feelings
were removed from them, and behold! their hearts
were filled with love. "Old things were done away,
and all things became new."

I will relate another circumstance, though a little
out of the order of time, which will serve to show the
malignity of an unrenewed human heart. In a little
town in Breckenridge County, Kentucky, called Hardinsburgh, there lived a notorious infidel, who delighted,
on almost all occasions, to treat the Christian religion
with scorn and contempt. It was his special pride to
mortify the feelings of professors of religion and ministers of the Gospel. In the course of my traveling
excursions it fell to my lot, almost a total stranger in
the place, to be detained here several days and nights.
The citizens having little or no preaching in the place,
invited me to preach to them of evenings. I consented

240 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

to do so, and therewere very good congregations and
some very good signs of a revival of reli gion. The people
were very friendly to me, and several respectable
citizens gave me an invitation to dine with them, and
I did so. This infidel had attended my preaching in
common with the rest, and in common with the rest
of the citizens he gave me a very friendly invitation
to dine with him. Having learned his infidel character, the first time ‘I declined. Several respectable
citizens urged me to accept his invitation, saying,
surely something strange had come over Mr. A., for he
was never known to invite a preacher to his house
before, in all his life, and they urged me to go. Accordingly, the next day he invited me home with him
to dinner. I went, and when we came to the table,
instead of requesting me to ask a blessing, he said, as
we drew up to the table, "Mr. Cartwright, I never permit any man to ask a blessing at my table, nor do I
do it myself; for it is all hypocrisy."

I had not seated myself. Said I: " Mr. A., did you
not invite me, as a preacher, to dine with you ‘P'

" Yes, sir," ,

" Do you not know that preachers are in the habit
of asking a blessing at table, sir ?"

" Yes, sir," said he; "but I will have none of it at
my table." a

" Very well, sir," said I, "if I am denied the privilege of asking a blessing at your table, I assure you
I will not eat with you," wheeled off, took up my
hat, and started, bidding him good-by..

"O, Mr. Cartwright," said he, "you must not leave
without eating with me."

" I tell you, sir," was my reply, " I will not," and
went out. His manner of treating me soon flew all
over the village, and the wickedest people in it

PETER CABTWRIGHT. 241

cried out shame, shame, on Mr. A., and greatly applauded me for not eating with him. He rendered
himself very unpopular by this mean act, and I
shrewdly suspect he never treated another preacher
as he had treated me. " Lord, what is man that thou
art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him ?" ' _ 0

The Kentucky Conference sat in Lexington again
this fall, September 25th, 1822; in Maysville, September 24th, 1823. Here we elected our delegates
to the fourth delegated General Conference, which
sat in Baltimore, May 1st, 1824. This was the third
General Conference to which I was elected. Our
Kentucky Conference was held in Shelbyville, September 23, 1824, and up to this time we had approximated to the following number of traveling preachers and members:

Memb. Trev. Prchrs.

 

Ohio Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36,541 122

Kentucky Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24,683 92

Tennessee Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25,509 87

Mississippi Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9,009 46

Missouri Conference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11,773 55
107,515 402

This year closed my twentieth year of regular traveling, from the time I was admitted on trial in the

old Western Conference in 1804. Then we had one _

conference, now we had eight; for the General Conference had formed three more in the West, namely:
Holston, Illinois, and Pittsburgh; then we had two
bishops, now we had five; then we had four presiding elder districts, now we had thirty; then we had
thirty-two traveling preachers, now we had over 400;
then in all the Western world we had 11,877 members, now we had over 120,000, including the mem- ' 16 i

242 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

bership of the Pittsburgh Conference, which properly
belonged to the West; then we had in all these United
States and the Canadas seven annual conferences,
now we had fifteen ; then we had, in the entire
Methodist Episcopal Church in these United States
and the Canadas altogether, of members, 113,134, of
traveling preachers, 400,- now we had of members,
328,523, traveling preachers, 1,272.

Thus you have a very small view of the progress
and prosperity of the Methodist Episcopal Church in
twenty years of her history. In these estimates we
make no account of the thousands that were awakened and converted by her instrumentalities, and had
joined other branches of the‘ Church of Christ,-nor of
the thousands that had died in the triumphs of faith
and gone home to heaven. _

When we consider that these United States had
just emerged from colonial dependence, and had
passed" a bloody revolution of seven years' continuance, and were yet surrounded by hundreds of thousands of bloody savages, hostile to the last degree, and
that we were without credit abroad and without means
or money at home, we may well join with the venerable founder of Methodism, Mr. John Wesley, and
say that " God had strangely set us free as a nation."
And, on the other hand, in reference to the Methodist
Episcopal Church, when we consider that her ministers were illiterate, and not only opposed and denounced by the Catholics, but by all Protestant
Churches; that we were everywhere spoken against,
caricatured, and misrepresented; without colleges and
seminaries, without religious books or periodicals,
without missionary funds, and almostall other religious
means ; and our ministers did not for many years, on
an average, receive over fifty dollars for a support

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 2%

annually, and a Methodist preacher's library almost
entirely consisted‘ of a Bible, Hymn Book, and a Discipline, may we _not, without boasting, say with one
of old, " What hath God wrought 3"

A Methodist preacher in those days, when he
felt that God had called him to preach, instead of
hunting up a college or Biblical institute, hunted up
a hardy pony of a horse, and some traveling apparatus, and with his library always at hand, namely,
Bible, Hymn Book, and Discipline, he started, and
with a text that never wore out nor grew stale, he
cried, " Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away
the sin of the world." In this way he went through
storms of wind, hail, snow, and rain; climbed hills
and mountains, traversed valleys, plunged through
swamps, swam swollen streams, lay out all night,
wet, weary, and hungry, held his horse by the
bridle all night, or tied him to a limb, slept with his
saddle blanket for a bed, his saddle or saddle-bags
for his pillow, and his old big coat or blanket, if
he had any, for a covering. Often he slept in dirty
cabins, on earthen floors, before the fire; ate roasting

ears for bread, drank butter-milk for coffee, or sage tea for imperial; took, with a hearty zest, deer or bear
meat, or wild turkey, for breakfast, dinner, and supper,

if he could get it. His text was always ready, " Behold the Lamb of God," &c. This was old-fashioned
Methodist preacher fare and fortune. Under such
circumstances, who among us would now say, "Here

am I, Lord, send me ?"

244 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

CHAPTER XVIII.

REMOVAL TO ILLINOIS.

MY three years on the Cumberland District were
years of immense labor and toil, and of great peace
and prosperity to the Church. I had seen with painful emotions the increase of a disposition to ustify
slavery, and our preachers, by marriage and other
ways, became more and more entangled with this
dark question, and were more and more disposed to
palliate and justify the traflic and ownership of human
beings, and the legislatures in the slave states made
the laws more and more stringent, with a design to
prevent emancipation. Moreover, rabid abolitionism
spread and dreadfully excited the South. I had a
young and growing family of children, two sons and
four daughters; was poor, owned a little farm of about
one hundred and fifty acres; lands around me were
high, and rising in value. My daughters would soon
be grown up. I did not see any probable means by
which I could settle them around or near us. Moreover, I had no right to expect our children to marry
into wealthy families, and I did not desire it if it
could be so; and by chance they might marry into
slave families. This I did not desire. Besides, I saw
there was a marked distinction made among the
people generally, between young people raised without work and those that had to work for their living;
and though I had breasted the storms and suffered
the hardships incident to an itinerant life" for more

PETER ‘CARTWRIGHT. 245

than twenty years, chiefly spent in Southern Kentucky
and Western Tennessee, and though I had just as many
friends as any man ought to have, and hundreds that
claimed me as the humble and unworthy instrument
‘ of their salvation, and felt not the least fear that I
should not be well supported during life as a Methodist
preacher, the whole country having grown up into
improved and comfortable living; and although many,
very many of my friends in the Church and out of
the Church remonstrated against the idea of my
moving to a new country, yet, after much prayer and
- anxious thought, I very clearly came to the conclur sion that it was my duty to move; and although the
thought of leaving thousands of my best friends was
severely painful to me, and sometimes almost overwhelmed me, and shook my determination, yet I saw,
or thought I saw, clear indications of Providence that
I should leave my comfortable little home, and move
to a free state or territory, for the following reasons:
First, I would get entirely clear of the evil of slavery.
Second, I could raise my children to work where
work was not thought a degradation. Third, I believed I could better my temporal circumstances, and
procure lands for my children as they grew up. And
fourth, I could carry the Gospel to destitute souls that
'had, by their removal into some new country, been
deprived of the means of grace. With these convictions, I consulted my wife, and found her of the
same mind, and in the spring of 1823, with my
brother-in-law, R. Gaines, a local preacher, and old
Father Charles Holliday, set out to explore Illinois in
quest of a future home.
We made the journey on horseback; packed horse
‘feed, and, in part, our own provisions, as best we
could, and camped out several times. We knew the

246 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

country was thinly settled, especially the northeastern,
north, and northwestern parts of the state; and our
inclination led us in these directions. We took our
course, without roads, up the Big Wabash Valley, till
we struck the Illinois River above Fort Clark, (now
Peoria City ;) thence wound our way north of said
river, through a part of what was then called the
Military Tract; recrossed the river at what is now
called Beardstown, (then there was only one solitary
family and a small cabin,) and made our way up the
Sangamon River to a small settlement on Richland
Creek, in Sangamon County, the then extreme northern county in the state, to the place on which I now
live, and where I have lived ever since I moved to
the state, and at which I expect my friends will
deposit my mortal remains in our family cemetery.
Here I found a very decent family, with a small improvement, having a double cabin, about the best the
country afforded. They were settled on Congress
land; and, indeed, though the land had been surveyed
by government, it had not been brought into market.
I gave him two hundred dollars for his improvement
and his claim; bought some stock, and rented out the
improvement, with a view to have something to live
on in the fall of 1824, when I expected to move
to it.

We then retraced our steps homeward through
Springfield. There were in this place, now the seat
of government, a few smoky, hastily—built cabins,and
one or two very little shanties called "stores," and,
with the exception of a few articles of heavy ware, I
could have carried at a few leads all they had for sale
on my back. When we returned home, ‘I made sale
of my little property, all with a special view to our
removal in 1824; and at the conference, which sat

PETER CARTWBIGH1‘. 

in Shelbyville, Kentucky, I asked and obtained a
transfer to the Illinois Conference, from Bishop Roberts, and was appointed to travel the Sangamon
Circuit.

When the conference adjourned, and I was about
to leave the body of preachers of the Kentucky
Conference, many of whom I had labored with for
ten, fiflaeen, or twenty years, it seemed to me that
I never felt such a rush of feeling before. As we
took the parting hand, our eyes mutually filled with
tears. Few of us ever expected to meet again til.
we meet at the judgment-seat. I shook their hands,
made my best bow to the brethren of the Kentucky
Conference, asked an interest in their prayers, and
hastened away home; and in a few days all my little
plunder was packed up and my family mounted, and
we started for Illinois.

Although the Illinois Conference, at the General
Conference, had been stricken oil? from Missouri Conference, yet the annual meeting this fall of both these
conferences was to be held at Padfield's, Lookingglass Prairie, October 23, 1824. It was my intention
to meet this conference on my way to Sangamon
County; but I was prevented by the following fatal
accident on our way. Just before we struck the
prairies, the man that drove my team contrived to
turn over the wagon, and was very near killing my
oldest daughter. The sun was just going down; and
by the time we righted up the wagon and reloaded,
it was getting dark, and we had a diflicult hill to
descend, so We concluded to camp there for the night,
almost in sight of two cabins containing families. I
was almost exhausted reloading my Wagon; the evening was warm, and my wife persuaded me not to

stretch our tent that night; so I struck fire, and‘

248 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

kindled it at the root of a small, and, as I thought,
sound, tree. We laid down and slept soundly.

Just as day was appearing in the east, the tree at
the root of which we had kindled a small fire fell-, and
it fell on our third daughter, as direct on her, from
her feet to her head, as it could fall; and I suppose
she never breathed after. I heard the tree crack
when it started to fall, and sprang, alarmed very
much, and seized it before it struck the child; but
it A availed nothing. Although this was an awful
calamity, yet God was kind to us; for if we had
stretched our tent that night, we should have been
obliged to lie down in another position, and in that
event the tree would have fallen directly upon us,

, and we should all have been killed instead of one.

The tree was sound outside to the thickness of the
back of a carving knife, and then all the inside
had a dry rot; but this we did not suspect. I sent
my teamster to those families near at hand for aid;
but not a soul would come nigh. Here we were
in great distress, and no one to even pity our condition. My teamster and myself fell to cutting the tree
of!‘ the child, when I discovered that the tree had
sprung up, and did not press the child; and we drew
her out from under it, and carefully laid her in our
feed trough, and moved on about twenty miles to an
acquaintance's in Hamilton County, Illinois, where
we buried her.

Here I will state a fact worthy of record. There
was in the settlement a very wicked family, total
strangers to me and mine. The old gentleman and
two sons heard of our affliction, and they hastened to
our relief, and every act of kindness that they possibly could do us was rendered with undisguised and
undissembled friendship; and they would on no acPETERVARTWRIGHT. 249count have any compensation. This was true friend. ship, and it endeared them to me in a most affectionate
manner. .I met and conversed with them years afterward; and although they are now dead and gone
to the spirit-land, I hope they will be in heaven
rewarded for their kindness to us in our deep and
heart-rending aflliction; for surely this was giving
more than " a cup of cold water" to a disciple. By the
blessing of Providence, we prosecuted our journey;
and on the 15th of November, 1824, we arrived where
we now live.

Sangamon County was not only a newly-settled country, but embraced a large region. It was the most
northern and the only northern county organized in
the state. It had been settled by a few hardy and enterprising pioneers but a few years before. Just north
of us was an unbroken Indian country, and the Indians
would come in by scores and camp on the Sangamon River bottom, and hunt and live there through
the Winter. Their frequent visits to our cabins created sometimes great alarm among the women and
children. They were a very degraded and demoralized people, and the white people were very much to
blame in dealing out the fire-water so freely among
them. But the whites kept advancing further and
further into theirocountry, and the Indians kept constantly receding and melting' away before their rapid
march, until they are now mostly removed west of the
Mississippi, the great Father of Waters.

The Sangamon Circuit had been formed about
three years when I came to it. Brother J. Sims, I
think, formed the circuit. Brother Rice followed,
and J. Miller, of one of the Indiana conferences,
traveled it in 1823-4. The circuit was in what is
called the Illinois District, Samuel H. Thompson

260 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

presiding elder. I found about two hundred andsixty members in society. The circuit embraced all
the scattered settlements in the above-named county,
together with parts of Morgan and M'Lean counties.
We were almost entirely without ferries, bridges, or
roads. My mode of traveling, with a few exceptions,
was to go from point to point of timber, through the
high grass of the prairie. My circuit extended to
Blooming Grove in M'Lean County, near where the
City of Bloomington now stands. A few fine Methodist families had settled in this grove; some local
preachers fi-om Sangamon Circuit first visited them;
then Jesse Walker, who was appointed missionary to
the Indians in and about Fort Clark and up the Illinois River toward Lake Michigan. I took it into
the Sangamon Circuit, and, in conjunction with
Brother Walker, appointed a sacramental meeting at
the house of Brother Hendricks, he and his wife
being excellent members of the Church, and he was
appointed class-leader. Brother Hendricks has long
since gone to his reward, while Sister Hendricks still
lingers among us a shining example of Christian
piety.

An incident occurred at this sacramental meeting
worthy of note: The ordinance of baptism was desired by some, and some parents wanted their children baptized, and the brethren desired me to preach
on or explain the nature and design of Christian baptism. I did so on the Sabbath. There was present a
New Light preacher, who had settled in the grove,
and was a very great stickler for immersion, as the
only proper mode. That afternoon there arose a dark
cloud, and presently the rain fell in torrents, and con' tinned almost all night; nearly the whole face of the

earth was covered with water; the streams rose sudPETER CARTWRIGHT. 251

denly and overflowed their banks. A little brook
near the house ‘rose so rapidly that it swept away the
spring house and some of the fences. Next morning
I was riding up the grove to see an old acquaintance.
I met Mr. Roads, my New Light preacher, and said,
" Good morning, sir."

" Good morning," he replied.

Said I, "We have had a tremendous rain."

"Yes, sir," said he; "the Lord sent that rain to convince you of your error."

" Ah!" said I, " what error?" i

"Why, about baptism. The Lord sent this flood to
convince you that much water was necessary."

"Very good, sir," said I; " and he in like manner
sent this flood to convince you of your error."

"What error Z" said be.

"Why," said I, " to show you that water comes by
pouring and not by immersion."

The preacher got into this mad fit because I had
satisfied one of his daughters that immersion was not
the proper mode of baptism, and she had joined the
Methodists; and I am told that this flood to this day
as called "Cartwright's Flood" by way of eminence;
and though it rained hard, and my New Light
preacher preached hard against us, yet he made little
or no impression, but finally evaporated and left for
parts unknown. His New Light went out because
there was "no oil in the vessel."

I had an appointment in a settlement in a certain

‘ brother's cabin. He had a first-rate wife and several
interesting daughters; and I will not forget to say,
had some three hundred dollars hoarded up to enter
land. For the thin settlement we had a good congregation. The meeting closed, and there was but one
chair in the house, and that was called the preacher's

252 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

chair. The bottom was weak and worn out, and one
of the upright back pieces was broken off. We had
a hewed puncheon for a table, with four holes in it,
and four straight sticks put in for legs. The hearth
was made of earth, and in the center of it was a deep
hole, worn by sweeping. Around this hole the
women had to cook, which was exceedingly inconvenient, for they had no kitchen. When we came to
the table there were wooden trenchers for plates,
sharp-pointed pieces of cane for forks, and tin cups
for cups and saucers. There was but one knife besides a butcher's knife, and that had the handle ofi'.
Four forks were driven down between the puncheons
into the ground; for bedsteads, cross poles or side
poles put in those forks, and clapboards laid crosswise
for cords. The old sister kept up a constant apology,
and made many excuses. Now, if the brother had
been really poor, I could have excused everything;
but, knowing he had money hoarded up, I thought it
my duty to speak to him on the subject. I was at
first a little careful, so I commenced by praising his
good-looking daughters, and noticed what a good
cook his wife was if she had any chance. " Now,
brother," said I, "do fill up this hole in the hearth,
and go to town and get you a set of chairs, knives
and forks, cups and saucers, and get you a couple of
plain bedsteads and bed-cords. Give your wife and
daughters a chance. These girls, sir, are smart
enough to marry well, if you will fix them up a
little." I saw in a moment the women were on my
side, and I felt safe. The old brother said he had
seen proud preachers before, and that he knew I was
proud the moment he saw me with my broadcloth

coat on, and he did not thank me for meddling with
his affairs. ' "

ms-ran CARTWBIGHT. 258

" Brother," said I, " you have been a member of
the Church a long time, and you ought to know
that the Discipline of our Church makes it the duty
of a circuit preacher to recommend cleanliness and
decency everywhere; and, moreover, if there was
nothing of this kind in the Discipline at all, my good
feelings toward you and your family, prompt me to
urge these things on you; and you ought to attend
to them for your own comfort, and the great comfort
of your family."

The old sister and daughters joined with me in all
I said.

"Brother," said I, "you have two fine boys here,
and they will help you do up things in a little better
style; and I tell you, if you don't do it by the time I
come round in four weeks, I shall move preaching
from your cabin somewhere else."

The old brother told me I could move preaching,
for if I was too proud to put up with his fare, he did
not want me about him. I went on, but left another
appointment, and when I came on to it, I tell .you
things were done up about right. The females had
taken my lecture to the old brother for a text, and
they had preached successfully to him, for the hole
in the hearth was filled up, two new bedsteads were
on hand, six new split-bottomed chairs were procured, a new set of knives and forks, cups and saucers, and plates, were all on hand. The women met
me very pleasantly, and the old brother himself looked better than usual; and besides all this, the women
all had new calico dresses, and looked very neat.
We had a good congregation, a good meeting, and
things went on very pleasantly with me and the
whole family during the two years that I rode the
circuit. And better than all this, nearly all the

254 AUTOBIOGRAPHY Ol"_

children obtained religion and joined the Church,
and those of them who still live, I number among my
fast friends.

On Horse Creek we had an appointment, and a
good society; old Brother Joseph Dixon was classleader and steward. I think he was one of the best
stewards I ever saw. The country was new; our
little market was at St. Louis, distant one hundred
miles or more; - and some of the people had to gc
sixty miles for their grinding and bread-stuff ; and
this country was generally settled with poor, but
very kind people; money was very scarce, and what
little there was, was generally kept close to enter
lands when our Congress should order sales; almost
universally we were settled on Congress or government lands. In this condition of affairs, the support
of a traveling preacher was exceedingly small. The
first year I traveled the Sangamon Circuit with a
wife and six children, I received forty dollars all told;
the second year I received sixty. This was considered a great improvement in our financial affairs. I
state these things that the reader may see the extreme difficulties our early preachers had to contend
with. The round before each quarterly meeting,
Brother Dixon, the steward, would take his horse
and accompany the preacher, and after preaching,
and the class had met, he would rise and call on the
Church for their aid in supporting the Gospel. He
invariably made it a rule to see that "every member
of his own class paid something every quarter to support the Gospel, and if there were any too poor to
pay, he would pay for them.

Brother D. had been a real back-Woodsman, a frontier settler, a great hunter and trapper to take furs.
Among other early and enterprising trappers, he prePETER CARTWRIGHTJ 255

pared himself for a hunting and trapping expedition
up the Missouri River and its tributaries, which at
that early day was an unbroken Indian country, and

_ many of them hostile to the whites. He made himself a canoe or dug-out, to ascend the rivers, laid in
his traps, ammunition, and all the necessary iixtures
for such a trip, and he and two other partners slowly
ascended the Missouri. After ascending this stream
for hundreds of miles, and escaping many dangerous
ambuscades of the Indians, winter came on with
great severity. They dug in the ground and buried
their furs and skins at different points, to keep them
from being stolen by the Indians. They then dug a
deep hole on the sunny side of a hill, gathered their
winter meat and fuel, their leaves and grass, and carried them into the hole, and took up their winter quarters. The snows were very deep, the weather intensely
cold; but they wintered in comparative safety till
returning spring, which they hailed with transports
of joy. They were robbed several times by the
Indians, had several battles with them, and killed
two or three of them. The next fall his partners fell
out with him, bought a canoe of the Indians, left him
alone, descended the river, dug up their furs, . and
returned home. Dixon fortunately secured most of
the ammunition they had on hand. He again found
a dreaded winter approaching. He resorted to the
former winter's experiment, and dug his cave in the
side of a steep hill, laid up his winter provisions, and
took up his winter quarters all alone. In this perilous condition, his eyes became inflamed, and were
very much affected from constant gazing on the almost
perpetual snows around him, until, such was their diseased state, he could not see anything. Here he was
utterly helpless and hopeless. He began to reiiect

256 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

on his dreadful condition, while he felt nothing but
certain death, and realized himself to be a great sinner and unprepared to die. For the first time in his
life, almost, he kneeled down and asked God for
mercy and deliverance from this awful condition.
Then and there he promised God if he would spare
and deliver him, he would from that solemn moment
serve him faithfully the rest of his life. This promise,
he told me, he had faithfully kept; and there is not
in my mind a single doubt but he kept his covenant
till he was safely housed in heaven.

When he made this covenant with God in his desperate condition, all of a sudden there was a strong
impression made on his mind that if he would take
the inside bark of a certain tree that stood a few
steps from the mouth of his earthy habitation, and
beat it up, soft and fine, soak it in water, and wash
his eyes with it, he would soon recover his sight. He
groped his way to the tree, got the bark, prepared it
as impressed, bathed his eyes, bound some of this
bark to them, and laid down and slept, not knowing
whether it was day or night. When he awoke his
eyes felt easy; the inflammation was evidently subsiding, and in a short time his sight began to return, and
soon was entirely restored. When he gained confidence in his restoration to sight he fell on his knees
to return thanks to God; a sweet and heavenly peace
run all through his soul, and he then and there, all
alone, shouted aloud the high praises of God. He
then felt that God had forgiven his sins, blessed his
soul, restored his sight, and that he ought to praise
and give glory to his holy name.

When the Weather opened for trapping he said he
had astonishing good luck; took a great amount of
the very best furs; and collecting them, began to derarer caarwwniemr. I!

Mend the river. He had anlndian village to pass on
the bank of the river, and as they were a deceitful,
sly, bad tribe of Indians, he determined to keep his
canoe as far from their shore as possible. They
made many friendly signs for him to stop, so he concluded to land and trade a little with them. He had
his rifle well loaded, and was a very strong man.
When his canoe struck the bank a large, stout Indian
jumped into it, and others were following. He, ac-cordingly, shoved off, when one on the bank raised

his rifle and aimed to shoot him. As quick as thought
Dixon jerked the Indian that was in the canoe between him and the other that raised his rifle; the gun
fired, and lodged its contents in the heart of the large

Indian in the canoe, who fell overboard dead. Dixon

paddled with all speed down the river, and escaped
being robbed or .killed. When he returned to St.
Louis he sold his furs for several thousand dollars, and
returned to his family, after having been absent nearly
three years. He then packed up, moved to Horse
Creek, in Sangamon County, -took preaching into his
cabin, joined the Methodist Episcopal Church, and
continued to be a faithful member, leader, and steward_for many years. His children mostly grew up,
married, and left him; his most excellent wife at
length died, witnessing a good confession ; his youngest son he named Missouri, in memory of his conversion on the trapping expedition up that turbid stream,
and also to keep fresh in his recollection the solemn
vow he had made in his perilous condition. After
the death of his wife he lingered a few years, and
then died in peace, at his daughter's, in Morgan
County. '

It may be gratifying to some to see what has grown

out of what was within the bounds of the old San' 1

'258 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

gamon Circuit in 1824—5. There is  Station, Virginia Circuit, Havana Circuit, Delavan Mission, East and West Charges in Bloomington, Randolph's Grove ‘ Circuit, Waynesville Circuit, Mount
Pleasant Circuit, Clinton, Honey Creek, Mount Pulaski, Decatur Station and Circuit, Taylorsville, Sulphur Spring, Virden Island Grove, and Springfield
Station. Thus the old hive has sent forth twenty
swarms, and still retains its old name, Saxngwmon.
Perhaps this circuit has retained its first name longer
than any circuit in the state or conference, At the
close of my second year I returned four hundred
members, being an increase, in two years, of one
hundred and sixty. At our Conference in Charlestown, Indiana, August 25, 1825, Bishop M'Kendree
attended and presided; and I was reappointed to
Sangamon Circuit. At the time of this conference
I was taken down with a violent attack of bilious
fever. Three friendly doctors attended me. They
succeeded in stopping the fever. My doctor advised
me to travel homeward slowly, and only a few miles
a day, till I gained strength, and to take good care
of myself. Some of the preachers secured' a preacher
acquainted with the country through which I had to
pass, to go with and take care of me, for I was very
feeble. This preacher was under marriage contract,
and the day set for the ceremony, but I knew it not.
The first day we rode twenty-eightmiles. I urged
him to stop long before we did. But no ;' he knew of
a Judge Somebody, a fine Methodist, and a‘ good
place, etc.; he lived in the west end of a little town.
As we passed the tavern I urged the preacher again to
stop; but no, he rode up to the judge's, told my name
and condition, but he would not take us in. There
was present a kind-hearted man, who, on learning my

PETER cnnrwnxenvr. 259

condition, took me home with him and treated me
well. Next morning we started on,'and when we got
‘into another little town, having rode that day twenty
miles, I begged my preacher to let me stop. " 0 no,
no," said he; " there is a fine place three miles down
here; We must get there." At that moment I saw a

doctor who had been a traveling preacher in Ken-i

tucky, and I knew him and called to him, and begged
him to take me somewhere that I could rest. I then
told my preacher guide to move on and move off, for
certainly I would not travel with him a step further.
So he left, and the doctor took me home with him,
and treated me kindly. On Sunday morning he took
me a few miles up the country, on Honey Creek, to
a camp-meeting that was in progress. Here I tarried
and rested a while. I was aiming to cross the Wabash, and get to J. W. M'Reynold's, near Paris.

The day I left the camp-meeting my fever returned,
just while I was crossing Honey Creek Prairie. It
seemed to me I should die for want of water, there
being no house on the road. I was immensely sick,
and the day was intensely Warm. At length I found
a little green bush that aiforded a small shade. Here
I laid down to die. I saw a house a little way off,
over a field, but was unable to get to it. In a few
minutes a lady rode up to me, and although I had
not seen her for twenty years, I instantly knew her,
andshe recognized me, and after a few minutes she

-rode oil‘ briskly after help.

In a little time there came a man and buggy, and
a small boy. The boy mounted my horse. The man
helped me into the buggy, and drove up to his house,
and took me in, and placed me on a bed between two
doors, where I had a free circulation of air. This
was the house where the lady lived. The man was

260 an-rouoeaarnr or

her husband. They took all possible care of me till 1
got a little better, then I started, and got safe tc
Brother M'Reynold's. And now I had the Grand
Prairie to cross, ninety miles through. To go alone
seemed out of the question, and Brother -Mac's family
was not in a situation for him safely to leave, and
carry me in a carriage through; but he said he would
go, as I must not go alone.

We arranged to start next morning early; and just
as we were about leaving, I saw a carriage with a
span of horses drive up to the steps with three persons, and who should they be but Brother and Sister
Springer, my neighbors, and my wife, who had heard
of my sickness, and had come to convey me home.

A bed was placed in the carriage, and we started.
There was but one house for eighty miles across this
Grand Prairie, and no water but a few ponds. I
thought that these two days that we were crossing, I
should surely die for the want of good wateri I drank
freely of these ponds, and it made me very sick every
time; and I threw off great quantities of bile, and this,
perhaps, saved my life. After all my fever abated,
I gradually grew better, and finally recovered my
wonted health.

We had a glorious camp-meeting this year on what
was called Waters' Camp Ground, on Spring Creek,
six miles west of Springfield. It lasted five days and
nights. Over forty professed religion, and joined the
Church; and the circuit generally was in a healthy
condition. The country this year settled up very rapidly, and
improvements went up equally as rapid in almost
every direction.

rnrnn ouvrwnxenr. an

CHAPTER XIX.

POLITICAL LI FE.

Om: Conference met in Bloomington, Indiana,
Sept. 28th, 1826. Bishop Souls and Bishop Roberts
attended and presided. S. H. Thompson's time on the
Illinois District having expired, he was appointed to
the Illinois Circuit, and I was appointed to succeed
him in the district, which was composed of the following circuits, or appointments: Illinois, Kaskaskia,
Shoal Creek, Sangamon, Peoria, Mississippi, Atlas,
and the Pottawattomie Mission. This district thus
extended from Kaskaskia River to the extreme
northern settlements, and even to the Pottawattomie
nation of Indians, on Fox River; up that river into
the heart of the nation. And there were only about
three thousand members of the Church in it, and only
half of another presiding-elder district in the state. The
Wabash District, Charles Holliday, presiding elder,
lay on the west side of the Wabash River, in Illinois,
and on the east side of that river, in Indiana.

The following appointments were in Illinois: Mount
Carmel, Wabash, Carmi, Mount Vernon, and Cash
River, with a membership of about thirteen hundred and fifty; a little over four thousand in the entire
state. My district was four hundred miles long,
and covered all the west side of the Grand Prairie,
fully two thirds of the geographical boundaries of the
state. The year before I moved to the state, there
had been a strong move, by a corrupt and demoral262 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

ized Legislature, to call a convention with a view to
alter the Constitution, so as to admit slavery into the
state. I had left Kentucky on account of slavery,
and, as I hoped, had bid a fmal farewell to all slave
institutions; but the subject was well rife through the
country; for, although the friends of human liberty
had sustained themselves, and carried the election by
more than one thousand votes, yet it was feared that
the advocates of slavery would renew the. effort,
and yet cause this " abomination of desolation in
stand where it ought not." I very freely entered the
lists to oppose slavery in this way, and without any
forethought of mind, went into the agitated waters of
political strife. I was strongly solicited to become a
candidate for a seat in the Legislature of our state.
I consented, and was twice elected as representative
from Sangamon County.

But I say, without any desire to speak evil of the
rulers of the people, I found a great deal of corruption in our Legislature; and I found that almost
every measure had to be carried by a corrupt bargain
and sale; which should cause every honest man to
blush for his country.

The great national parties were now organized, and,
as my honest sentiments placed me in the minority
in my county, of course I retired from politics. But
I say now, if the people would not be led by party
considerations, but would select honest‘ and capable
men, I cannot see the impropriety of canvassing for
oflice on Christian principles.

There is an incident or two connected with my
little political experience, that I will give:

The first time I ran for office in Sangamon County,
I was on the north side of the Sangamon River, as
we say in the east, electioneering, orrather trying to

PETER caarwnrenr. 288

get acquainted with the people, for I was at that
early day a great stranger to man‘; of them. Pasing through a brushy point of undergrowth, near a
ferry where I intended to cross the river, I heard
just before me some one talking very loud. I reined
my horse to listen. I heard some one say that Peter
Cartwright was a d—d rascal; and so were all Methodist preachers; they would all steal horses, and that it
was a scandal to the country that such a man as
Cartwright should oifer for a representative of the
county; and that the iirst time he saw him, he intended to whip him for his impudence. This sur‘ prised me a little, and I looked round for some way

to pass without coming in contact with this company; but there was no path that I could see, and the
brush was so thick I could not get through. So I
summoned all my courage, and rode boldly up, and
spoke to the man. There were six of them; and, as
I learned, but one of them had ever seen me. So I
said: "Gentlemen, who is it among you that is going
to whip Cartwright the first time you see him?"
The man who had threatened spoke out and said: "I
am the lark that's going to thrash him well." Said
I: "Cartwright is known to be much of aman, and it
will take a man to whip, him, mind you." "O I no,"

said he; " I can whip any Methodist preacher the ,

Lord ever made." " Well, sir," said I, " you cannot
do it; and nbw I tell you my name is Cartwright, and
I never like to live in dread; if you really intend to
whip me, come and do it now."

He looked a little confused, and said, " O 1 you
can't fool me that way; you are not Cartwright."

"Well," said I, "that is my name, and I am a
candidate for the Legislature, and now is your time;
if you must whip me, do it now."

$1 .LU'l.‘0lIOGB.A'PHY or

He said, " No, ‘no, you are not  stall;
you only want to fool me."

By this time we had moved slowly to the boat, and
when we got on it, he broke out in a fresh volley of
curses on Cartwright. I said to a gentleman on the
boat, " Here, hold my horse ;" and stepping up to this
cursing disciple, I said sternly to him, " N o/w, sir, you
have to whip me as you threatened, or quit cursing me,
or I will put you in the river, and baptize you in the
name of the devil, for surely you belong to him."
This settled him; and strange to say, when the election
came off, he went to the polls and voted for me, and
ever aiterward was my warm and constant friend.

Take another instance of what an honest man has
to hear, if he mixes in the muddy waters of political
strife; and what powerful temptations it throws in his
way to do wrong, and thereby wound his tender con-‘
science, if he has any. There was a man, whom I
never knowingly saw, and he did not know me by
sight, as I clearly proved. At a large gathering in
Springfield, he stated that he had lived my neighbor

, in Kentucky, and that he saw, and heard me offer to

swear off a plain note of my indebtedness; and this
statement was gaining and spreading like wildiire.
Those opposed to my election were chuckling over it
at a mighty rate; some of my friends came to me
md told me of it, and said, I must meet it and stop
it, or it would defeat my election. Said I:

" Gentlemen, if you will take me to, and show me
this man, I will give you clear demonstration that his
statements are false."

So a crowd gathered around me, and I walked upto the public square where this man was defaming me.
I said to the company, " Take me right up to the
man, and I will show you that he never saw me, and

rerun currwnmnr. :03

never knew me." They did so; and when we came
to him, one said to me, " This is Mr. G."

Looking him in the eye, said I, " Well, sir, I want
to know something about this lying report you have
been circulating about me." There was a large crowd
gathered around.

" W110 are you, sir ?" said he. "I don't know you."

" Did yo11 ever see me before ?"

" No, sir, not that I know of."

‘‘ Well, sir, my name is Peter Cartwright, about
whom you have circulated the lying statement that I,
in your presence, in Kentucky, offered to swear off a
plain note of my indebtedness; and I have proved to
this large and respectable company that you are a
lying, dirty scoundrel; and now, if you do not here
acknowledge yourself a liar and a dirty fellow, I will
sweep the streets with you to your heart's content;
and do it instantly, or I will give you a chastisement
that you will remember to your latest day."

The crowd shouted, "Down him, down him, Cartwright; he ought to catch it."

After the crowd was a little stilled, my accuser said,
"Well, gentlemen, I acknowledge that I have done
Mr. Cartwright great injustice, and have, without any
just cause, lied on him." At this, the crowd gave
three cheers for Cartwright.

Now, you see, gentle reader, the muddy waters that
a candidate for ofhce in our free country has to wade
through; and well may we pray, "Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil."

I will relate an incident that occurred in the LegisLature. After we were sworn in as members of that
body, there was a flippant, loquacious lawyer, elected
from Union County. He was a pretty speaker, but not
very profound, and had a very high opinion of his

$8 ' AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

own tact and talent. He was also a great aspirant,
and had a thirst for popularity, and there were
several congregations of Dunkers, or Seventh-day
Baptists, in the district. This lawyer represented that
they kept Saturday for the Christian Sabbath, and
thought, or professed to think, it was altogether wrong
that they should pay taxes, work on roads, perform
military duty, or serve on juries, etc., etc., etc.

He wanted to have a law passed, favoring them in
all these particulars, and thus exclusively legislating
for their particular benefit, thereby making a relig~
ious test, and making ‘a sectarian distinction, and
legislating for their pretended scruples of conscience.
He accordingly introduced a bill for their special
benefit. I opposed the passage of the bill, and briefly
remarked, that as a nation, we all acknowledged Sunday as the Christian Sabbath, and that there ought to

, be no distinctions in Churches, or among the people.;

and as to bearing arms, that the people who were unwilling to take up arms in the defense of their country,
were ' unworthy of the protection of the government;
and as for not working on roads, if there were any
unwilling to work on roads, they should not be allowed the privilege of traveling them; as to serving on
juries, if anybody was unwilling to serve on them,
he ought to be deprived the privilege of having the
right of trial by jury; and if there were any unwilling
to pay taxes to support government, they should be
declared outlaws, and denied the protection of government. The representative from Union, at this, flew
into a mighty rage, and, instead of arguing the case,
began to eulogize the Dunkers, and drew a contrast
between them and the Methodists. He said the Dunkers were an honest, industrious, hard-working people;
their preachers worked for their own support; there

rrruu ouvrwnrenr. 365"

was no hypocritical begging among them; no carrying the hat round in the congregation for public collectidns, and hypocritical whining among them for
support, as was always to be seen among Methodist
preachers. Thus he laid on thick and fast. It was
my good fortune to know, that a few years before,
this ‘same lawyer was a' candidate for Congress, and
the lamented S. H. Thompson was the presiding elder,
and his district covered the congressional district this
lawyer desired to represent; and as Brother Thompson was very popular among the people, and had at
number of camp and quarterly meetings in the bounds
of . this congressional district, this said lawyer had
pretended to be serious on the subject of religion; and
here he followed Brother Thompson from appointment to appointment, appearing to be" very much
concerned about religion, threw in liberally at every

public collection, offering to carry the hat round himself when collections were' taken.

When he closed his tiradeof abuse, I rose and said,

"‘ Mr. Speaker, I award to the gentleman from Union
the honor of being one of the best judges of hypocrisy in all the land ;" and then narrated the above
facts. He rose and called me to order; but the
speaker said I was in order, and directed him to sit
down. Presently, he rose again, and said if I was
not called to order, he would knock me down at the
bar. The speaker again pronounced me in order,
and bade me proceed. I finished my speech, and
left my mark on this belligerent son of the law.

When we adjourned, our clerk told me to be on
my guard; that he heard this lawyer say, the moment
I stepped out of the State House door he intended to
whip me. I walked out and stepped up to him, and
asked, " Are you for peace or war ?"

£8 as-raosroaaarnr or

"0," said he, "for peace; come, go home with me
and take tea."

We looked arms, and I went. When we got there,
we found the governor and his lady, and a number
of genteel people. We sat down to tea, and I found
they were going to eat with graeeless indifference.
Said I, " Governor, ask a blessing." He blushed,
apologized, and begged me to do it. I did so; and
then remarked that I had called on his excellency by
way of reproof, for I thought the governor ought tobe a good man and set a better example. He readily admitted all I said to be true; and this was the
hat time during the session that I ate at any of their
houses without being requested to ask a blessing.

At a quarterly meeting I held in Kaskaskia in
1827, an incident occurred which I will relate. S. L.
Robinson and A. E. Phelps were the circuit preachers, both of whom have passed away, witnessing a
good confession. E. Roberts and Colonel Mather
lived in Kaskaskia at this time, and although neither of mom was a professor of religion, yet they _

were both friendly to religion, and treated Methodist preachers with great kindness. We stayed with
them during the quarterly meeting; and although
neither of them was a drinking man, yet they someimes took a little rum; so also did Methodist and
other preachers. These two men, in all kindness,
poured out some wine, as they supposed, into glasses,
and sent it round in a waiter to us preachers, but
through mistake it happened to be brandy. The
most of the preachers turned off their wine as was
supposed, and they did it so suddenly and IIDSIISPIJ
ciously, the mistake was not detected till it was drank

. Fortunately for me, I got the smell of the brandy,

and held back from drinking at all.‘

rrrnn ctuzrwnenr. Q
-Said I, " Gentlemen, this is brandy as sure as you

live." I

Mr. Roberts and Mr. Mather were greatly surprised
at their mistake, and were mortified. The preachem
who had drank their brandy through mistake were
aiarmed, fearing they would be intoxicated, being so
little in the habit of eusingardent spirits. No serious
intoxication was the result of this mistake; but how
much better it would have been wholly to abstain
from all, and then these accidents would never happen.
Suppose any, or all of us, through this mistake, had
become intoxicated, what a dreadful reproach we
would have caused to religion, and the worthy name
of Christ would have been blasphemed through an
idle, not to say sinful habit. A

The last year Brother Thompson was on this district, it being very large, he requested me to attend
some of his quarterly meetings, and, among others, I
attended one in Green County, near what is now

called Whitehall. John Kirkpatrick, a local preacher ‘

from the Sangamon Circuit, went down and arrived
there a little before me. When I came he approached
me and said,

" Brother, I sincerely pity you from my very
heart."

" Why, what's the matter ?" .

" The people have heard that you are one of the
greatest preachers in the West, and their expectations are on tiptoe, and no bishop could satisfy them; A,

but do your best."

These statements somewhat disconcerted me, though
I never was very anxious to gratify idle curiosity; I
knew my help must come from God, and unless the
Lord helped me, every effort would be vain; but if
God would help me, I asked no other aid. At1e:\gth

270 urronroonarnv or

the hour arrived, and I rose in the stand, and » tried
to preach the best I knew how. The people gave me

A their kind attention, but I saw in their countenances

they were disappointed. During the intermission,
Brother Kirkpatrick came to me and said,

" I told you so; you have fallen' several degrees
under the people's expectations. You must try
again."

Accordingly, on Sunday I took the stand, and tried
to look wise, and I not only tried to look so, but I
tried to preach so, and in all good conscience I went
at the top of my speed, and did my very best, but it
was a failure. Brother Kirkpatrick came to me again,
and deeply sympathized with me.

Said I, " Brother, I know what is the matter; I'll
come it the next time."

So on Sunday" night I mounted the stand, took
my text, and, though I had loaded in a hurry, drew
the bow at a venture, and let iiy arrows in almost
all directions: some laughed; some cried; some became angry; some ran; some cursed me right out;
some shouted; some fell to the earth; and there was
a general uproar throughout the whole encampment.
Our meeting lasted all night, and the slain of the
Lord were many; and although this discourse was
delivered without connection, system, or anything
else but exhortation, I redeemed myself, and now it
was admitted that I was a great preacher.

I attended several camp-meetings in this neighborhood during my continuance on the district, and we

‘ always had good times; there was, however, considerable opposition and persecution. At one of these
camp-meetings, the wicked young men, who were
chiefly children of religious people, or professors in
other Churches, brought their whisky and hid it in

P-ETER CABTWBIGHT. 271

the woods, where they would collect together and
drink, and then come and disturb the worshiping
congregation. I closely watched them, and after
they had gone out to their whisky and drank freely,
and returned to interrupt us, I captured their keg of
whisky, and brought it in and placed it under guard.
After a while they missed it, and there was great
confusion among them. They finally suspected me,
and sent me word, if I would give up their whisky
they would behave themselves or go away. I sent
them word, that I never hired people to behave, and
if they did not behave I would make them. They
then sent me word, if I did not give up their whisky
they would stone the preachers' tent that night, and
one of them had the impudence to tell me so. I utterly refused to give up the whisky, and told him to
stone away, that I would be ready for them.

There was, close by the camp ground, a beautiful
running stream, with a gravelly bottom, and many
little rocks or pebbles. After dark a while, the camp
ground was brilliantly lighted up; I went and borrowed some old clothes, and dressed myself in disguise, and obtained an old straw hat. Thus attired, I
sallied out, and presently, unperceived, I mixed among
these rowdies, and soon got all their plans; they were
to wait till the congregation was dismissed, the lights
put out, and the people retired to rest; and then they
were to march up and stone the preachers' tent, and
if I made my appearance to annoy them in any way,
they were to give me a shower of stones. I mixed
freely among them, and do not suppose any one even
suspected me at all. Meeting closed, the lights were
blown out, and the people mostly retired to rest; in
the meantime I had slipped down to the brook, and
tilled the pockets of the old overcoat that I had bor27:1 auronocaarmr or

rowed, with little stones; and as I came up to them,
they were just ready to commence operations on the
preachers' tent; but before they had thrown a single
stone, I gathered from my pockets my hands full of
stones, and flung them thick and fast right in among
them, crying out, at the top of my voice, " Here they
are! here they are! take them! take them!" They
broke at full speed, and such a running I hardly ever
witnessed. I took after them, hallooing, every jump,
"Take them! take them!" Thus ended the farce.
We had no more interruption, and our camp-meeting
went on gloriously, and we had many conversions
clear and powerful. .
There lived in this settlement 9. very pious sister,
who was much aiiiicted; she was poor, and money
was scarce, and hard to get; but this sister believed
it to be her duty, and the duty of every member of
the Church, to aid in the support of the Gospel. She
was very liberal, and very punctual in paying' her
quarterage; but circumstances, entirely beyond her
control, prevented her from getting the money to pay
her quarter-age. The above-named camp-meeting was
the last quarterly meeting before conference, and the
thought, that her preachers were to go away without
their pay, greatly aiilicted her; she talked to me
about it, and felt greatly distressed, and even wept
over it. On Monday morning she went home, living
but a short distance from the camp ground, to get a
fresh supply of provisions, and, as she returned to the
camp ground, she found, lying in the road, a silver
dollar; she picked it up, and came to the camp ground
greatly rejoicing, and said, the Lord had given her
that dollar to pay her preachers, and she gave it to
the support of the Gospel with great cheerfulness.
Now, if all our Church members would act as con‘rnrzn OARTWBIGHT. 278

scientiously as this beloved sister, our preachers would
never go without their pay. This sister lived and died
a noble pattern of piety; her end was peace, and well
might she say, on her dying couch, to her surrounding friends, who wept by her bedside: " Follow me,
as I have followed the Lord Jesus Christ."

Before I take leave of this camp-meeting, I will relate an incident, to show what lengths people can go
in wild and unjustifiable fanaticism. There came a
man to this meeting from one of the Carolinas, who
had professed religion in some of the revivals in that
country. He was a man of good education, and
wealthy, of polite manners, of chaste and pleasant
conversation ; he had joined no Church, had no license
to preach" from any accredited branch of the Christian
Church, had no testimonials of his good character, or
of being in fellowship with‘ any Christian body whatever; and yet he professed to be called of God to the
ministry of the word, and that God had appointed
him to travel all over the world, and to travel on foot
too.

First, he was to bring about a universal peace
among all nations; then, secondly, he was to unite all
the branches of the Christian Church, and make them
one. Until then he was forbidden to ride, or go in any
other way than on foot; and when he had accomplished the object of his mission, the closing of which
was to be attended by the bringing in of the Jews,
and their return to Palestine, and the rebuilding of
Jerusalem, and the rearing up of the Temple; then
Christ was to descend bodily as he ascended, and
reign a thousand years on earth, in the midst of his
saints; and then, and not till then, he, the preacher,
was to ride, and ride in triumph into the new Jerusalem, and this was to be the commencement of the
18

274 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

millennium. This man would talk on the subj eet until
his feelings would be wrought up to an ecstatic rapture, and he would shout in apparent triumph, as if
he had performed the greatest work ever accomplish~
ed on earth, saving the redemption of the world.
Although his whole conversation on the subject was
replete with supreme absurdities, yet it was astonishing to see with what earnest attention the people
heard him in his private conversations; I say private,
because I would not let him occupy the pulpit, and
deliver his discourses from the stand, although he,
and others, importuned me to let him do so; but I
told them, No, I could not, in view of my responsibility
to God and man, permit any such religious foolishness to disturb and divert the minds of the people
from the sober truths of the Gospel, and gave,.as my
decided‘ opinion, that God would not swerve one
hair's breadth from the system of truth recorded in
the Gospel to save or to damn the world. This gave
him great offense, and shortly he left us; and I was exceedingly glad when he took his departure. During
the time he stayed among us I tried to reason him out
of his absurd notions, to show the great folly and inconsistency of his views, but all in vain; he construed
it into persecution, and a disposition to fight against
God. I have lived to see many of these insane enthusiasts on the subject of religion, and I have never
seen any good resulting from giving them any countenance at all; but in several instances, great harm
was done by showing them countenance. They can
manufacture more fanatics, and in a shorter time,
than twenty good, sound, Gospel ministers can turn
five sinners from the error of their ways to the
service of the living and true God. Perhaps it may
not be considered out of place to indulge here in a

PETER canrwarsnr. 275

few remarks‘ on the subject of this wild, frenzied
fanaticism.
There are several classes of these fanatics, according to the best observations that I have been able to

make, and I have had many opportunities in the
course of my fifty years' ministry. - First, there are
many that are truly awakened and soundly converted to God, and are pious, but instead of taking the
word of God for their only infallible guide, and trying
the spirits, and their impressions, or feelings, by that
as a standard, they take all their impressions and

sudden impulses of mind as inspirations from God,'

and act accordingly. If you oppose them, they say
and believe you areiighting against God. If you try

' to reason them out of their visionary flights, and settle

them down on the sure foundation, the word of God,
they construe it all into the want of religion and cry
out persecution.

Secondly. There is another class of enthusiastic
persons, that not only seem, but actually are, so supremely wrapped up in self, that all they do, or say,
or perform, is to be seen of men, and if they can only
get the ignorant multitude to run after them, and
cry "Hosannahl blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the Lord," they Wrap themselves in their
mantle of supreme self-complacence. They surely
have not the fear of God before their eyes, and their
fearful responsibilities seem not to enter into their
calculations from first to last. Woe unto them! If
they want to go to hell, they had better take the
most obscure route to that dismal region, and go
single-handed and alone, than to draw the ignorant
and gaping crowds, the riff raif of all God's creation,
after them; but all rebels against the government of

God love company. The devil himself is a fearful

276 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

witness of this fact, when, under his mutinous and revolting conspiracy against the eternal majesty of.
Heaven, he drew the third part of the stars of heaven
after him in his rebellion against God. It is impossible to calculate the mischief done by this class of
fanatics, and the many souls they have ruined forever.

Thirdly. There is a dark, motley crowd of wizards,
witches, and spiritual rappers, so called, that have,
sooner or later, infested all lands, and are the common property of the devil. - They must have a fee for
divining and soothsaying, and make a gain of their
pretended art, and some of them pretend to be ministers of Christ and followers of the Lamb. By the
indulgence of my readers I will give a very brief
and, of course, imperfect statement of a case that will
set this matter in a true light.

There was, in one of our Eastern conferences, 3
very talented, shrewd traveling preacher, whose
piety was of a doubtful complexion. If his piety
had been equal to his talents as a pulpit orator, he
certainly could have done a great deal of good; but
being weighed in the balances of the public mind,
and, in point of piety, found wanting, he thought
he must rise somehow, so he fell in with those locusts
of Egypt, the spiritual rappers, took a few lessons,
and then commenced operations, and really astonished the ignorant multitudes, himself with the rest.
He pretended to call up the dead from every country
and clime; be summoned them from heaven, earth,
and hell; he not only could tell who was happy in
heaven, as he said, but who were miserable in hell;
he could hold communion with God, with angels,
spirits, and the devil also. The last part I am not
disposed to doubt. Indeed, I have very little doubt
that he was in constant communion with the devil.

PETER canrwnmnr. 277

The Chu_rch was grieved with this state of things,
and the ministers thought it their duty to arrest him,
not only for these presumptuous pretensions, but for
sundry other moral delinquencies. They tried him,
and expelled him from the Church. He appealed to
the General Conference that sat in Pittsburgh in 1848.
On examination the General Conference thought that
there was some informality in his trial in the annual
conference to which he belonged, and they remanded
it back to his conference for a new trial. The conference took up the case again, found him guilty of
several immoralities, and expelled him again. From
this act of expulsion he appealed to the General Conference that sat in Boston in 1852. In his defense
before that body, he openly avowed that he could tell
what was going on in heaven, earth, and hell; that he
had foretold the results of many of the important battles
in Mexico, under Generals Taylor and Scott, before
the battles were fought; and that he knew how the
decision of that General Conference would go, before
the trial ended. When the special pleadings in his
case were over, and he was requested to retire, in
order that the Conference should make up their verdict, I slipped out at the door after him, and said to
him, " Now, Brother S., can you tell how this Conference will decide in your case beforehand?"

" Yes, I can," said he.

" Well," said I, " if you will tell me now, and they
should decide as you say, you can very easily make a
convert of me. Do tell me here, privately; I will say
nothing about it till the verdict is rendered."

" Get away," said he; " I will not do it."

" N 0," said I, " because you cannot." The General
Conference, with great unanimity, aflirmed the decision of the court below, and he was expelled.

278 ' AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

While I was on my way to the quarterly meeting
in Mississippi Circuit, at Brother J. Pickett's, in what
was then Madison County, south of the 'Macoupin
Creek, there had fallen a tremendous rain, and the
creek was out of‘ its banks. There was a little, old,
crazy horse-boat; and although within a few miles
of the place where the quarterly meeting was to be
held, there was no chance of getting there without
risking life in this old, crazy boat across this rapid
stream. When I rode up to the creek there sat a
good old local preacher on the bank, holding his
horse by the bridle. After the usual salutations,
he said,

" Brother, I started to go to the quarterly meeting,
but I have no money, and the ferryman will notset
me over, even on trust."

" How much does he charge?" said I.

He replied, " Twelve and a half cents."

" Very well, brother," said I, "go with me, and

‘I will pay the ferriage."

So we crossed and got out safely. That night this
old brother preached, and the power of the Lord was
present to kill and make alive. Three souls were
converted and six joined the Church, and we had an
excellent meeting. I state this little circumstance to
show the great good that can be done with a small
sum of money. I do not think that I ever laid out
twelve and a half cents to better advantage in all my
little pilgrimage on earth. A

From this quarterly meeting I crossed the Illinois
River on to the military tract, aiming for the Atlas
Circuit quarterly meeting. Late in the evening I
rode up to a temporary building, atotal stranger, and
asked for quarters for the night, which was readily
granted. I found that my landlord's family had

srmrnn onvrwnrenr. 279

moved from some of the New-England states, and
were a well-informed and clever family. The gentleman's name was Colonel Ross. Several families had
moved out here, and had been living here three or
four years, and, perhaps, had never heard a sermon
since they had settled in this new country. I was
invited to pray in the family night and morning.
Our conversation chiefly turned on religious subjects.
When I started on next morning, they would receive
no compensation from me, and as they were kind, and
would have nothing for my night's lodging, having in my saddle-bags a few religious books, I drew
out "The Letters and Poems of Caroline Matilda
Thayer," and made a present of this little book to
my landlady, and went on my way.

I was happy afterward to learn from this landlady's own mouth that God made this little book the
means of her sound conversion. She -led a happy
Christian life, and died a peaceful, triumphant death.
I name this little circumstance to show, in a small
way, what good can be done by the distribution of
religious books among the people. It has often been
a question that I shall never be able to answer on
earth, whether I have done the most good by preaching or distributing religious books. If we as a Church
had been blessed with a flourishing Book Concern
such as we now have, and our preachers had scattered books broad-cast over these Western wilds, or any
other wilds, it Would be impossible to tell the vast
amount of good that would have been done. And,
indeed, this is one of the grand secrets of the success

‘ of our early Methodist preachers.

Well do I remember of reading in early life,
Russel1's Seven Sermons, Nelson's Journals, and
such books as those, which would make me weep.

280 AUTOBIOGRAPHY. or

and pray too. For more than fifty years I have litmly believed, that it was a part and parcel of a Methodist preacher's most sacred duty to circulate good
books wherever they go among the people. And I
claim to have come as nigh my duty in this as any
other, and perhaps more so. I have spread thousands
of dollars' worth among the people; sometimes a
thousand dollars' worth a year. But I fear a change
for the worse has come over our Methodist preachers
on this subject; many of them, since the country has
grown up into improved life, and wealth abounds,
feel themselves degraded in peddling books, as they
call it, and want to roll this whole duty on to the
ooqwrteurs. But I believe, with our most excellent
Discipline, that we should " be ashamed of nothing
but sin." The religious press is destined, in the order
of Providence, to give moral freedom to the perishing millions of earth. " My people," saith the Lord,
"perish for lack of knowledge." Think of this,
ye ministers of Jesus Christ; lay aside your pride,
and call to your aid in disseminating religious knowledge from the pulpit, religious books, and God will
own the effort, and prosper the work of your hands
everywhere.

I suppose I was the first preacher who ever held
a camp-meeting in the military tract, in what is now
called Pike, Adams, Schuyler, and Hancock Counties.
We had a camp-meeting in Pike County in 1827. We
had but one tent on the ground, and that was called
the " Preachers' Tent." The people rolled on to the
ground in their wagons; brought their victuals, and
ate at the wagons. We held this meeting several
days and nights in this way, and we had a prosperous
meeting. We held one in Schuyler County the same
season, and many souls were blessed.

1* ETER OABTWBIGHT. 281

Our Pottawattomie Mission was located on Fox ‘

River. Jesse Walker was missionary, and I was
appointed superintendent; and it belonged to the
Illinois District. During the two years that I superintended this mission I received not one cent from
the missionary funds. We had near one hundred
miles of unbroken wilderness country to pass through
to get to this mission. I had to pack provisions for
myself and horse to and from the mission. There
being no roads, I had to hire my pilot, and camp out.

Having made preparations for the journey, and an
appointment to meet the chiefs of the nation at the
mission, I started from the Peoria Quarterly Meeting
with my pilot and several volunteers for the mission.
We shaped our course from point to point of timber:
Late in the evening we struck the timber of the 11linois Vermilion, and hnding plenty of water, we
camped, struck fire, cooked, and took supper and dinner all under one. We had prayer, fixed our blankets and overcoats, and laid us down, and slept soundly
and sweetly till next morning. We rose early, took
breakfast, fed our horses, and started on our way
across the Illinois River, swimming our horses beside
a canoe, and just at night reached the mission. We
called the mission family together and preached to
them. The next day the chiefs appeared; we smoked
the pipe of friendship with them, and, through an interpreter, I made a speech to them, explaining our
object in establishing a mission among them. All
the chiefs now shook hands with us, as their custom
is, and gave us a very sociable talk, and all bid us a
cordial welcome save one, who was strongly opposed
to our coming among them. He did not wish to
change their religion and their customs, nor to educate their children. I replied to him, and met all his

282 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

objections. I tried to show them the benefits of civilization and the Christian religion. There was present a Chippewa chief, with his two daughters, at the
mission. This chief made a flaming speech in favor
of the mission, and in favor of our " Great Father,"
the President, and the American people. He had
fought under the American colors in the last war
with England, and had his diploma from the President as a brave captain, and showed it with great exultation. His two daughters were dressed like the
whites, and could read pretty Well. When our " great
talk " was over, I asked them the liberty to preach to
them, which was granted I tried to explain to them
the original state of man, the fall of man, and the
redemption through Christ; the condition of salvation,
namely, faith in Christ, and obedience to all the precepts of the Gospel, as revealed in the Holy Scriptures; and urged them to repent, and forsake all their
sins, and come to Christ.

It was an awkward and slow way to preach, through
an interpreter, but I succeeded much better than I
anticipated. One Indian woman, who had obtained
religion, as we believed, desired baptism, and the ordinance was administered to her. Several couple,
from the scattering white people that hung around
the mission, applied to be married.

After directing matters, according to my instructions as superintendent, we started for home. After
traveling near hfty miles, night came on at a point of
timber called Crow Point, and there we camped. A‘
dreadful storm of wind arose, which blew a severe
gale, but Providence favored us in withholding the
rain, and we considered this a great blessing. The
next day we reached the settlement, in health and
safety.

PETER canrwnrenr. 88

' We expended several thousand dollars of missionary money in improving these mission premises, and
succeeded in civilizing and Christianizing a few of
these Indians, but the whites kept constantly encroaching on them till. they became restless, and, dually,
the government bought them out. The mission
premises, with a section of land, was reserved for one

of the half breed, so that the Missionary Society lost I

all that they had expended. It is true, the chiefs of
the nation gave Brother Walker a thousand dollars of
their annuities, as a compensation for the improvements he had made with the missionary money; and.

this money properly belonged to the Missionary
Society, but they never realized it; and the Indians
moved, f1na1ly,west of the Mississippi. There is still
a lingering, wasting remnant of that nation; they
have a missionary among them, and a good many of

them are pious Christians.

Before this mission was broken up there appeared
another of those wandering stars, or visionary preachers, by the name of Paine. He visited a camp-meeting held near Spring-field. He had no proper credentials to preach, and yet he professed to be commissioned from heaven to convert the World, whites,
Indians, and all. He wanted to preach at my campmeeting, but I would not permit him to occupy the
stand. He called off the loose crowd some distance
into the woods, gave us a terrible tongue-lashing,
and then departed north to preach to the Indians. In
the meantime the Black Hawk Indian war had
broken out, and they were killing our people on the
outskirts of the settlements fearfully. This Paine
had gotten up somewhere this side of Chicago, and
wanted to come down the country toward the old
mission. He was admonished not to venture, and was

284 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

assured the Indians would kill him, but he was 90
visionary that he said he was not afraid to go alone,
right in among them, for the Lord would protect him,
and the Indians would not hurt a hair of his head.
He, in despite of every warning, started alone,
through a long prairie. The Indians were waylaying
the trail, and as he drew near a point of timber they
shot and killed him, and then cut oif his head; after
scalping it, they placed it on a pole, and stuck the pole
erect in the ground. They then took his horse and
riding apparatus, clothes, etc. The next day, as a

.company of men passed, they saw Paine's head sticking on a pole, and his body greatly mangled by the
wolves; and this was an end of his commission to
convert the world, Indians and all. "As the fool dieth,
so died he."

In the fall of 1827, Sept. 20th, our conference was
holden in Mount Carmel, and I was continued on the
Illinois District, and the name of Mississippi Circuit
changed to Apple Creek Circuit. At the Mount
Carmel Conference we elected our delegates that sat
111 Pittsburgh, May 1st, 1828. This was our fifth delegated General Conference, and the first we ever had
in the West, this side of the mountains.

In the month of April Brother Dew, Brother
Thompson, and myself, met at St. Louis, to take pas~
sage on board a steamboat to the General Conference
in Pittsburgh. We had never been on board a steamboat before, at least I never bad. They were then a
new thing among us, so we took passage on board
the " Velocepede," Mr. Ray captain. Before we went
aboard, Brothers Dew and Thompson, with the kindest feelings imaginable, thought it their duty to cantion me to be very quiet, for these steamboat fellows,
passengers and all, were desperadoes. They knew]

rnrnn CABTWBIGHT. 285

was outspoken, loved everybody and feared nobody.

They were afraid I would get into some difliculty
with somebody. I thanked them very kindly for
their special care over me. "But," said I, " brethren,
take care of yourselves; I think I know how to behave myself, and make others behave themselves, if
need be." ~

When we got aboard we had a crowded cabin, a
mixed multitude; some Deists, some Atheists, some
Universalists, a great many profane swearers, drunkards, gamblers, iiddlers, and dancers. We dropped
down to the barrack, below St. Louis, and there came
aboard eight or ten United States omcers, and we had
a jolly set, I assure you. They drank, fiddled, danced,
swore, played cards, men and women too. I walked
about, said nothing, but plainly saw we were in a bad
snap, but there was no way to help ourselves. Brother
Thompson came to me and said, " Lord have mercy
on me; what shall we do 3" ,

" Go to your berth," said I, "and stay there
quietly."

" N 0," said he; " I'll reprove them."

" Now, brother," said I, " do not cast your pearls
before swine."

"Well," said he, "I won't stay in the cabin; I'll
go on deck."

Up he started, and when he got there, behold, they
were playing cards from one end of the deck to the
other. Back he came and said, " What shall I do?
I cannot stand it."

" Well," said I, " Brother Thompson, be quiet and
behave yourself; you have no way to remedy your
condition, unless you jump overboard and swim to

shore."

So things went on several days and nights. At the

286 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

mouth of the Ohio there came aboard a Captain
Waters. He had a new iiddle and a pack of cards.
He was a professed infidel. Card playing was renewed all over the cabin. The captain of the boat
was as fond of drinking and card playing as any of
them. There was a lieutenant of the regular army
on board, and although he was very wicked, yet he

had been raised by religious parents. His wife, as‘

he told me, was a good Christian. In walking the
guard this lieutenant, whose name was Barker, and
myself fell into conversation, and, being by ourselves,
I took occasion to remonstrate with him on the subject of his profanity. He readily admitted it was
Wrong, and said, "I have been better taught. But
0," said he, " the demoralizing life of a soldier!"
There was also a Major Biddle on board, a ‘pro:
fessed infidel, but gentlemanly in his manners; he
afterward fell in a duel, in or near St. Louis. I got
a ‘chance to talk to him in private, and alone; I remonstrated against his profanity; he agreed with me
in all I said. In this way, I got to talk to many of
them, and they mostly ceased to swear profanely in
my presence. Presently, they gathered around the
table, and commenced playing cards; I walked carelessly up, and looked on. Lieutenant Barker and Cap, tain Waters looked up at me; I knew they felt reproved. Said one of them to me: " We are not blacklegs; we are not playing for money, but just to kill
time." I affected to be profoundly ignorant of what
they were doing, and asked them what those little
spotted things were. Mr. Barker said,

"Sit down here, and I will show you what we are
doing, and how we do it."

" N o, no," said I, "my friends; I am afraid it is all
wrong." paras cuvrwnxenr. 287

They insisted there was no harm in it at all.

" Well," said I, " gentlemen, if you are just playing
for fun, or to kill time, would it not be much better
to drop all such foolishness, and let us talk on some
topic to inform each other? then we could all be
edified. As it is, a few of you enjoy all the pleasure,
if, indeed, there is any in it; while the rest of us, who
have no taste for such amusements, are not at all
benefited. Come, lay aside those little spotted papers,
that are only calculated to please children of a larger
size, and let us talk on History, Philosophy, or Astronomy; then we can all enjoy it, and be greatly benefited." . '

Captain Waters said: "Sir, if you will debate with
me on the Christian religion, we will quit all our
cards, iiddles, and dances." .

" I will do it with pleasure, captain," said I. "I
have only one objection to debate with you. You are
in the habit, I see, of swearing profanely, and using
oaths, and I can't swear back at you; and I fear, a
debate, mixed up with profane oaths, would be unprofitable."

"Well, sir," said he, "if you will debate with me
on that subject, I will pledge you my word and
honor that I will not swear a single oath."

" Very well, sir," said I; " on that condition, I
will debate with you." By this time there were
gathered around us a large crowd.

" Well," said Lieutenant Barker, " take notice of
the terms on which this debate is to be conducted."
Said he, "Now, gentlemen, draw near, and take
your seats, and listen to the arguments; and by the
consent of the two belligerent gentlemen, I will keep
order." ~

We both agreed to his proposition. The captain

288 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

opened the discussion by a great iiourish of trumpets,
expressing his great happiness at having one more
opportunity of vindicating the religion of reason and
nature, in opposition to the religion of a bastard. To
all of these flourishes, I simply replied, that the
Christian religion was of age, and could speak for
itself; and that I felt proud of an opportunity to
show that inndelity was born out of holy wedlock;
and, therefore, in the strictest sense, was a bastard,
and that. I thought it ill became the advocate of a
notorious illegitimate to heap any reproaches on Christ.
These exordiums had one good effect; they iixed and
riveted the attention of almost all the passengers, the
captain of the boat, ladies and all. My opponent
then proceeded to lay down his premises, and draw
his conclusions. When his twenty minutes expired,
I replied; and in my reply, quoted a passage of
Scripture. _

" Hold, sir," said my opponent, " I don't allow a
book of fables and lies to be brought in; nothing shall
be admitted here but honorable testimony."

"Very Well, sir," said I; " the Bible shall be dispensed with altogether as evidence; and then I feel
confident I can overturn your system on testimony
drawn from the book of nature ;" and proceeded in
the argument.

In his second replication, he quoted Tom Paine as
evidence.

" Hold, sir," said I; " such a degraded witness as
Tom Paine can't be admitted as testimony in this debate."

My opponent flew into a vio' ent passion, and swore
profanely, that God Almighty never made a purer
and more honorable man than Tom Paine. As he

belched forth these horrid oaths, I took him by the

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 289

chin with my hand, and moved his jaws together, and
made his- teeth rattle together at a mighty rate. He
rose to his feet, so did I. He drew his fist, and swore
he would smite me to the floor. Lieutenant Barker
sprang in between us, saying,

" Cartwright, stand back; you can beat him in
argument, and I can whip him; and, if_ there is any
fighting to be done, I am his man, from the point of a
needle to the mouth of a cannon; for he is no gentleman, as he pledged his word and honor that he would
not swear; and he has broken his word and forfeited
his honor."

Well, I had then to fly in between them, to prevent

. a bloody fight, for they both drew deadly weapons.

Finally, this ended the argument. My valorous captain made concessions, and all became pacified. From
this out, Barker was my fast friend, and would have
fought for me at any time; and my infidel, Captain
Waters, became very friendly to me; and when we
landed in the night at Louisville, he insisted that I
should go home with him and partake of his very
best hospitalities. L ,

But, to return a little to my narrative, the whole
company that witnessed the encounter with ‘my infidel captain were interested in my favor. Our boat
was old and crazy, and we made but little speed;
consequently, we were detained on the river over
Sunday. Early on Sabbath morning, the passengers
formed themselves into a kind of committee of the
whole, and appointed a special committee to wait on
me, and invite me to preach to them that day on the
boat. Lieutenant Barker was the committee. He
came to me, and presented the request. I said,

" Lieutenant, I never traveled on a steamboat before,

and it will be a very awkward affair for me to preach
19

\

390 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

on the boat; and, besides, I don't know that the captain would like such an arrangement: and the passengers will drink, and perhaps gamble, and be disorderly; and every man on a steamboat is a free man,
and will do pretty much as he pleases, and will not
be reproved."

Said the lieutenant, " I have consulted the captain
of the boat, and he is willing, and pledges himself to
keep good order. And now, sir," said he, " we have

annoyed you and your fellow-clergymen all the week,

and I pledge you my word, all shall be orderly, and
you shall enjoy your religious privileges on Sunday
undisturbed, and you must preach to us. We need it,

‘and the company will not be satisfied if you don't
comply.", I gave my consent, and we fixed on the following
times for three sermons: One immediately after the
table was cleared off after breakfast, one after dinner,
and one after supper. I led the way, taking the
morning hour. The cabin was seated in good order,
the deck passengers were invited down. We had a
very orderly, well_-behaved congregation. Brother
Dew preached in the afternoon, and Brother Thompson at night, and I rarely ever spent a more orderly
Sabbath anywhere within the walls of a church.
From this out we had no more drunkenness, profane swearing, or card playing. What good was
done, if any, the judgment day will alone declare.
I cannot close this sketch and do justice to my feelings without saying a few things more.

After the adjournment of the General Conference,
on our return trip home, the river had fallen very
much. VVe could not pass over the falls, and the

canal was not finished around them. Of course we
had. to land and reship at the foot of the falls. The

PETER OARTWRIGHT. 291

Maryland, a good steamboat, lay here waiting for
passengers. When I entered this boat, almost the
drst man I met was Lieutenant Barker, Who, when
he recognized me, sprang forward and seized me
by the hand, and said, " O, is this Mr. Cartwright?"
and really seemed as glad to see me as if I had been
his own brother. He had been on East, and was returning with his wife to some of the Western military
posts.
" ow, sir," said he, " I told you I had a good
little Christian woman for my Wife. She is in the
ladies' cabin. I have talked to her of you a thousand times. Come, you must go right in with me,
and I will introduce her to you. I know she will
be glad to see and form an acquaintance with you."

I Went, and was introduced to this, as I believe,
Christian lady. We had a number of preachers on
board, returning delegates from the General Conference, and we had preaching almost every day and
night from that to St. Louis, for we had almost entire
command of the boat.

292 AUTOBIOGRAPHY 0!‘

‘CHAPTER XX.
METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH IN CANADA.

IN the fall of 1828 our conference sat in Madison,
Indiana, October 9th. This was the only annual conference that I ever missed attending in fifty years.
My wife was sorely afflicted, and was supposed to be
at the gates of death, so that I did not think it my
duty to leave her, though a kind Providence spared
her to me a little longer, and she still lives. I was
reappointed to the Illinois District. The Oneida
Annual Conference was formed at the General Conference in May, 1828. This made nine annual conferences east, and eight West of the mountains. They
had a membership in the nine Eastern conferences
of 270,210. In the East there Were of traveling preachers 984. We had in the West, of traveling
preachers, 519. Of members the West had 150,894.
Total number of members, 421,104; of traveling
preachers, 1,503.

The New-Hampshire and Vermont Conference

was formed in the interim, or between the General

Conferences of 1828 and 1832. It will also be remembered that Canada had existed as a separate
annual conference, and was in union, as a conference,
with the Methodist Episcopal Church in these United
States, and Was regularly supplied with American
preachers, and superintended by our American bishops. Being under the British laws, that established
the Catholic Church in Lower Canada, and the Church

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 293

of England in Upper Canada, our people, members,
and preachers labored_under many civil disabilities.
They thought, under all the circumstances, that it
would be better to be separated from the Methodist
Episcopal Church in these United States, and organized
into a distinct Methodist Episcopal Church in Canada ;
elect from among themselves a bishop, that should
be resident among them; and thereby avoid many of
those disabilities that had fallen so heavily upon
them, in consequence of being under the jurisdiction
of American bishops. Accordingly, they petitioned
the General Conference of 1828, at Pittsburgh, to set
them off as a separate and distinct Church; but, after
careful consideration and investigation, the General
Conference, with great unanimity, resolved, that they
were not vested with any constitutional povver to
divide the Methodist Episcopal Church; and, therefore, declined granting them their request; but said,
if they really thought their civil disabilities were a
burden too grievous to be borne, they would throw
no difficulties in their way, but leave them to make
their own choice, whether they would remain as an
integral part of the Methodist Episcopal Church in
the United States, or organize themselves into a separate Church. They choose the latter first, and then
merged themselves into the great Wesleyan connexion of England.

In this organization of the Canada Methodist Episcopal Church many false statements have been made,
alleging, that the General Conference of 1828, at
Pittsburgh, did divide the Church. But be it distinctly remembered, that no ofiicial act of that General
Conference can be produced to establish the truth of
this assertion; so far from it, that directly the contrary is the fact in this case; and generally, those who

294 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

amrm and publish this unreasonable falsehood, know
that these statements are at war with truth, and they
only resort to this subterfuge in order to justify the
Southern disorganized secession from the Methodist
Episcopal Church in 1844-45, and thereby claim
another division of the Methodist Episcopal Church
by the General Conference of 1844.

The organization of all Christian Churches is the
voluntary association of individuals, under the accredited supervision of a Divinely-appointed ministry
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and not a ministerial act
separate and apart from the voluntary choice of the
individual consent of the members that compose that
Church. The ministerial act, asserted and maintained,
in organizing a Church, independent of the choice of
the individuals that compose that Church, is clearly
" lording it over God's heritage," and is a fearful feature of popery. And that this is the fact, in reference
to the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, is as clear
as a sunbeam; for there are thousands in the pale of
that Church that are not there by choice, but of
necessity of some kind. And there are many that are
greatly entangled with slavery; so much so, that if it
had been left to their choice, they would have clung to
the Methodist Episcopal Church with a dying grasp.
And there are thousands, if they could obtain the ministers of their choice, who would speedily return to the
bosom of the Church, and hail with delight the privilege of being united again to their spiritual mother.

How wicked it must be for those ministers of the
Church, South, to fabricate every kind of story, to
hedge up the way of our ministers, who, from the
purest and most benevolent feelings, go into the
slave states, simply to gather the poor destitute
rnembprs of our Church, as amatter of benevolent duty

rnrnn canrwnxenr. 2'95‘

Ihey cry, " Church North," " Abo1itionisn1,"when they
know that most of our preachers- are not abolitionists, ‘
but occupy the very ground our venerable fathers
and founders occupied before they were born. They
as good as murdered the lamented Kelly, who died
from the abuse he received from the blood-stained
hands of his persecutors, urged on by those very proslavery pretended ministers. Many of them greatly
rejoice, and triumph over, having gained the Church
suits by the unholy, not to say bribed judges. Mark
ye! the blighting curse of God will follow these ungodly and unjust gains; and the time will come, when
the visible disapprobation of a just and holy God will
be manifest to all men.

There is one circumstance that befell me at the
General Conference at Pittsburgh in 1828, that I wish
briefly to state; but, for the sake of honorable feelings,
I must be sparing of names. Brother Waterman,
who was considerably radicalized, had the duty assigned him of billeting out the preachers among the
families that had agreed to take care of them during‘
the General Conference. When I arrived in Pittsburgh I went to Brother Waterman to know where I
was to stay, and he gave me a ticket to a gentleman's house in Alleghany Town; he was nominally a
ruffle-shirted Methodist; he was rich, and abounded
in almost all the good things of this world. His lady
was a very genteel, fine, fashionable woman, but a
stiff-starched Presbyterian; so I was told. One of the
bishops was stationed here, and two D.D.s, both
preachers. I, of‘ course, very confidently made my

way to this gent1eman's house. As I approached the ~_

dwelling I cast -my eye upward, and through a window I saw the bishop and another preacher sitting
in an upper  When I reached the portico the

296 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

gentleman met me at the. entrance. Addressing 
I said: ~

" Does Colonel —— live here ?"

" Yes, sir."

" Brother Waterman informed me, as one of the
delegates to the General Conference, that I was to
board with you during the Conference; my name is
Peter Cartwright ; I hail from Illinois." a

" Yes, sir," said he, seriously; " we had intended
to take four of the preachers, but my wife thinks she
can't take but two, and Bishop —— and Dr. are
here already, and We can't accommodate you."

I felt a little. curious, but so foolish was I, that I
hastily concluded that the thing was a trick, played
off to plague me. He never invited me in.

" Well," said I, "I must see the bishop anyhow,

I

and I reckon you'll let me stay ;" so in I went. After .

entering,

" Please, sir," said I, " direct me to the bishop's
room." He did so, and up I went, and ushered myself
into his magisterial presence. After the accustomed
salutations, which I thought came from the bishop
with unusual coolness, I said to him:

"And is it so that I am not to stay here alter
Brother Waterman has sent me ?" ~ .

"Too true, too true," said he; "the lady of the
house is not a Methodist, and says she is not 
to take but two."

The reader may be sure I began to feel bad at a
mighty rate; the bishop seated himself, and began to
write, looking dry, sour, and cool, but paid no further attention to me. I took my hat, and started
down stairs in a mighty hurry, gathered my saddlebags, and started oil‘. Just as I mounted the steps
leaving his ornamented lot, the landlord hailed‘ me,'

rrurmz GABTWBIGHT. 297

and requested me to stop. He came near, and in a cold,
stiff manner, informed me that his wife had concluded that I might stay, and invited me to return.

"No, sir," said I, "it is too late; I can't, under the
circumstances, return; I have money enough to pay
my way; and I had rather pay my way than to be
treated as I have been."

" But," said the gentleman, " you must not leave
my house in this way; it will be a great reproach to
me and my family."

"Yes, sir," said I, " you ought to have thought of
that sooner." j .

" Well," he asked, " where are you going 3"

- " To a tavern," said I, "if I can find an orderly
one."

So on I went. After proceeding some distance I
saw a tavern sign, and went in, and after looking
around a little, I said to the tavern keeper:

»" Can I board with you for a month, and be accommodated with a private room 3"

He said I could.

. " Do you keep an orderly house, or shall I be
annoyed by drunkards and gamblers 3"

"My house, sir," said he, "is kept orderly; you
shall not be annoyed by any rude company whatever.
Be seated, sir," said he; " you shall have a room fitted

A up directly. I judge," said he, "you are one of the

delegates to the General Conference."
" Yes, sir, I am," was my reply.
A . Said he, " Mr. Waterman was to have sent me two
preachers, but none have come, unless you are one
amigned me."
« " No, sir, I am not sent; I come on my own responsibility." A
Said he, "I am a member of no Church, but my

Q auremoennrnr or

wife is a Methodist, and she will be glad for you to
stay with us." ~

I soon began to feel that I had got into another atmosphere. I fared well, was treated kindly, and had
nothing to pay.

Shortly after I had settled down, the landlord of
my first place sought me out, and entreated me to
return to'his house. He said his wife had fitted up a
comfortable room, and desired me to return.

" N o, sir," said I, "I shall not do it; I am not dependent on you or yours at all, and I am well provided for here, and I mean to stay."

He went home, and sent to invite me
back again. The messenger said I ought to return;
that the family were very much mortilied at the circumstance that had taken place. I told him that I
felt under no obligations to him or them; that they
had treated me very cavalierly, and I should abide
my determination not to return; but by invitation I
visited them, and stayed with them some; but I think
I effectually humbled their pride for once.

I was at this iinst place several evenings; but everything seemed to come wrong. The bishop seemed
as cold as an icicle, and as stiff in his manners as if

he had been the autocrat of all the Russias. I felt
that there was not the least congeniality in them, and
that I was alone in such company. The time of evening devotions came on. The master of ceremonies
asked me to lead the devotions; but the moment
I was requested to do so, it appeared to me that thick
darkness fell on me, and if ever I felt the power of
the devil physically and mentally, it was just then.
I turned almost blind, literally blind, and the great
drops of sweat rolled off my face. I was so blind I
feared I could not see to read a chapter, hence 

 

PETER canrwnrenr. 299

turned to the first Psalm, which I could, and had,
repeated often by memory; but I found my memory
as defective as my sight, and surely, memory, sight,
and all gone, I made a very stammering out at repeating the first psalm; but I stammered over it in some
sort. My voice was usually clear in those days,
and I could sing tolerablyy well. I rose and commenced singing a verse of one of our familiar hymns,
but not a soul in the crowd, by name or nature,
would sing with me. I stopped short, and kneeled
down to pray, but in all my life I was never in a
worse plight to pray but once, and that was the first
time my leader called on me to pray in public after
I had professed religion. I then thought my head
was as large as a house, and I now thought I
had no head at all. It seemed to me that the
devil was veritably present, and all around, and in
everybody and everything. I stammered over a
few incoherent sentences, and closed by saying
" Amen." And you may rely on it, while in this
wretched state of feeling, and before I was delivered
from the hour and power of temptation, I felt as
though the devil reigned triumphant, and had a bill
of sale of us all. The next day, when the General
Conference adjourned, at noon, the presiding bishop
called on me to close by prayer. 0, how awful I felt I
I fell on my knees and uttered only a few words, and
said "Amen " before one half of the preachers had
fairly got on their knees. They looked round and
scufiled up,_and looked queer; and I assure you I have
no language at my command by which I could describe my feelings, for I felt "unutterable woe." This
state of bad feelings lasted during a whole week.
One night I heard of a prayer-meeting near by
where I lodged. I determined to go; and it pleased

800 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

God that night to roll back the clouds that hai covered me in such thick darkness. I was very happy, and
the next evening hastened to the house where I
had made such a dreadful out in reading, singing, and
praying. It so happened that when the family got
ready for prayer, and sent up for the preachers to
come down, they were all very much engaged in fin»
ishing an interesting report. The bishop said he could
not go, and that he wished some one would go and
hold prayer with the family, and let the rest stay. I
spoke up and said, " Let me go, for I feel so much
better than I did when I tried to pray with them before, I want to go and try again." He bade me go.
I went, took the book, read a chapter readily, sung
a hymn clearly, knelt and prayed with more than my
accustomed liberty, and got happy. The family wept.
We talked, wept, and sung together, and I felt as
independent of the devil and a stiff bishop as if there
were no such beings in the world.

When the General Conference adjourned, and I
had started for the steamboat, the landlady that I
thought was so stiff, formal, and proud, followed me to
the boat, and sent by me a present of a silk dress to
my wife. Why this dispensation of darkness should
be permitted to fall on me I cannot tell, but there is
no doubt on my mind there was a special Providence in it, if I only understood the matter; but I
leave all to the revelations of the great day of judgment. " The Lord reigneth."

At our Conference, in the fall of 1828, Galena
Charge was added to the Illinois District} so that my
district reached nearly from the mouth of the Ohio
River to Galena, the extreme northwest corner of the
state, altogether six hundred miles long. This was a

wemendous field of travel and labor. Around this

PETER OARTWRIGHT. 301

district I had_ to travel four times in the year, and I
had many rapid streams to cross, mostly without
bridges or ferry-boats. Many of these streams, when
they were swollen, and I had to cross them to get to
my quarterly meetings, I would strike for some point
of timber, and traverse up and down the stream until
I could find a drift or a tree fallen across. I would
then dismount, strip myself and horse, carry my
clothes and riding apparatus across on the fallen tree
or drift, and then return and mount my horse, plunge
in and swim over, dress, saddle my horse, and go on
my way, from point to point of timber, without roads.
Often night would overtake me in some lonesome,
solitary grove. I would hunt out some suitable place,
strike fire, for I always went prepared with flint, steel,
and spunk, make as good a fire as circumstances called
for, tie up or hopple out my horse, and there spend
the night. Sometimes, in traveling from point to
point of timber, darkness would come upon me befire I could reach, by miles, the woods, and it being
so dark that I could not see the trees I was aiming for,
I would dismount and hold my horse by the bridle till
returning light, then mount my horse, and pursue my
journey. A
The northern part of my district was newly settled;
and where it was settled at all, a few scattering cabins, with families in them, were all that could he looked for or expected in a vast region of the north end
of my district; and I assure my readers that when I
came upon one of these tenanted cabins, in those long

' and lonesome trips, it was a great treat, and I have

felt as truly thankful. to God to take shelter in one of
those little shanties and get the privilege of a nightis

lodging, as I have, under other circumstances,‘ been
when I have lodged in a fine house, with all the com$ AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

forts of life around me. I recollect, in one of my
northern trips, I had a very large and uninhabited
prairie to cross; about midway across the prairie,
twenty miles from any house, I came to a deep and
turbid stream; twenty miles beyond was the point I
was aiming for that day. The stream looked ugly and
forbidding. I was mounted on a fine large horse, and
I knew him to be an excellent swimmer. I hesitated
for a moment. To retrace my steps I could not consent to, and if I advanced, a swim, on my horse, wu
to be performed, no timber being in sight. I got
down, readjusted my saddle, girded it tolerably 
tied my overcoat on behind, put my watch and pocket
papers in my saddle-bags, and then tied them around
my neck, letting the ends rest on my shoulders, and
said, "N ow, Buck," (that was the name of my horae,)
" carry me safe to the other bank." In we went; he
swam over easily, and rose on the opposite bank safely.
I readjusted my affairs, and went on my way rejoicing, and was not wet but a trifle. Three times this
day I swam my horse across swollen streams, and
made the cabin I was aiming for. Here lived a kind
Methodist family, who gave me a hearty welcome;
gave me good meat and bread, and a strong cup of
coffee, and I was much happier than many of the
kings of the earth. I arrived safe at my quarterly
meeting. All the surrounding citizens had turned out,
twenty-seven in number. We had £ve conversions;
seven joined the Church; and we were ueanly all
happy together.

In one of those northern trips I was earnestly solicited to cross the Mississippi and preach to the few
new settlers near what is now called Burlington
City, on the west of the ,Father of Waters. My sonin-law, Wm. D. B. Trotter, perhaps was the first

PETER on-arwaxenr. 808

traveling‘ preacher who broke ground in the Iowa

State, and I followed a short time aherward. I had
sent them an appointment to hold a two daysi meeting, just back of where Burlington City stands. Then
there were only a few cabins in the place; now it is a
growing city, containing, perhaps, ten thousand souls.

When I went to my appointment, although there
was but a scattered population, yet when they came
out to meeting the cabins were so small that there
was not one in the whole settlement which would
hold the people. We repaired to the grove, and
hastily prepared seats. Years before this time an
old tree.had fallen down across a small sapling and
bent it near the earth. The sapling was not killed,
and the top of it shot up straight beside the tree that
had fallen on it, and it had grown for years in
this condition. The old tree had been cut off, and
they scalped the bark off of that part of the sapling
that lay parallel with the ground. They drove a
stake down, and nailed a board to it, and the top of
the sapling that grew erect, and this was my handboard, and I stood on that part of the sapling that
lay a near and level with the ground. This was my
pulpit, from which I declared the unsearchable

riches of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and we had a

good meeting. .

On the 23d of August, 1828, one of our beloved
bishops, Enoch George, fell a victim to death. He
had been an itinerant preacher thirty-eight years, and
had honorably discharged the duties of a bishop in
the Methodist Episcopal Church for twelve years.
One has said of him, " Bishop George was a man of
deep piety, of great simplicity of manners, a very pathetic, powerful, and successful preacher; greatly bep loved in life, and very extensively lamented in death."

I04 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

The Illinois Conference met this fall (September
18th, 1829) at Edwardsville. Our country was rapidly filling up, our work constantly enlarging, and
Bishop Roberts, at conference in Vincennes, Septem
ber 30th, 1830, found it necessary to divide the circuits, and multiply the presiding-elder districts. The
following new districts were formed in the bounds of
the Illinois Conference, namely: the Illinois District
was divided into two: the Kaskaskia and Sangamon
Districts. The Kaskaskia District embraced the following appointments: Kaskaskia, Brownsville, Jonesborough, Golconda, Mount Vernon, Shoal Creek,
and Shelbyville, in all seven. The Sangamon District
embraced the following appointments: Lebanon, Apple Creek, Atlas, Spoon River, Sangamon, Salt Creek,
Peoria, Fox River Mission, and Galena Mission, nine.
Samuel H; Thompson was appointed to the Kaskaskia District, and I was appointed to the Sangamon
District. This district still covered a large field of labor, embracing from opposite St. Louis to the north
ern limits of the state. ‘

Within the bounds of this district there lived a local
preacher, who was a small, very easy, good-natured,
pleasant man; he was believed to be also a very pious
man, and a good and useful preacher. His wife was
directly the reverse of almost everything that was
good, saving it was believed she was virtuous. She
was high-tempered, overbearing, quarrelsome, and a
violent opposer of religion. She would not 131: her husbandls clothes to go out to preach, and was 
he should ask a blessing at the table, or pray in the
family. And when he would attempt to pray, she
would not conform, but tear around and make all the
noise and disturbance in her power. She would
turn the chairs over while he was reading, singing,

rnrnn canrwnrenr. ‘<85

or praying, and if she could I not stop him any
other way, she would catch a cat and throw it in
his face while he was kneeling and trying to pray.
Poor little man! surely he was tormented ahnost to
desperation. He had invited several preachers home
with him to talk to her, and see if they could not
-mod erateher; but all to no purpose; she would curse
them to their face, and rage like a demon. He had
insisted on my going home with him several times,
-but I frankly confess I was afraid to trust myself. I
pitied him from my very heart, and so did everybody
else that was acquainted with his situation. But at
length I yielded to his importunities, and Went home
with him one evening, intending to stay all night.
After we arrived I saw in a minute that she was mad,
and the devil was in her as large as an alligator; and I
fixed my purpose, and determined on my course.
After supper he said. to her very kindly, " Come, wife,
stop your little aifairs, and let us have prayer." That
moment she boiled over, and said, "I will have none
of your praying about me." I spoke to her mildly, and
expostulated with her, and tried to reason; but no,
the further I Went, the more wrathful she became,
and she cursed me most bitterly. I then put on a
stern countenance, and said to her, "Madam, if you
were a wife of mine, I would break you of your bad
ways, or I would break your neck."
" The devil you Would!" said she. "Yes, you are
a pretty Christian, ainlt you?" And then such a volley of curses as she poured on me, was almost beyond
human endurance.
"Be still," said I; " we must and will have prayer."
But she declared We should not. " Now," said I to her, "if you do not be still, and

behave yourself, P11 put you out of doors." At this
20

806° AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

she clinched her nst, and swore she was one half
alligator, and the other half snapping-turtle, and that
it would take a better man than_I was to put her out.
It was asmall cabin we were in, and we were not far
from the door, which was then standing open. I caught
her by the arm, and swinging her round in a circle,
brought her right up to the door, and shoved her out.
She jumped up, tore her hair, _foamed; and such
swearing as she uttered, was seldom equaled, and
never. surpassed. The door, or shutter of, the door,
was very strongly made to keep out hostile Indians;
I shut it tight, barred it, and Went to prayer, and I
prayed as best I could, but I have no language at my
command to describe my feelings; at the same time,
I was determined to conquer, or die in the attempt.
While she was raging and foaming in the yard and

around the cabin, I started a spiritual song, and sung '

loud, to drown her voice as much as possible. The
five or six little children ran and squatted about and
crawled under the beds. Poor things, they -were
scared almost to death.

I sang on, and she roared and thundered on outside, till she became perfectly exhausted, and panted
for breath. At length, when she had spent her force,
she became calm and still, and then knocked at the
door, saying, " Mr. Cartwright, please let me in."

" Will you behave yourself if  let you in ?" said L

"O yes," said she, "I will ;" and throwing myself
on my guard, and perfectly self-possessed, I opened
the door, took her by the hand, led her in, and
seated her near the fireplace. She had roared and
foamed till she was in a high perspiration, and looked pale as death. After she took her seat, " 0," said

she, " what a fool I am!"
"Yes," said I, "about one of the biggest fools I

PETER cnnrwmenr. 807

‘ever saw in all my life. And now," said I, "you
have to repent for all this, or you must go to the devil
at last." She was silent. Said I, "Children, come
out here; your mother wonit hurt you now," and
turning to her husband, said, "Brother C., let us
pray again." We kneeled down, and both prayed.
She was as quiet as a lamb.

And now, gentle reader, although this was one of
the hardest cases I ever saw on this earth, I must
record it to the glory of Divine grace, I lived to see,
in less than six months after this frolic with the devil,
this woman soundly converted to God, and if there was
ever a changed mortal for the better, it was this said
woman. Her children, as they grew up, all, I believe,
obtained religion, and the family became a religious,
happy family,_and she was as bold in the cause of God
as she had been in the cause of the Wicked one.

I When I came to the County of Sangamon in 1824,
and rode the Sangamon Circuit in 1825-26, Springfield, our present seat of government for the state,
was a very small village. Even the county seat. was
not located at it, and for several years there was no
regular society of any denomination organized there
save the Methodist. We had a respectable society in
point of numbers and religious moral character, but
they were generally very poor. There was no meeting-house or , church in the place. , We preached in
private houses almost altogether for several years.

‘The iirst Presbyterian minister who came to the

town, that I have any recollection of, was by the
name of . He was a very well educated man,
and had regularly studied theology in some of the
Eastern states, where they manufacture young preachers like they do lettuce in hot-houses. He brought
with him a number of old manuscript sermons, and

i 808 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

read them to the people; but as to common sense, he
had very little, and he was almost totally ignorant of
the manners and usages of the world, especially this
new Western world; yet he came here to evangelize
and Christianize us poor heathen. He did not meet
with much encouragement, but he certainly was a
pious, good man, much devoted to prayer. He came
to my appointments, and we became acquainted.
He, in part, traveled with me round my circuit,
anxious to get acquainted with the people, and
preach to them. He soon saw and felt that he had
no adaptation to the country or people. I told him
he must quit reading his old manuscript sermons, and
learn to speak extemporaneously; that the Western
people were born and reared in hard times, and were
an out-spoken and oif-hand people; that if he did not
adopt this manner of preaching, the Methodists would
set the whole Western world on fire before he would
light his match. He tried it a while, but became discouraged, and leii: for parts unknown.

Shortly after this others. came in, but still there
was no church in the town of Springfield to worship
in for any denomination. The Methodists were poor,
the Presbyterians few, and not very wealthy. At
length the citizens put up a small school-house, which
was appropriated to religious purposes on the Sabbath,
but it was often attended with dimculty, as different
ministers of different denominations would make their
appointments in this little school-house, and their
appointments would often come together and clash.
This was attended with no good results, and at length
a proposition was made for the Methodists ‘and Presbyterians to unite and build a church between them,
and dehne each denominationls time of occupancy
and legal rights in the church till such time as one

PETER oanrwrusmr. 309

or the other could be able to build separately, and
then sell out to the other denomination. A subscription was set on foot, and five or six hundred dollars
subscribed.

Thinking all was right, I left to iill my appointments; but when the deed to this property was to be
made, it was settled on Presbyterian trustees, and the
Methodists only occupied it by grace. There was a
very honest old gentleman, who was an intelligent
lawyer, that had not subscribed anything, but intended to; but he wanted equal rights and privileges
secured to the Methodists, though he himself was a
Universalist. He saw how things were driving, and
sent for me. I went, and, on examination, found that
the agreement between the two denominations was
violated in the deed. I expostulated with them, but
all in vain ; they persisted. I then went, and immediately drew up a subscription to build a Methodist
church, and subscribed seventy-iive dollars. My old
honest lawyer told me he would either give two lots
in the new town, above where the most of the town
then was, or he would give iifty dollars. I took the
two lots, on which the Methodist church now stands.

The Presbyterians went on and built the little
brick shanty that stands near where the iirst Presbyterian church now stands, and in one day I obtained
about six hundred dollars, and the Methodists built
their old frame meeting-house that stood as a monu.ment of their covetousness for many years, and, indeed,
till lately, when they saw their folly, and now have
a iine church. But still they ought to have at least
two more good churches in a city containing ten
thousand souls, and constantly increasing in population, and, undoubtedly, is destined to become a large
inland city, and, from its central position and railroad

f§~

310 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF

facilities, will, in a very few years, contain fifty thousand inhabitants. .

The securing those two lots at an early day in
Springfield, clearly shows the sound policy of taking
early measures in every new country, city, town, village, and prospectively strong settlement, to secure
lots for churches and parsonages when they can be
obtained at a nominal price, and often as a donation.
Our people and preachers are often too negligent in
this very thing. They wait till lots rise in value, and
sometimes have to give for a suitable one, on which
to build a church or parsonage, as much as would
erect a decent house in which to worship God. The
two lots above named were, by their owner, valued
at fifty dollars. They would now sell, I suppose, for
seven or eight thousand dollars. They will soon be
in the heart of the city, and are as beautiful lots, for
church purposes, as are to be found in the city.

A few years ago our beloved Bishop J anes, in a
visit to Springfield, saw clearly its rapid growth, and
the slowness of the members of the Church in that
place in regard to church extensions, and he advised,
and organized, through the mission committee, the
establishment of a mission in Springfield. But such
was the short-sighted policy of many of the members
of the Church belonging to the old charge, that they
directly and indirectly opposed the establishment of
this mission. But, through the strong and persevering
efforts of the missionaries and the superintendent of
the mission, we succeeded in procuring a lot and
erecting a neat little mission church at a cost of
something like twenty-seven hundred dollars.

When the church was finished, it was in debt some
four hundred dollars, and instead of the members of
the old charge, and the mission charge, making an

PETER OARTWRIGHT. 811

effort to pay this indebtedness, they suffered the
church to be sold for less than three hundred dollars;
and even the members of the old charge devised a
plan to buy it in, and diverted it from its original
purpose of a church, to an academy, for the beneiit
of the old charge; and, consequently, our mission was
blown out, our labor, for from two to four years, lost,
and, inopen violation of the provisions of the Discipline
of -the Church, the mission property was converted
from Church to academical purposes; and a house
and lot, that had cost near three thousand dollars,
was thus sacriiiced for a debt of less than three hundred dollars. This very transaction will stand out to
future generations as evidence of the folly and stupidity of the members of the Methodist Church in
Springiield, and will bar our approach to the citizens
for years to come, when we desire to solicit aid to
erect houses of worship in our metropolis.
Somewhere about this time, in 1829-30, the celebrated camp-meeting, took place in Sangamon County
and Circuit; and, as I suppose, out of incidents that then
occurred was concocted that wonderful story about
my fight with Mike Fink, which has no foundation in

fact. We had this year two fine camp-meetings on ~

the same ground, a few weeks apart; at the iirst, it
was thought, over _one hundred professed religion,
and most of them joined the Methodist Church. At
the second camp-meeting, over seventy joined the
Church. Our encampment was large, and well seated; and we erected a large shed, that would, it was
supposed, shelter a thousand people. The story to
which I have alluded was published in "The National
Magazine," and Brother Finleyis Autobiography. It
originated, I believe, in a paper, published in NewYork, called " The Sunday Times ;" from this paper,

818 AUTOBIOGRAPHY -or-.

it has been republished almost all round the Union.
I would not care about the publication of this story
by the secular press, if it had not found its way into
our religious papers. One of the editors of one of our
religious papers, who had published it, in reply to a
letter of mine complaining of the caricature, and
correcting some of the wrong statements, said, " It
was good enough for me; and that if I would not
publish a true history of my life, it was no matter if
others publisheda false one."

While I was on the Sangamon District, I rode one
day into Springfield, on some little business. My
horse had been an excellent racking pony, but now
had the stiff complaint. I called a few minutes in a
store, to get some little articles; I saw in the store
two young men and a young lady; they were strangers,
and we had no introduction whatever; they passed

out, and 011'. After I had transacted my little busi-—

ness in the store, I mounted my stiif pony, and
started for home. After riding nearly two miles, I
discovered ahead of me, a light, two-horse wagon,
with a good span of horses hitched to the wagon ; and
although it was covered, yet the cover was rolled up.

. It was warm weather, and _I saw in the wagon those

two young men and the young lady that I had seen
in the store. As I drew near them, they began to sing
one of our camp-meeting songs, and they appeared to
sing with great animation. Presently the young lady
began to shout, and said, " Glory to God! Glory to
God I" the driver cried out, " Amen! Glory to God!"

My first impressions were, that they had been
across the Sangamon River to a camp-meeting that I
knew was in progress there, and had obtained religion,
and were happy. As I drew a little nearer, the
young lady began to sing and shout again. The

PETER" GABTWBIGHT. 31.8

young man who was not driving fell down, and cried
aloud for mercy; the other two, shouting at the top
of their voices, cried out, "Glory to God! another
sinnefs down." Then they fell to exhorting the young
man that was down, saying, "Pray on, brother; pray
on, brother; you will soon get religion." Presently up
jumped the young man that was down, and shouted
aloud, saying, " God has blessed my soul. Halleluiah !
halleluiah! Glory to God!" '

Thinking all was right, I felt like riding up, and
joining in the songs of triumph and shouts of joy that
rose from these three happy persons; but as I neared
the wagon, I saw some glances of their eyes at each
other, and at me, that created a suspicion in my
mind that all was not right; and the thought occurred to me that they suspected or knew me to be
a preacher, and that they were carrying on in this
way, to make a mock of sacred things, and to fool me.
I checked my horse, and fell back, and rode slowly,
hopingthey would pass on, and that I should not be annoyed by them any more; but when I checked my
horse and went slow, they checked up and went slow
too, and the driver changed with the other young man ;
then they began again to sing and shout at a mighty
rate, and down fell the iirst driver, and up went a
new shout of " Glory to God! another sinnerls down.
Pray on, brother; pray on, brother; the Lord will bless

you," Presently up sprang the driver, saying, " Glory;
‘ to God! he has blessed me." And both the others

shouted, and said, "Another sinnerls converted, another
sinnefs converted. Halleluiah! Glory toGodl" Arush
of indignant feeling came all over me, and I thought
I would ride up and horsewhip both of these young
men; and if the woman had not been in company, I;
think I should have done so; but I forbore. It was a

314 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

vexatious encounter; if my horse had been iieet, as in
former days, I could have rode right 011', and left
them in their glory, but he was stiff, and when I
would fall back and go slow, they would check up ;and when I would spur my stiff pony, and try to get
ahead of them, they would crack the whip and keep
ahead of me; and thus they tormented me before, as
I thought, my time, and kept up a continual roar of
" Another sinnefs down! Another soulis converted!
Glory to God! Pray on, brother! Halleluiahl halleluiah! Glory to God!" till I thought it was more
than any good preacher ought to bear.

It would be hard for me to describe my feelings
just about this time. It seemed to me that I was
delivered over to be tormented by the devil and his
imps. Just at this moment I thought of a desperate‘
mndhole about a quarter of a mile ahead; it was a
long one, and dreadful deep mud, and many wagons
had stuck in it, and had to be prized out. Near the
center of this mndhole there was a place of mud
deeper than anywhere else. On the right stood a
stump about two feet high; all the teams had to be
driven as close to this stump as possible to avoid a
deep rut on the left, where many wagons had stuck;
I knew there was a small bridle way that wound
round through the brush to avoid the mud, and it
occurred to me that when we came near this muddy
place I would take the bridle way, and put my horse
at the top of his speed, and by this means get away
from these wretched tormentors, as I knew they could
not go fast through this long reach of mud. When
we came to the commencement of the mud I took
the bridle path, and put spurs and whip to my horse.
Seeing I was rapidly leaving them in the rear, the
driver cracked his whip, and put his horses at almost

PETER cnvrwnreur. 815‘

full speed, and such was their anxiety to keep up with me, to carry out their sport, that when they
came to this bad place they never saw the stump on
the right. The fore Wheel of the Wagon struck centrally on the stump, and as the wheel mounted the
stump, over Went the Wagon. Fearing it would turn
entirely over and catch them under, the two young

' men took a leap into the mud, and When they lighted

they sunk up to the middle. The young lady was
dressed in white, and as the Wagon Went over, she
sprang as far as she could, and lighted on all fours;
her hands sunk into the mud up to her armpits, her
mouth and the whole of her face immersed in the
muddy water, and she certainly would have strangled
if the young men had not relieved her. As they
helped her up and out, I had wheeled my horse to
see the fun. I rode up to the edge of the mud, stopped my horse, reared in my stirrups, and shouted at
the top of my voice,

"Glory to God! Glory to God! Halleluiah!
another sinneris down! Glory to God! Halleluiah I Glory! Halleluiah !"

If ever mortals felt mean, these youngsters did;
and well they might, for they had carried on all this
sport to make light of religion, and to insult a minister, a total stranger to them. But they contemned
religion, and hated the Methodists, especially Methodist preachers. ‘When I became tired of shouting over them, I said
to them:

" Now, you poor, dirty, mean sinners, take this as a.
just judgment of God upon you for your meanness,
and repent of your dreadful wickedness; and let
this be the last time that you attempt to insult a
preacher; for if you repeat your abominable sport

§.r

816 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

and persecutions, the next time God will serve you
worse, and the devil will get you." They felt so badly that they never uttered one
word of reply. Now I was very glad that I did not
horsewhip them, as I felt like doing; but that God had
avenged his own cause, and defended his own honor
without my doing it with carnal weapons; and I may
here be ‘permitted to say, at one of those prosperous
camp-meetings named in this chapter, I had the great
pleasure to see all three of these young *people converted to God. I took them into the Methodist
Church, and they went back to Ohio happy in God.
They were here on a visit among their relations from
that state, and went home with feelings very different
from those they possessed when they left.

There is another small incident connected with
these two prosperous camp-meetings before named.
There was a great and good work going on in our

congregation from time to time; and on Sunday‘

there were a great many from Springfield, and all
the surrotmding country. A‘ great many professors
of religion in other Churches professed to wish their
children converted, but still they could not trust them
at a Methodist meeting, especially a camp-meeting.
A great many of these young people attended the
camp-meetings, and on Sunday the awful displays of
Divine power were felt to the utmost verge of the
congregation. -When I closed my sermon, I invited
mourners to the altar, and there was a mighty shaking among the dry bones; many' came forward, and
among the rest there were many young ladies
whose parents were members of a sister Church;
two in particular of these young ladies came into
the altar. Their mother was present; and when she
heard her daughters were kneeling at the altar of

rsvrna canrwnrervr. 817

God, praying for mercy, she sent an elder of her
Church to bring them out. When he came to tell
them their mother had sent for them, they refused to
go. He then took hold of them, and said they must
go. I then took hold of him, and told him they should
not go, and that if that was his business, I wanted
him to leave the altar instantly. He left, and reported to their mother; and while we were kneeling
all round the altar, and praying for the mourners,
the mother in a great rage rushed in. When she
came, all were kneeling around, and there was no
place for her to get in to her ‘daughters. As I knelt
and was stooping down, talking, and encouraging the
mourners, this lady stepped on my shoulders, and
rushed right over my head. As, in a fearful rage,
she took hold of her daughters to take them out by
force, I took hold of her arm, and tried to reason
with her, but I might as well have reasoned with a
whirlwind. She said she would have them out at
the risk of her life. .

"They are my daughters," said she, " and they shall
come out."

Said I to her, "This is my altar and my meeting,
and I say, these girls shall not be taken out."

She seized hold of them again. I took hold of her,
and put her out of the altar, and kept her out. Both
of these young ladies professed religion, but they were
prevented by their mother from -joining the Methodists. She compelled them to join her Church,
sorely against their will. They married in their
mothers Church, but I fear they were hindered _,for
life, if not finally lost.

I have often thought of the thousands who have
been awakened and converted under Methodist preaching, but, from the prejudice of their husbands, wives,

818 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

parents, or children, and friends, have been influenced
to join another branch of the Church. What a fearful account will many have to give who, through prejudice or bigotry, have opposed their relatives or friends
in joining the Church of their choice ; if these souls are
lost, who will have to answer for it at the bar of God?
" Lord, we saw some casting out devils in thy name,
and we forbade them, because they followed not
us." " Forbid them not," was the reply of our Saviour; "for there is no man can do a miracle in my
name, and speak lightly of me." Let us be careful on
this subject, for the loss of a soul is a fearful consideration to all.

We had a camp-meeting in Morgan County, Sangamon District. While I was on this district the following remarkable providence occurred: There were
large congregations from time to time, many awakened
and converted to God, fifty joined the Church. C G.
W. Teas, now a traveling preacher in the Iowa Conference, made the fiftieth person that joined the
Church. We had worship for several days and nights.
On Monday, ust after we dismissed for dinner, there
was a very large limb of a tree that stood on the side
of the ground allotted for the ladies, which, without wind
or any other visible cause, broke loose and fell, with
a mighty crash, right in among the ladiesi seats; but as
the Lord would direct it, there was not a woman ‘or
child there when the limb fell. If. it had fallen at any
time while the congregation was collected, it must

have killed more than a dozen persons. Just in the _

south of Morgan, near Lynnville, we had another
camp-meeting, perhaps the same summer. In the
afternoon, at three oiclock, I put up a very good local
preacher to preach. He was not as interesting as some,
and the congregation became restless, especially the

PETER cum-wnixenr. 819

rowdies. I went out among them, and told them they
ought to hear the preacher.

"O," said they, "if it was you we would gladl

~ hear you."

" Boys," said I, " do you really want to hear me 9"

" Yes, we do," said they.

" Well," said I, "if you do, go and gather all those
inattentive groups, and come down in the grove, two
hundred yards south, and I will preach to you."

They collected two or three hundred. I mounted
an old log; they all seated themselves in a shade. I
preached to them about an hour, and not a soul

moved or misbehaved. In this way I matched the
rowdies for once. OH AUTQBIOGBAPHY or

CHAPTERXXI.

CAMP ROWDIE8.

IN the fall of 1831, our Conference was holden in
Indianapolis, Indiana, October 4th; Bishop Roberts
presided. At this Conference, we elected our delegates to the General Conference, which was to sit in
Philadelphia, May 1st. This was the fifth delegated

- General Conference to which I was elected, and, perhaps, it is the proper place to say, this was the only
General Conference that I ever missed attending, from
1816 to this date. My family were in great affliction,
which prevented my attendance. Brothers Andrew

and Emory were elected, and ordained bishops in the
Methodist Episcopal Church; and the Indiana Conference was formed, so that there were now twelve

annual Conferences East and South, and ten, West
and South; all the latter formed out of the old Western Conference. Our numbers in the West had risen
to 217,659. Our traveling preachers numbered 765.
The others, Eastern and Southern, had, in members,

-882,060; traveling preachers, 1,454. Total, _in round

numbers, 600,000. Of traveling preachers, 2,219.
The reader will see our increase in the old conferences in members, in four years, was 111,850; and
in the West, Was 66,775; total, 177,625. We had increased in traveling preachers, in the same length of
time, 716; this was a greater increase than all the
branches of the Protestant Christian Churches in the
Union could number; and surely, all the factories in

PETER GARTWRIGHT. 881

the Union that make preachers, did not, in the same
length of time, graduate as many preachers; and in
point of learning and real ability, our increase of
preachers will compare favorably with any of them.
As 1832 closed my three years on the Sangamon
District, I will relate an incident or two which occurred in Fulton County. We held a camp-meeting, at t

which good preparations were made; many attended,
and our prospects for an interesting meeting were
fair, and there was an increasing interest, But some
low and unprincipled fellows, in the adjoining village
of Canton, fitted out a man, who was perfectly bankrupt, and sent him down to set up a huckstefs shop,
with tobacco, segars, cakes, candies, pies, and almost
all kinds of ardent spirits. I went to him, and told
him he should not disturb us in vending those articles,
and that he must desist; he swore he would not, and
hurled defiance at me; I got a writ and an officer,
and took him; he employed a younglawyer to defend him; I prosecuted the suit, and the jury iined
him ten dollars and costs. On saying that he had
nothing, and was not worth a cent in the I world, the
court told him, he had to pay his fine or go to jail;
he said he must go to jail then, for he could not pay
his fine. There was a black-legged gang, that were
his chief customers, who swore, if we attempted to
put him in jail, which was about ten miles off, that
they would rescue him, and give those who attempted
to convey him there, a sound drubbing. The oiiicex
was scared, and hesitated ;' in the meantime, I ordered
out an execution, and levied on his whole grocery

He declared that these articles were not "his, but be

longed to other men. I said, I did not care a fig who
they belonged to, and ordered the oflicer to levy on

them, and I would indemnify him. When we had
‘.21

322 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

secured the grocery, and put it under guard, on
omcer still hesitated to take the criminal to  I
told him to summon me, and four other stout men that
I named, and I would insure the criminal a safe
lodgment in jail, or risk the consequences. This was
done, and we hoisted our prisoner on a horse, mounted our own horses, well armed with bludgeons, and
started on a merry jog. When we got about halfway,
I told the prisoner that he had better pay his line,
and not disgrace himself by lying in jail. No, he
swore he would not; so on we went. The rowdies
that were to waylay us and release the prisoner, never
appeared. When we got in sight of the town, in
which the jail was, the prisoner asked me very
seriously, if we really intended to put him jail. I
told him yes, certainly we did. "Well," said he, "I
canit go into jail ;" and then pulled out the money and
paid his fine and costs.

We returned to the encampment, and the rowdies
were in a mighty rage because they could get no
drink, for we had the groggery under guard. They
swore if we did not release it, they would break up
the camp-meeting. I told them to ride on, that we
would not release the grocery, and we could whip the
whole regiment. At candle lighting we had preaching; they were still and quiet till most of the tent.holders had gone to bed. Then they began their dirty
deeds. I had ordered out a strong watch, and directed
the lights to be kept burning all night. They began
at a distance to bark like dogs, to howl like wolves,
to boot like owls; they drew near and crowed like
chickens; they tried to put out our lights, and threw
chunks at the tent; but the guard beat them. back,
and kept them of nearly all night. Toward day,
they drew nearer and nearer still, and would slap

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 828

their hands, and crow like chickens. One ringleader
among them came right before the preachersi tent,
slapped his hands, and crowed and passed on. I stepped to a hre close by, and gathered a chunk of fire,
and threw it, striking him right between the shoulders, and the fire flew all over him. He sprung, and
bounded like a buck. I cried out, "Take him; take
him ;" but I assure you it would have taken a very
fleet man to have taken him, for he ran as though
the very devil was in him and after him. When I
returned to the tent, one of the guard came and told
me that they were taking wheels off the wagons and
carriages; and looking through an opening in the
tent, I saw one of them busy in loosening my carriage behind the tent, where I had tied it to a sapling for fear they would run it off. I slipped round,
gathered a stick in my way, and came up close

. behind him, and struck at him, not with much intent

to hurt, but to scare him. However, the stroke set
his hat on one side of his head; he dashed off in a
mighty fright, and his hat not being adjusted right,
it blinded him, and fleeing with all speed, he struck
his head against a tree, knocked himself down,
bruised his face very much, and lay senseless for
several minutes; but when he came to himself, he
was as tame as a lamb, and his dispensation of mischief was over. This put an end to the trouble of the
rowdies, and afterward all was peace and quiet.

We had a very singular and remarkable man
among us, a traveling preacher in the Illinois Conference; his name was Wilson Pitner. He was at this
camp-meeting. He was uneducated, and it seemed
impossible for him to learn; but, notwithstanding his
want of learning, and in common he was an ordinary
preacher, yet at times, as we say in the backwoods,

824 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

when he swung clear, there were very few that could

excel him in the pulpit; and perhaps he was one of '

the most eloquent and powerful exhorters that was
in the land.

On Monday he came to me, and desired me to let
him preach at eleven olclock, saying,

"I have faith to believe that God will this day
convert many of these rowdies and persecutors."

I consented; and he preached with great liberty
and power. Nearly the whole congregation were
powerfully moved, as he closed by calling for every
rowdy and persecutor to meet him in the altar; for,
said he,

"I have faith to believe that God will convert
every one of you that will come and kneel at the
place of prayer."

There was a general rush for the altar, and many
of our persecutors, and those who had interrupted
and disturbed us in the forepart of the meeting, came
and fell on their knees, and cried aloud for mercy;
and it is certainly beyond my power to describe the
scene; but more than hfty souls were converted to
God that day and night. Our meeting continued for
several days, and about ninety professed to obtain the
pardon of their sins, most of whom oined the Church,
and great good was accomplished, although we waded
through tribulation to accomplish it.

Such success often attended the Gospel labors of
this brother. He is now in California laboring for
the good of souls. _

When, in 1832, the Illinois Conference was divided,
and Indiana set off, the former was confined to the
State of Illinois, and consisted of the following presiding-elder districts, namely: Wabash, Kaskaskia,
Sangamon, and Mission District. Our first Illinois

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 825

Conference in its separate form from Indiana, sat in
the town of Jacksonville with the four above-named
districts; it was held September 25th, 1832. The
Indiana preachers met with us this fall; Bishop Soule
presided. Our increase of members in the Conference this year was near three thousand. When the
bishop and council met, it was found that the country
was so rapidly nlling up, and the work enlarging so
constantly, that it was necessary to make two more
presiding-elder districts. The Mission District was
called Chicago, and the Quincy District was formed.
When the Illinois Conference met in Jacksonville,
and was organized, there were thirty-live traveling
preachers of us, and our membership was about ten

thousand. I had traveled now about twenty-eight,

years, and although blessed with a strong constitution,
I began to feel the worse for wear, and that I needed

a little rest. I therefore asked and obtained a super- _

annuated relation for one year; but when the Quincy
District was formed, there was not a man in the
eldership willing to go to it, such was its new and wilderness state. The bishop said if he could not get a
presiding elder for it, it must be merged into the
other district. I told him it ought not to be merged.

" Well," said he, " what are we to do? there is no
one of these elders willing to go to it."

Said I, " Let me remedy the evil."

Said Bishop Soule, "I wish you would."

" Well," said I, " to-morrow morning let some
brother move a reconsideration of the vote by which
I was granted a superannuated relation, and make
me effective; and if you, sir, see proper to appoint
me to that district, I am ready and willing to go."

This proposition was agreed to all round; and next
morning, the motion to reconsider was made, put,and

326 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

carried, and I was appointed to the Quincy District;
so you see I have sustained in more than fifty years,
a superannuated relation about ten hours. The
Quincy District was composed of the ‘following appointments, namely: Galena Mission, Fort Edwards
Mission, Henderson River Mission, Blue River Mission, Quincy, Rushville, and Canton, commencing at
the mouth of the Illinois River, and running up the Mississippi River to Galena, the northwest corner of the
state, and up the Illinois River on its west side to near
Peoria; thence due north to the northern line of the
state, and even into what is now Wisconsin State

We had in this district about fourteen hundred members. Much of our district was new settlements,
formed and forming; hard, long rides, cabin parlors,
straw beds and bedsteads, made out of barked saplings, and puncheon bedcords. But the people were
kind and clever, proverbially so; showing the real
pioneer or frontier hospitality. The men were a
hardy, industrious, enterprising, game catching, and
Indian driving set of men. The women were also
hardy; they would think no hardship of turning out
and helping their husbands raise their cabins, if need
be; they would mount a horse and trot ten or fifteen
miles to meeting, or to see the sick and minister to
them, and home again the same day. How different
from those ladies who live in older circles, and have
grown up in wealth, luxury, and fashionable life, who
would faint if they had to walk a hundred yards in
the sun without a parasol or umbrella; who are
braced and stayed at such an intemperate rate, that
they cannot step over six or eight inches at a step, and
should they by‘ any accident happen to loose their
moorings, and fall, are imprisoned with so many
unmentionables, that they could not get up again;

rnrmz cnarwnronr. 827

and should a thunder-storm suddenly overtake them
out doors, would scream as if the world were coming
to an end.

I was frequently four or five weeks from home at a
time. On one of those trips, in the northern end of
this district, the following incident occurred. I started
from home in order to attend some four or five quar~
terly meetings up north. I had traveled some eighty
miles, when a most tremendous rain fell; it continued
two nights and a day; during which time I was comfortably housed at a friendis. When the rain ceased I
started for the Henderson River Mission. The whole
face of the earth, where it was level, was a sheet of
water, and the ravines and little rivulets were swollen

‘into large creeks. I had about thirty-six miles to

travel to reach my meeting. The brother at whose
house I stopped, tried to dissuade me from any attempt
at performing my journey, saying there was no road
or path for twenty miles, and no house or cabin until
I should reach the Twenty Mile Point of Timber; and
that I would have to steer for that point as my only
guide; that in low places, and in the valleys of
prairies, I would be for miles together out of sight of
this point; and should any accident befall and detain
me, night would overtake me, and I would lose sight
of the landmark, and have to lay out all night, and
perhaps might be lost in this large prairie for days;
and, besides, if I should be fortunate enough to reach
the point of timber, there was the large creek, and no
doubt it was swimming for twenty yards. There were
no bridges, no canoe, and I could not iind any fallen
tree that could possibly reach across, so that I would
have to swim, and all alone. If any accident should
happen to me, I would certainly be drowned.

The prospect looked gloomy, and I felt some mis328 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

givings come over me; and the reasons and argue
ments of my friend were not without considerable
effect on my mind. I paused for a few moments, reasoning on the subject. Just then my old Methodist
preacher motto occurred to my mind, that is, " Never
retreat till you certainly know you can advance no
further." And as my motto occun'ed to my mind, my
purpose was unalterably fixed to go ahead.

" Brother," said I, "as there is no road, get on your
horse and ride a little distance with me, till I can
clearly see the point of timber that is to guide me."

He readily consented, and did so. We rode two
miles, and the point of timber was plain in view. As

he turned back he said, " I should not be surprised if

I never saw you again."

" Well," said I, "if I fall, and you never see me
again, tell my friends that I fell at my post, trying to
do my duty. Farewell."

I had a fine, large, faithful horse under me, and '

a Divine Providence above me, and in a few minutes
after my friend and myself separated, I felt that I had
nothing to fear. On I moved; sometimes in and
sometimes out of sight of my landmark; sometimes
nearly swimming in the little branches, but every step
I left the prairie in the distance, and neared my point
of timber. There was so much water, and the ground
was so soft, I could make but slow progress; but
every time I rose on the high ground, from the low
valleys in the prairie, my point of timber seemed
nearer and nearer still. At length, about three
oiclock, I reached the timber in safety; rode up and
hailed the cabin, but there was no person at home.
I saw in the distance, about fourteen miles off, my
next point of timber, and contiguous to the place of
holding my quarterly meeting. I concluded to make

rurnn OABTWBIGHT. I39

3 hard push and go through that afternoon; but here
was the large creek to cross, only two hundred yards
ahead of me. I concluded to go above the timber
and cross it; but when I came to it I found it had
swollen and spread out at least two hundred yards on
the level ground. I could not tell how far I would
have to swim on my horse. I rode in about one third
the apparent distance across. My horse was nearly
swimming. I concluded it would be too far for me
to risk a swim on horseback. It occurred to me that
" prudence was the better part of valor," so I retreated.
I then pursued the creek down the timber, in search
of a drift or tree across the stream, where I could
carry my things over, and then return and swim
my horse, without wetting all my traveling apparatus.
At length I found a tree that had been felled across a
narrow part of the creek, that I thought answered my
purpose admirably, but by this time it was nearly
night, and if I got safe over the creek I could not
make the distance to the next point of timber, and
should have to lay out without food for myself or my
horse. I came to a halt, and thinking that the occupants of the cabin I had just passed would be in at
night, I concluded to retrace my steps and get quarters for the night. So back I came to the cabin, but
still there was no one at home. I concluded, at home
or not at home, I should lodge there that night. So
down I got, opened the door of the cabin, and ushered myself in. I found they had covered up some iire
in the ashes, to keep in their absence, which made
me still hope they would come home some time that
night. I went out and stripped my horse, and put
him up and fed him, and then my next care was for
something to eat myself. By this time I had a good
appetite. I‘went and made up a little tire, and in a

830 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

small comer cupboard, made of clapboards, backwoods fashion, to my great joy I found a pan of corn
bread, nicely baked, zind, though cold, it relished
well. In one corner of the wooden chimney there
hung some excellent dried venison. I pulled out
some coals and broiled my venison, and had a hearty
meal of it. And now, thought I, if I only had a good
cup of coffee, I should have the crowning point
gained of a good and pleasant meal. In looking
about in the cupboard, I found a tin bucket full of
excellent honey, in the comb. I took it out, got
some water in a tin cup that was on the shelf,
sweetened the water with the honey, and found in it
an excellent substitute for coffee. There was a nice
clean bed, in which I slept unusually sound. Next
morning I rose early, fed my horse, prepared my
breakfast, much after the fashion of my supper, saddled my horse, and started on my journey.

When I came to the creek it had fallen considerably, but was still swimming. I carried all my traveling iixtures over perfectly dry; stripped myself, went
back, mounted my horse, went over safe, dressed myself, knelt down and offered my sincere thanks to
God for his providential care over me, and the mercy
he had showed me, and went on mylway shouting and
happyI arrived at the place of the quarterly meeting, and
found the few scattered members, six in all, and about
eight who were not members, and these comprised
the whole settlement, save one family who lived close
by, the head of which was a great persecutor of the
Methodists. He said he had moved there, in that
new and out-of-the-way place, especially to get rid of

those wretched people called Methodists, but he had
scarcely got into his rude cabin before here was the

U

PETER cnnrwnrenr. 831

Methodist preacher, preaching hell fire and damnation, as tney always did.
On Monday morning I Went over to see him. He
was a high-strung Predestinarian in his views; believed, or professed to .believe, that God had decreed
everything that comes to pass. After introducing
myself to him, he presently bristled up for an argument. I told him I had not come to debate, but to
invite him to the Saviour. He said he could not receive anything from me, for he cordially despised the
Methodists. I told him if God had decreed all things,
he haddecreed that there should be Methodists, and
that they should believe precisely as they did, and that
they were raised up by the decree of God to torment
him before his time, and that he must be a great simpleton to suppose that the Methodists could do or believe anything but what they did; and now, my dear
sir, you must be a vile wretch to want to break the
decrees of God, and Wish to exterminate the Methodists; that if his doctrine was true, the Methodists
were as certainly fulfilling the glorious decrees of
God, which were founded in truth and righteousness,
as the angels around the burning throne; and several
admonitions I gave him, and, by the by, he had some
feeling on the subject. I talked kindly and prayed
with him, and left.

After I left, he began to think on the topics of
conversation, and the more he thought the more hi
mind became perplexed about these eternal decrees.
When he would sit down to eat, or ride, or walk the
read, he would soliloquize on the subject. After cutting off a piece of meat and holding it on his fork,
ready to receive it into his mouth, he would say: " God
decreed from all eternity that I should eat this meat,
but I will break that decreefi and down he would flash

I

882 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

it to the dogs. As he walked the paths in the settlement and came to a fork, he would say, "God from all
eternity decreed that I should take the right-hand path,
but P11 break that decreefl and he would rush to the
left. As he rode through the settlement, in coming to
a stump or tree, he would rein up his horse and say,
" God has from all eternity decreed that I should go
to the right of that stump or tree, but I will break
that decreefl and would turn his horse to the left.

Thus he went on until his family became alarmed,
thinking he was deranged. The little settlement,
also, was fearful that he had lost his balance of mind.
At length, deep conviction took hold of him; he saw
that he was a lost and mined sinner, without an interest in Jesus Christ. He called the neighbors to
come and pray for him, and, after a long and sore
conflict with the devil and his decrees, it pleased
God to give him religion, and almost all his family
were converted and joined the Methodist Church, and
walked worthy of their high and holy calling.

At another quarterly meeting in this mission on
Sunday, we had twenty-seven for our congregation,
and yet the scattered population were all, or nearly
all, there for many miles around, and when we administered the sacrament on Sabbath, we had just seven
communicants, preachers and all. Brother Barton
Randle, now a superannuated member of the Illinois Annual Conference, was the missionary. Though
a man of feeble health and strength, yet he was
faithful in hunting up the lost sheep in this new and
laborious field of labor. He suffered many ‘privations and hardships, but he endured all as seeing Him
who is invisible, and I have thought that he was one
among the very‘ best missionaries I was ever acquainted with. He did great good in this new and

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 383

rising country, and laid firmly the foundation of
future good, which the increasing and now densely
populated country has realized. Long‘ since this
mission has formed many large circuits and self—supporting stations, and no doubt many, in the great day
of retribution, will rise up and call Brother Randle
blessed, and he will hail many of his spiritual children
in heaven from this field of labor. Brother Randle
was the first missionary that was sent to, and formed
this mission, and, at the close of his year, he returned
seventy-iive members.

The Rock Island mission was formed in 1832, and
Philip T. Cordier was appointed missionary. He
was a man of feeble talents, unstable, and did but
little good. He was finally expelled. I do not know
what has become of him. On my first visit to Rock
Island Mission, which was chiefly located in what
was then called Wellsis settlement, a few miles above
the mouth of Rock River, the river had been very
high, but was fallen considerably. There was an old
ferry-boat at the lower ford. The ferry-man was a
very mean man, charged high, and imposed very
much on travelers. Some thought the river might
be forded, others thought that it would swim. I was
a total stranger, and although I had no money to pay
my ferriage, yet I did not wish to swim if I could
well avoid it, so I rode up and hailed the fen'yman.
I asked him if the river was fordable. '

"Nofi said he, "it is swimming from bank to bank

nearly, and it is a very dangerous ford in the bargain‘?!
" Wellfi said I, " what do you do with strangers
who have no money? I am out, but shall return this
way on Monday. If you will ferry me over you
shall then be sure of your pay? .

334 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

" I wonit do itfi said he. "You must leave something in pawn till you return, or I will not set you
over?

"What shall I leave V

" Your overcoatfi said he.

" No, sir; perhaps I shall need it before that time,
and if you will not trust me I am afraid to trust you?

" Wellfi said he, "you canit get over. I wonit
trust you?

I felt a little indignant, and turned of, saying,
"My horse is a much better ferry-boat than your
own, and heill trust me? So I determined to take a
swim. Just as I turned off from the ferryman I saw
a man on horseback ride down to the riveris edge on
the other side. He waded his horse in, and came
over without swimming at all. This stranger told
me there was no better ford on any river in the world,
and that there was not the least danger on earth. I
told him what the ferryman said.

".Al1,il said he, "you have made a blessed escape,

for if you had left your overcoat, you never would
have got it again. He is a great rascal, and makes
his living by foul means?
. So I passed over ‘in safety, and had the pleasure of
keeping my overcoat. When I got to Brother Wellsls
I found a good little society, all in peace, and we had
a very pleasant little quarterly meeting.

Here, on the north side of Rock River, on the
rising ground from the Mississippi bottom, stands the
site of one of the oldest Indian towns in the north or
northwest. It is a beautiful site for a city. There
were to be seen lying, bleached and bleaching, the
bones of unnumbered thousands of these poor, wild,
and roaming races of beings. It was the center of
the vast, and powerful, unbroken, warlike tribes of

.i.

Paras CABTWRIGHT. 885

the Northwest. This particular spot was claimed by
the notorious Black Hawk and his tribe. If they had
been a civilized people, and had known the real arts
of war, it would have been utterly impossible for the
Americans to have vanquished and subdued them as
they have done. When I looked over the fields in
cultivation by the whites, where the ground had, for
ages, been the country of thousands of Indians, a
spirit of sorrow, came over me. Had they been an
educated and civilized people, there no doubt would
now be standing on this preeminent site as splendid a
city as N ew-York. But they are wasted away and
gone to their long home. I saw a scattered few that
were crowded back by the unconquerable march of
the white man.

On another visit to a quarterly meeting on the
Rock Island Mission, Brother H. Summers, a traveling presiding elder in the Rock River Conference,
accompanied me. We had a pleasant meeting, and
it was believed that good was done. I had taken and
distributed a good many religious books in the
mission, which were eagerly sought for by the community. Brother Summers and myself concluded to
cross at the upper ford on Rock River. About midway in the river was a very slippery rock, which
could be avoided by keeping up stream considerably,
but somehow I missed the safe track, and my horse
got on this slippery rock, and all of a sudden he
slipped and fell. My saddle turned, off I went, and
the iirst thing I knew I saw my saddle-bags iioating
down with great rapidity, for the water ran very
swift. I left my horse to get up as best he could, and
took after my saddle-bags. I had a tight race, but
overtook them before thty sunk so as to disappear.
They were pretty well filled with water. My books

836 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

and clothes had all turned Campbellites, for there
was much water; and I escaped, not by the skin of
my teeth, but by the activity of my heels. My horse
rose, and, with all the calmness of old Diogenes,
waded out, and left me to do the same. Brother
Summers could not maintain his usual gravity, butl
assure you all his fun was at my expense. I had
scarcely a dry thread about me, but on we went, and
reached Pope River settlement that night.

The Galena Mission, I think, was formed in 1827.
It. was a singular providence, somehow, that, notwithstanding Galena was in my district for several years,
yet, by high waters, sickness of my horses, myself,
and family, I was never able to reach a single appointment in Galena, and to this day I have never seen her
hills, walked her streets, or explored her rich mineral
stores or mines, and although I have always borne the
name of a punctual attendant on my appointments, it
seems strange to me that I never reached that interesting point.

In the fall of 1834 and 1835, William D. R. Trotter
rode and preached on the Henderson River Mission;
he was my son-in-law. On one occasion when I attended one of his quarterly meetings, there was no
parsonage, and but few families comfortably situated
to board with. During the meeting it rained almost
constantly, and then turned cold, and there fell a
considerable quantity of snow. I was in my gig
or one-horse sulky. As I was to return home from
this quarterly meeting, my daughter concluded that
she would go with me, and spend a few weeks with
her mother. I told her I knew the streams were very
high, and it was doubtful whether we could get along.
She said she thought if I could get along, she
could. So we started in my two-wheeled vehicle.

and rapidly rising; no ferry-boat, no comfortable
house to stay at. One of the citizens of the village

a rapid stream on a canoe? The man said he could
do it; and, rather than stay for any length of time
among a drunken, swearing, rowdy crowd, I concluded to try it. Down we went; I took out my horse,
took oE the harness, and took the harness and all
the traveling appendages into the canoe; took in
my daughter; took my harness, bridle, and led my
horse in, and swam him over, by the side of the canoe.
I landed all safe, and then returned with the manager
of the canoe for my carriage; we rolled it into the
water, centered it as well as we could; balanced it,
and I held on to it while he paddled and managed
the canoe; and over we went safe and sound; geared

Judge Phelps, a fine man, and his wife an excellent
woman, and very friendly family; and we were not
only made welcome, but comfortable. That night it
snowed, and covered the ground several inches. Next
morning we started early, and crossed the Illinois
River just above the mouth of Spoon River, which we
had crossed the day before. We met some travelers
in the afternoon, who told us that the waters of the
Sangamon River were out for five miles, and that we
could not reach the ferry-boat without swimming.
We then turned our course up Salt Creek, which
emptied into the Sangamon River above where we

' had intended to cross it. Just before sundown

we reached Salt Creek, where was a miserable old

rotten ferry-boat, and Salt Creek out of its banks a
22

368 avronroenarnr or

mile. The fen-yoman told us he could ferry us over the
main channel of the stream, and he had no doubt we
could wade out without swimming if we could find
the way. It was at least a mile to the bluff; he said,
if we kept the road we would swim. We could only
tell where the road was by a little space along, clear
of weeds and grass. He said if we kept on .ground
where ‘we could see the tops of the weeds and grass,
there was no danger, but if we could not see these,
not to venture, for there were many ponds clear of
weeds and grass as well as the road. This seemed to
me to be a very dangerous undertaking. But my
daughter urged me on. I had great confidence in
my horse; he was large and strong, and an excellent
swimmer; so over we went. There were a few rods
of earth uncovered with water; and then we took
water for the bluffs. We could see very distinctly
the windings of the road by the little space that was
clear of weeds and grass; but presently we would
come to a large space‘ clear of weeds and grass; these
we took to be ponds, and would wind round them
and come back to our watery road. In this tedious
way we got along slowly, though making all the
speed we could without injuring my horse. As we
neared the bluffs, darkness was closing in on us very
fast; at length we got within about three rods of the
bluffs, and we could not see the tops of weeds and
grass, neither to the right nor left, nor in front; I
turned up stream, and then down stream, but all my
pilots had disappeared. I was brought to a stand.
Said I to my daughter: a

" Letls swim it; Gray will ferry us over safe?

" Agreed," said she.

Said I, "Take a firm hold of the gig, and sink or
swim, never let go, and Gray will make land?

PETER canrwnrenr. 889

So in I drove, when, behold! it was not swimming,
and my horse waded out safe. We then had four
miles to go, without road or pilot, and very dark. I
took my course by the evening star, and soon arrived
at afriendls house; was kindly received and comfortably
entertained by my old brother, Dr. Ballard, in NewMarket, then Sangamon County. He has long since
fallen asleep, left earth for heaven, and is reaping his
reward among the blessed.

I have thus given a small sketch of some of the
perilous scenes through which early Methodist preachers had to pass, to show the Methodist preachers of
the present day, the difference between walking on
Turkey carpets, and eating yellow-legged chickens, and
walking on mud and water, and eating nothing for
days at a time.

The Fort Edwards Mission was formed, I believe,
in 1832-33. D. B. Carter was the first missionary
appointed to this mission; he returned at the next
conference iifty-three members. Brother Carter was
a man of small literary acquirements. When he
professed religion he could not read a hymn intelligibly, but believing God had called him to preach
the Gospel, he industriously applied himself to books,
and soon‘ learned to read very well. He was not
a brilliant or profound theologian ; but he was a pious,
zealous, useful minister of Jesus Christ; and during
his short ministerial career, many were the seals of
his ministry. a He was much beloved in life, and
greatly lamented in death. After a few years of
zealous, useful labors, the fell disease, consumption,
seized on him; he lingered in a superannuated relation
a year or two, and then died a peaceful and happy
death. Many in the great day of judgment will
rise up and call him blessed.

840 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

The Fort Edwards Mission lay up and down the
east bank of the Mississippi, from Quincy City to
Fort Edwards, which stood where the city of Warsaw
now stands; thence up the Mississippi to the celebrated foot of what is called the Lower Rapids, where, in
after times, was erected the idolatrous city of Nauvoo, under the supervision of the. grand impostor
Joseph Smith, who was and is claimed as the Monmon Prophet. ‘

PETER OABTWBIGHT. 841

CHAPTER XXII.

MORMONISM.

P1-znmr me to make a few remarks about the blasphemous organization called the Mormons, or Latterday Saints. The original absurdity and trifling character of Joe Smith and his coadjutors, is a matter of
history, known and understood of all the intelligent
reading community that have sought information on
the subject, and therefore need not be stated here by
me. But there are a few facts I will state that have
come under my own personal knowledge; for it has

fallen to my lot to be appointed to travel in the
' region of country in Illinois most infested with this

imposture.

After the Mormons were driven from Missouri for
their infamous and unlawful deeds, they fled to Illinois,
Joe Smith and all, and established themselves at
N auvoo, or the foot of the Lower Rapids, on the east
side of the Mississippi. At an early day after they
were driven from Missouri and took up their residence in Illinois, it fell to my lot to become acquainted with Joe Smith personally, and with many of their

‘leading men and professed followers. On a certain

occasion I fell in with Joe Smith, and was formally
and oliicially introduced to him in Springfield, then
our county town. We soon fell into a free conversation on the subject of religion, and Mormonism in
particular. I found him to be a very illiterate and

842 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

impudent desperado in morals, but, at the same time,

he had a vast fund of low cunning.

In the first place, he made his onset on me by ilattery, and he laid on the soft sodder thick and fast.
He expressed great and almost unbounded pleasure
in the high privilege of becoming acquainted with
me, one of whom he had heard so many great and
good things, and he had no doubt I was one among
Godls noblest creatures, an honest man. He believed
that among all the Churches in the world the Methodist was the nearest right, and that, as far as they
went, they were right. But they had stopped short
by not claiming the  of tongues, of prophecy, and
of miracles, and then quoted a batch of Scripture to
prove his positions correct. Upon the whole, he did
pretty well for clumsy Joe. I gave him rope, as
the sailors say, and, indeed, I seemed to lay this
iiattering unction pleasurably to my soul.

" Indeedji said Joe, "if the Methodists would only
advance a step or two further, they would take the
world. We Latter-day Saints are Methodists, as far as
they have gone, only we have advanced further, and
if you would come in and go with us, we could sweep
not only the Methodist Church, but all others, and
you would be looked up to as one of the Lordis greatest prophets. You would be honored by countless
thousands, and have of the good things of this world
all that heart could wish?

I then began to inquire into some of the tenets of
the Latter-day Saints. He explained. I criticised his
explanations till, unfortunately, we got into high debate, and he cunningly concluded that his first bait
would not take, for he plainly saw I was not be flattered out of common sense and honesty. The next
pass he made at me was to move upon my fears. He

nnrna canmwaronrr. M8

saidthavtinallagesofthoworldthegoodandright
way was evil spoken of, and that it was an awful
thing to iight against God.

"Now? said he, "if you will go with me to Nauvoo,
I will show you many living witnesses that will testify
that they Were, by the saints, cured of blindness,
lameness, deafness, dumbness, and all the diseases
that human dosh is heir to; and I will show youfi
said he, " that we have the gift of tongues, and can
speak in unknown languages, and that the saints can
drink any deadly poison, and it will not hurt them ;ii
and closed by saying, " the idle stories you hear
about us are nothing but sheer persecution?

I then gave him the following history of an en:ounter I had at a camp-meeting in Morgan County,
some time before, with some of his Mormons, and
assured him I could prove all I said by thousands
that were present.

The camp-meeting was numerously attended, and
we had a good and gracious work of religion going on
among the people. On Satunday there came some
twenty or thirty Mormons to the meeting. During
the intermission after the eleven oiclock sermon they
colleetedin one corner of the encampment, and began
to sing, and they sang well. As fast as the people
rose from their dinners they drew up to hear the
singing, and the scattering crowd drew up until a
large company surrounded them. I was busy regulating matters conneeted with the meeting. At length,
according, I have no doubt, to a preconcerted plan,
an old lady Mormon began to shout, and after shouting a while she swooned away and fell into the arms
of her husband. The old man proclaimed that his
wife had gone into a trance, and that when she came
to she would speak in an unknown tongue, and that

344 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

he would interpret. ' This proclamation produced
considerable excitement, and the multitude crowded
thick around. Presently the old lady arose and
began to speak in an unknown tongue, sure enough.

Just then my attention was called to the matter. I
saw in one moment that the whole maneuver was intended to bring the Mormons into notice, and break
up the good of our meeting. I advanced instantly
toward the crowd, and asked the people to give way
and let me in to this old lady, who was then being
held in the arms of her husband. I came right up
to them, and took hold of her arm, and ordered her
peremptorily to hush that gibberish; that I would
have no more of it; that it was presumptuous, and
blasphemous nonsense. I stopped very suddenly her
unknown tongue. She opened her eyes, took me by
the hand, and said,

" My dear friend, I have a message directly from
God to you?

I stopped her short, and said, " I will have none of
your messages. If God can speak through no better
medium than an old, hypocritical, lying woman, I
will hear nothing of it? Her husband, who was to
be the interpreter of her message, iiew into a mighty
rage, and said,

"Sir, this is my wife, and I will defend her at the
risk of my life? \

I replied, " Sir, this is my camp-meeting, and I
will maintain the good order of it at the risk of my
life. If this is your wife, take her off from here, and

‘ clear yourselves in five minutes, or I will have you

under guard?
The old lady slipped out and was off quickly. The

old man stayed a little, and began to pour a tirade of _

abuse on me. I stopped him short, andsaid, "Not an..

PETER CABTWRIGHT. 845'

other word of abuse from you, sir. I have no doubt
you are an old thief, and if your back was examined,
no doubt you carry the marks of the cowhide for
your villainyil And sure enough, as if I had spoken
by inspiration, he, in some of the old states, had been
lashed to the whipping-post for stealing, and I tell
you the old man began to think other persons had
visions besides his wife, but he was very clear from
wishing to interpret my unknown tongue. To cap
the climax, a young gentleman stepped up and said
he had no doubt all I said of this old man was true,
and much more, for he had caught him stealing corn
out of his ‘fatherls crib. By this time, such was the
old manls excitement that the great drops of sweat
ran down his face, and he called out,

" Donlt crowd me, gentlemen; it is mighty warm?

Said I, " Open the way, gentlemen, and let him
out? When the way was opened, I cried, "Now
start, and donlt show your face here again, nor one
of the Mormons. If you do, you will get Lynchls
law?

They all disappeared, and our meeting went on
prosperously, a great many were converted to God,
and the Church was much revived and built up in
her holy faith.

My friend, Joe Smith, became very restive before
I got through with my narrative; and when I closed,
his wrath boiled over, and he cursed me in the name
of his God, and said, "I will show you, sir, that I will
raise up a government in these United States which
will overturn the present government, and I will raise
up a new religion that will overturn every other form
of religion in this country W

" Yesfl said I, ". Uncle Joe; but my Bible tells me
‘ the bloody and deceitfvgl man shall not live out half

346 . AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

his days ;l and I expect the Lord will send the devil
alter you some of these days, and take you out of the
way? .

" N o, sirfl said he; " I shall live and prosper, while
you will die in your sins?

" Well, sirfi said I, " if you live and prosper, you
must quit your stealing and abominable whoredomsli

Thus we parted, to meet no more on earth; for in a
few years after this, an outraged and deeply-injured
people took the law into their own hands, and killed
him, and drove the Mormons from the state. They
should be considered and treated as outlaws in every
country and elime. The two great political parties in
the state were nearly equal, and these wretched Mormons, for several years, held the balance of power,
and they were always in market to the highest bid
der; and I have often been put to the blush to see om
demagogues and stump orators, from both political
parties, courting favors from the Mormons, to gain a
triumph in an election. Any man or set of men that
would be mean enough to stoop so low as to connive
at the abominations of these reckless Mormons, surely
ought to be considered unworthy of public omce,
honor, or confidence. But this is the way with all
demagogues, and if our happy and glorious Union is
destroyed, it will be done by these office-seekers, who
go for their own little insignificant selves, while the
true love of country is an eternal stranger in their
traitorous hearts.

One fact I wish here to mention, that ought to be
made public. When Joe Smith was announced a
candidate for President of these United States, almost
every iniidel association in the Union declared in his
favor. I traveled extensively through the Eastern
states and cities, as well as in the West, that year;

PETER GABTWRIGHT. 

and I must say this was literally true, as far as I conversed with, or obtained reliable information of those
infidel associations or individuals. Does, not this speak
volumes? and ought it not to teach the friends of religion an impressive lesson ?

Great ‘blame has been attached to the State, the
citizens of Hancock County, in which N auvoo is situated, as well as other adjoining counties, for the part
they acted in driving the Mormons from among them.
But it should be remembered they had no redress at
law, for it is beyond all doubt that the Mormons would
swear anything, true or false. They stole the stock,
plundered and burned the houses and barns of the
citizens, and there is no doubt they privately murdered
some of the best people in the county; and owing to
the perjured evidence always at their command, it
was impossible to have any legal redress. If it had
not been for this state of things, Joe Smith would not
have been killed, and they would not have been driven
with violence from the state. Repeated efforts were
made to get redress for these wrongs and outrages,
but all to no purpose; and the wonder is, how the
people bore as long as they did with the outrageous
villainies practiced on them, without a resort to violent
measures. I claim to know all about the dreadful
conduct of the Mormons, and could state in detail the
facts in these cases, but think it unnecessary. This
much I think it my duty to state, at least to palliate
the seeming high-handed measures of our wronged
and oppressed citizens.

In the _ fall of 1833, our Illinois Conference was
held in Union Grove, Padfleldis, St. Clair County,
September 25th. It fell to the lot of Bishop Soule to
take this Western tour, in the summer previous to our
conference. He came to my house on his Western

848 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

round of conferences. He traveled in a two-horse carriage, with an excellent span of horses, and he needed such, for the Missouri Conference sat in Arkansas
Territory, at Salem, Washington County, a longiway
in the interior, and west of the Mississippi. He had
mountains to climb and large rivers to cross, through
a sparsely-populated country. My son-in-law, William D. R. Trotter, rode the Blue River Mission,
which was in Pike and Calhoun Counties, and lay
directly in the bishopis route. My quarterly meeting was in this mission. Trotter, the missionary,‘ was
at my house, so we started in company with the
bishop. After we crossed the Illinois River, we had
a hilly country to pass through to get to the quarterly
meeting, almost without roads. So steep were some
of the hills, and so deep the hollows and ravines, that
we had to loose the horses from the bishopis carriage,
and let it down by hand; then hitch on and drive up
the hills. It seemed to me that if these were episcopal honors, I would beg to be excused from wearing
them; and really it appeared to me that it was enough
to discourage a bishop himself. But those who know
Bishop Soule, know him to be a man of indomitable
courage.

After much labor to man and beast, we got safe to
the quarterly meeting. The bishop stayed with us
over Sabbath, and preached two excellent sermons,
which had a good effect on the congregations; and
the curiosity of many was gratified, for if circumstances had not transpired to bring him to our camp
quarterly meeting, they would have lived and died
without ever seeing a Methodist bishop.

Our Western country, in certain locations, was, in
1832 and 1833, fearfully visited with that dreadful
scourge, the cholera. On Monday of our camp-meet

‘

PETER cuvrwnxenr. 849

ing, a very severe case of cholera took place with a
hearty young man, that terminated fatally in eight or
ten hours. The people generally believed it to be

contagious; hence we deemed it most prudent to‘

close the meeting, though our prospects for a good
meeting were very encouraging. Bishop Soule, with
great labor and fatigue, prosecuted his journey, and
reached the Missouri Conference, but was taken sick
with aviolent attack of fever, so that he did not reach
our conference till the last hour of its session. The
conference had elected me as their president. We
had done all our business, and the council had made
out all the appointments, and we were just about
adjourning, when the bishop arrived. I sent a messenger to him, and inquired of him if he wished to
say anything to the conference; but he declined
coming into the room, and requested all those who
had been elected to omce to wait until he had
rested a little, being much fatigued, and he would
ordain them. They did so, and were ordained accordingly.

At this conference, in the fall of 1833, the brethren
in Jacksonville, though few in number and comparatively poor, petitioned for a stationed preacher.
Their request was granted, and Thomas J. Starr was
appointed their preacher. Few and poor, however,
as the brethren in Jacksonville were, there was a
great improvement, in point of numbers and wealth,

' from the time of their first organization as a class till

now. I am sorry that it is out of my power to give
the date of the organization of the first class in Jacksonville, but I think it was in 1827, when it was embraced in what was then called the Mississippi Circuit,
and Thomas Randle and Isaac House were the circuit
preachers. In the course of this year, the first quar850 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

terly meeting ever held in Jacksonville was held in a
log-house, owned by old Father Jordan. It was held
up stairs, and I well remember it was an interesting
quarterly meeting. In 1831 the Jacksonville Circuit
was formed from a part of the old Mississippi Circuit,
and John Sinclair, now of the Rock River Conference,
was the circuit preacher; but from the rapid growth
of the town, and increase of population, the Methodists have two large churches and pastoral charges,
and there are many more churches in the city, belonging to other denominations. The Presbyterians
have a flourishing college located here, and the Methodists have a female college, numeromly attended.
There is also another flourishing female college in
Jacksonville, but to what denomination it belongs,
or whether to any particular one, I am not prepared
to say. The Illinois State Hospital for the Insane,
the Deaf and Dumb Asylum, the Institute to Educate
the Blind, all under the fostering care of the state,
are located in Jacksonville. Indeed, it is the Athens
of Illinois, and speaks loudly in favor of the state,
and of the citizens of Jacksonville and surrounding
country in particular. These institutions have high
claims bu all benevolent sympathizers in human woe,
and all the real friends of a sanctified literature that
will issue streams of light and life, to bless unnumbered thousands of our fallen race.

Our Illinois Conference, for 1834, was holden at
Mount Carmel, October 1st. This year, the brethren
in the town of Rushville desired to be organized into
a station, and pledged themselves for the support of a
preacher. I consented, and appointed T. N. Ralston,
and it has remained a station ever since.

At one of our early camp-meetings in Schuyler
County, Rushville Circuit, there was a general relig\

urns oanrwnrenr. 31

ions excitement. Many professed religion and joined the Church. Among the rest was a very intelligent and interesting young lady, a Roman Catholic. She was deeply convicted, and knelt at the altar
and prayed fervently for mercy, and, alter a sore connict, she found peace in believing in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Her conversion was a very clear one. She
joined the Methodist Church, and desired me to baptize her. I inquired of her whether she had not been
baptized. She told me she had been baptized by the
Roman priest, but she was aware of her own knowledge that the priest was a very wicked man, and that
she did not believe he had any right to administer the
ordinances of the Church on account of his wickedness, and, therefore, she was dissatisfied with her baptism. After mature reflection on the subject I baptized her, and she proved to be a worthy member of

the Church.

352 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

. CHAPTER XXIII.

CONVERSION OF A FAMILY.

IN the course of this year, 1834, we had a campmeeting in Knox County, Henderson River Mission;
There was a goodly number tented, and a fine turnout of people, for the number of settlers in this new
and rising country. Our encampment was pitched in
a beautiful little grove, on an eminence, surrounded
by prairie on every hand. p .

There was in this settlement an interesting and intelligent family from one of the Eastern states. The
younger members of the family consisted of several
young men and young ladies. The young people
liked the Methodists, and were deeply convicted; the
old people, particularly the old lady, were very much
opposed to them. Living, as they did, close by the
camp ground, they put their Yankee ingenuity to
work to keep their children away from the meeting;
but nnding they could not accomplish it, they at once
determined to pitch their tent on the camp ground,
and then they thought they would have a better opportunity to Watch the children, and counteract any
iniluence We might exert upon them. They pretended to be very friendly, to save appearances. The old
lady, for the purpose of disarming me, treated me
very kindly, and invited me to eat with them, which
I did. In the meantime one of the daughters, who
was deeply convicted, told me all about her mothefs
opposition to the Methodists, and her schemes to prepm; : emvrwn rear; 353

vent her children from being influenced. to become
religious. I '
- One Saturday evening I invited the seekers of
religion to come forward to the altar for the prayers of the Church. Two of her daughters came forward and knelt in prayer. A younger sister, almost
as much opposed to the Methodists as her mother,
went into the altar with a vial of hartshorn, and while
her two sisters were trying to pray she slipped the
hartshorn to their nose, in order to drive them up and
prevent their seeking religion. I I very soon detected
her in her operations, and took hold of her hand,
wrenched the vial from her, led her out of the altar,
and told her if I caught her in there any more on
such business, I would pitch her out and publicly expose her. I ‘
While I was talking to and praying with these
two young ladies, and others, I saw the old lady, their
mother, come and take her seat outside of the altar,
immediately opposite her daughters, and if at any
time she thought I was not watching her, she would
kick them in their sides to drive them up. I watched
her very closely, and when in the act of kicking them,
I took hold of her foot and gave her a strong push
backward, and over she tumbled among the benches.
Being a large corpulent woman, she had some considerable tussel to right herself again. So in this way
I defeated the scheme of the devil once more. The
girls became very much engaged, but While there were
many still pressing to the altar, and my attention for
a moment was called oii',,the old lady contrived to get
them out of the altar into the tent. As soon as I discovered what was done, I gathered two or three good
singers and praying persons, and followed them into

the tent, and commenced singing; I then gave them
- 23

35¢ AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

an exhortation; then said, “Let us pray," and called on
the father of the girls to pray for his children, but he
refused ; I then called on their mother to kneel down
and pray for her_ children, and she refused. In the
meantime two of the boys, as well as the two girls,
became very much affected, and cried for mercy; and
presently the third daughter, that had used the harmhorn in the altar, got awfully convicted, and begged
all present to pray for her, as she would be lost and
damned forever. This was too much for the old people; they became awfully alarmed, and wept bitterly;
and you may be sure the whole tent was in a mighty
uproar. The singing, praying, and exhortations were
kept up nearly all night. Four of the family were
powerfully converted, and the sectarian devil in the
old father and mother was effectually disarmed, and
from that blessed night they became a religious family;
all joined the Methodist Church, and, as far as I know,
walked worthy of their high vocation. May they all
prove faithful till death, and then receive a. crown
of life. _

While on the Quincy District—-the town of Quincy
was a very small and sickly place——I remember
spending near two weeks in it when, if my recollection serves me, there was but one family where there
was no aflliction. In some families there were one,
two, or three confined to their beds with fever, and
sometimes the whole family were sick together, and
not one able to help another. I went from house to
house, not only to minister to their temporal wants,
but to pray with them, and point the sick and dying
to Christ. Many died, and it was with great diiiiculty
that we could muster enough persons able to bury
the dead.

There was one case which, in a very special manner,

PETER cs.-arwmenr. 856

affected my mind. Under the hill, close by the brink
of the river, there was what was called a tavern. It
was a poor, filthy place at best; the general resort of
boatmen, and, in a word, all kinds of bad company
resorted to this house. A young man, from some of
the Eastern states, had come out to explore the West,
and was taken sick on the boat, on the river, and was
left at this miserable house. He was a professed
Christian, and a member of the Methodist Church.
No medical aid could be obtained, no nurse, and, in
a word, no care was taken of him. In this deplorable
condition, he heard that there was a Methodist
preacher in town, visiting the sick. He sent for me,
and I went to see him. He told me who he was,
where his parents lived, and that he had a considerable sum of money with him, and he Wanted n1e to
take charge of it, for he was sure if it was known he
had money, he should be robbed of it. I took charge
of his money, told the landlord to give him all the
attention he could, and I would see him paid. The
sick man said he was sensible he must die, but that
he was not willing to die at that house, and begged
me to have him removed, if possible. I knew of a
very comfortable place, a few miles in the country,
and caused his removal there. Here he lingered for a
while, and then died. He had requested me, in case
of his decease, to have him decently buried, pay out
of his money his tavern bill, his iuneral expenses,
and write to his parents, that they might come to get
his clothes and money. I did as requested. His
younger brother came, got his money and clothes,
and although it was a mournful dispensation to his
relatives, yet it afforded them great comfort to know
that he died among friends, though strangers.

This is one among many cases of the kind that

35o AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

from an early day came under my notice, in which
enterprising men have come to the far West, have
been taken sick, and died among strangers, uncared
for. ,

We had a camp-meeting in Adams County, Quincy
Circuit, and it was numerously attended. There was
a gracious work of religion going on among the people, and there was a pretty clever, intelligent old
gentleman, who had moved into the settlement from
Kentucky, who, in that State, had been a Baptist
preacher, but had got his mind confused with Alexander Campbellls dogmas about experimental religion.

He had a iine family, and some of them knew what °

real religion was. He and family attended our campmeeting. He was very fond of argument on almost
all theological subjects. He tried to get me into debate during the meeting, but I told him I was there
for other and better business. He denied the operations of the Spirit, its testimony, bearing witness with
our spirits; that we are the children‘ of God, and that
all those happy feelings professed by Christians were
nothing but excitement; that there was no religion
in it.

On Sunday night a most tremendous power fell on
the assembly, and a general shout went up to heaven
from hundreds of Christians. Among the crowd of
happy and shouting Christians this gentlemanis wife
and daughter were exceedingly happy, and shouted
aloud. The old gentleman could not stand it; he fled
behind the tent, lighted his pipe, and tried to smoke
away his bad feelings. After laboring in the altar a
long time, I stepped back to get a drink of water, and
there sat this old Campbellite preacher, and the cloud
of smoke from his pipe was fearful; he seemed to be
insensible of what he was about, and the pipe and toPETER CAR'I‘WRIG.H{T 357

bacco were paying tribute to his reveries at a mighty
rate. Istepped up to him and tapped him on the
shoulder, and said, “ Come, Mr. , go with me,
and I will show you more happy Christians than you
ever saw among the Oampbellites in all your life?

“Sirf said be, “it is all delusion; they are not
happy? .

“ Butfi said I, “ your wife and daughter are among
the foremost shouters in the crowd. Comefi said I,
“ you must come with me to the altar; I Want to pray
for you there, that you may get religion, and be hap—

- py too. Come, sir, I want to see you converted, and

shouting-happy? I took him by the arm, to lead him
to the altar, but he drew back. I gathered him
again, and pulled him along; but the moment he saw
his wife and daughter shouting, and making toward
him, he tore loose from my grasp, and actually ran.
Poor man, he was so confused by iishing in‘ the muddy waters of Campbellism, that he lost his mental
balance. He would not yield to the Spirit of God,

and submit to be an humble, shouting, happy Christ-'

ian. Sometimes he would talk rational; sometimes
quote, and apply the Scriptures right; then, again, he
became skeptical. But the great difficulty was, the
pride of his professed ministerial standing would not
let him yield, and renounce his errors. Thus be
worried on for a considerable time, and was carried
into the whirlpool of doubt and unbelief. His
friends talked to him, but talked in vain. He
became more and A more ilighty in his mind, till at
length, in a paroxysm of insanity, he shot himself.
This event fell like a thunderbolt on his family and
the surrounding community; and proves that it is a

hard thing to fight against God.

358 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

CHAPTER XXIV.

MISBIONARIES FROM THE EAST.

ABOUT this time there were a great many young
missionaries sent out to this country to civilize and
Christianize the poor heathen of the West. They
would come with a tolerable education, and a smattering knowledge Of the old Calvinistic system of
theology. They were generally tolerably Well furnished with old manuscript sermons, that had been
preached, or written, perhaps a hundred years before.
Some of these sermons they had memorized, but in
generaltliey read them to the people. This Way of
reading sermons was out of fashion altogether in this
Western world, and of course they produced no good
effect among the people. The great mass of our
Western people Wanted a preacher that could mount
a stump, a block, or old log, or stand in the bed of
a Wagon, and without note or manuscript, quote, expound, and apply the Word of God to the hearts and
consciences of the people. The result of the eE'orts
of these Eastern missionaries was not very flattering;
and although the Methodist preachers were in reality
the pioneer heralds .of the cross throughout the entire
West, and although they had raised up numerous
societies and churches every five miles, andnotwith
standing We had hundreds of traveling and local
preachers, accredited and useful ministers of the Lord
Jesus Christ, yet these newly-fledged missionaries
would write back to the old states hardly anything

rnrmn euzrwnrenir. 859

else but wailings and lamentations over the moral
wastes and destitute condition of the West.

These letters would be read in their large congregations, stating that they had traveled hundreds of
miles, and found no evangelical minister, and the
poor perishing people were in a fair way to be lost
for the want of the bread of life; and the ignorant
or uninformed thousands that heard these letters
read would melt into tears, and their sympathies be
‘greatly moved, when they considered our lost and
heathenish state, and would liberally contribute their
money to send us more missionaries, or to support
those that were already here. Thus some of these
missionaries, after occupying our pulpits, and preaching in large and respectable Methodist congregations,
would write back and give those doleful tidings.
Presently their letters would be printed, and come
back among us as published facts in some of their
periodicals. .

Now, what confidence could the people have in
such missionaries, who would state things as facts
that had not even the semblance of truth in them?
Thus I have known many of them destroy their own
usefulness, and cut off all access to the people ; and,
indeed, they have destroyed all confidence in them
as ministers of truth and righteousness, and caused
the way of truth to be evil spokenof. On a certain
occasion, when these reports came back known to
contain false statements, the citizens of Quincy called
a meeting, mostly out of the Church, and after discussing the subject, pledged themselves to give me a
thousand dollars per annum, and bear all my traveling expenses, if I would go as a missionary to the
New-England States, and enlighten them on this and
other subjects, of which they considered them proam -a~U‘I‘O1$IOG~R.AP H Y or

foundly ignorant. But, owing to circumstances bur
yond my control, I was obliged to decline the accept
ance of their generous o&'er.

If it had been consistently in my power, how gladly and willingly would I have undertaken this labor
of love, and gloried in enlightening them down East,
that they might keep their home-manufactured clergy
at home, or give them some honorable employ better
suited to their genius, than that of reading old musty
and worm-eaten sermons. If this matter is rightly
looked into, it will astonish every, well-informed
man to see the self-importance and self-complacence
of these little home-manufactured fellows. If they
would tarry at Jericho till their beards were
grown out, it certainly would be more creditable to
themselves, and to all others concerned, and especially to the cause of God.

It will be perceived that in the fall of 1834:, the
Galena and Chicago Districts were formed, which
gave us six presiding-elder districts in our Conference.
Our Conference met in Springfield, October 1st,
1835. At this conference I was returned to the Quincy District, which now consisted of the following appointments, namely: Pittsiield, Quincy Circuit, Quincy Mission, Rushville Station, Rushville Circuit, Canton, Fort Edwards Mission, Henderson River Mission,
and Knoxville Mission——8. At this conference in
Springfield, we again elected our delegates to the
General Conference, which was holden in Cincinnati,
May 1st, 1836. To this General Conference I was
elected; and it was the fifth General Conference in
Wlllcll I was entitled to a seat by the suifrages of my
brethren in the ministry.

At the General Conference of 1832, that body had
granted the privilege to the West to publish a religrvnren 0A.B'1‘WBIGR'r.- 861

ions paper at Cincinnati, on the hard condition that we
obtained five thousand subscribers. However, by
strong effort we obtained that number, and Thomas
A. Morris was its first editor. At the General Conference of 1836, he, as well as Brother Beverly Waugh,
and Doctor Fisk, were elected Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and Doctor C. Elliott, the present
incumbent, was elected editor of the Western Christian Advocate, John F. Wright, our Western Book
Agent, and Leroy Swormstedt, Assistant Book Agent.

It was at this General Conference of 1836, that the
ground was taken by a majority of the delegates from
the slaveholding states, that slavery was right, and a
blessing, instead of a curse, to the slaves themselves.
We had from the North, 0. Scott and his coadjutors,
who were ultra abolitionists; and we had some warm
debates on the subject. The Southern delegates met
in private caucus to devise a plan of separation from
the Methodist Episcopal Church, unless we would so
modify the Discipline as to tolerate slavery, or make
it no bar to membership or oiiice in the Church. This

movement was headed by the Rev. William A. Smith, of Virginia, and others of the same cloth and kidney. I was invited by John Early, of Virginia, now bishop
of the Southern Church, to attend one of these cancuses. I went. Some of them took strong ground,
and urged a division, or a separation from the Methodist Episcopal Church. Others of them said they
would never consent to a division; that they would
rather suffer martyrdom than to divide the Church.
Finally, I think they did not harmonize on any plan
of division at that time; but William A; Smith said
to me, he never would be satisfied unless we would
agree to expunge everything from the Discipline of
the Methodist Church on the subject of slavery; and,

862 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

true to the dark principles of his creed, he never
rested until he divided the Methodist Church; and
at the late General Conference of the Church, South.
they swept, as wit.h the besom of destruction, every
rule from their Discipline on the subject of slavery
and only lacked a few votes of erasing from the Gen
eral Rules that part which forbids “ the buying and
selling of men, women, or children, with an intention
to enslave them."

This rule the advocates of slavery at the South
have always interpreted to apply to the slave-trade,
and that trade alone. Taking them to be sincere in‘
this interpretation of this General Rule, what is the
conclusion that we must draw from their late move in
their General Conference? It is, plainly, that they
wish every disciplinary barrier moved out of the
way, and the slave-trade, with all its damning, mnr-'
dering influences, revived again, notwithstanding it
is denounced by all Christian philanthropists, and
made piracy by the laws of our happy country; notwithstanding all their pretensions to patriotism, their
love of country, and all their law-loving and lawabiding professions, as being “ obedient to the powers
that be? they would open the way to revive this
abominable traiiic in human souls and bodies; and
while this slave-trade stands reprobated by every
Christian nation that deserves the name, and has the
broad seal of reprobation set on it by God himself,
they wish to see its dark wheels set in motion again,
without let or hinderance. — ‘

And why should they not desire this, if they are
sincere in their expressed opinions? They tell us that
slavery “is a political, domestic, and religious blessing ;ii if so, why not enter into the slave-trade, wholesale and retail? go with armed ships, kidnap humanrarna oaarwarenr. 803

beings by the thousand, bring them to America, sell
them into perpetual bondage? Never mind the parting of husband and wife, parents and children; the
encouraging the savage ferocity of these poor degraded
heathen. Tell them the Christian religion sanctions
their bloody wars among themselves; and that it is
to make Christians of them that you buy and trans
port them to “ the land of the free and the home of
the brave." Have no scruples of conscience about
the thousands that are murdered in these wars, instigated by Christians, or that die on their passage from
the land of barbarism to this Christian land of universal freedom ; “ the great end will sanctify the
means? Crowd the slave ships, or “ floating hells ;"
all, all is to better their condition. It is a god-like
deed of mercy, and Why should not Methodist preachers, bishops and all, have a large share in this benevolent and Christian affair? Who can forbid? And
let the oflicers of these slave vessels never forget to
tell these savage tribes that there is at least one very
popular Church in America that sanctions all these
operations, and will justify them; namely, the Methodist Episcopal Church, South.

Prior to the General Conference of 1836, the runmad spirit of rabid abolitionism had broken out in
some of the Eastern and Northern conferences; and
Methodist preachers were found by the dozen to quit
their appropriate fields of labor, and their holy calling
of saving souls, and turn out and become hired lecturers against slavery. So zealous were they, that they
forget their pastoral duties; and they Went so far as
violently to oppose colonization as a slaveholding
trick. Dr. Fisk was a good man and true, and
was as much opposed to slavery as any of them,
yet he was for occupying real Methodist preacher

804 C xurosrosaarnr or

ground, and bearing his plain, honest testimony 
the moral evil of slavery, and not meddling with it
politically, only in a constitutional way. He, seeing
that this rabid abolitionism would rivet the chains of
slavery the tighter, rouse the jealousies of the slaveholders, and disrupt the Methodist Church, flung
himself into the breach, and met those lecturers in
open combat; vanquished them in argument, and
compelled them to retreat, or bolt, and set up for
themselves. 0. Scott and his coadjutors formed
themselves into a separate party organization, calling
themselves the “True Wesleyans fl but long since
they have found, to their sorrow, that they misnamed
the brat, for the secession that they produced was a
very feeble, little, illegitimate child. But they nursed
it till it took the rickets; and the last I heard of it,
it was fast wasting away, and “ the last state of it is
worse than the first? .

Under these circumstances, Dr. Fisk stood in the
general confidence of the Methodist Episcopal Church,
North and South, East and West; and although he was
not present at the General Conference at Cincinnati,
yet when we were about to elect three new bishops,
Dr. Winans, of Mississippi, a thorough Southern man,
and a great defender of slavery, rose, and in open
conference nominated Dr. Fisk for episcopal honors;
and if I am not greatly mistaken, nearly the entire
Southern delegation voted for him, and he was elected
by a great majority of the members of the General
Conference. But Dr. Fisk, thinking that the episcopate was strong enough without him, declined being
ordained, and lived and died without episcopal consecration. It is a pity that more Methodist preachers do

not follow the illustrious course pursued by Dr. Fisk.
Then we should benefit the slaves more than we do.

1-.r.'rnn OABTWBIGBT. 34

At the General Conference of 1836, there were six
new conferences. formed; two in _the West, namely,
Arkansas and Michigan, and four in the East, namely,
Erie, North Carolina, Oneida, and N ew—J ersey. The
number of members in the West was about 262,690;
our traveling preachers in the West had increased to
1,069. The number of members in the Eastern conferences was about 396,000; their traveling preachers
numbered about 3,560. Total membership, 658,690;
total traveling preachers, 4,629. Our increase in the
West, in four years, was something like 45,000; in
traveling preachers we had increased about 300.
The increase in the Eastern conferences, according to
the Minutes, was 14,000; their increase in traveling
preachers was something like 200. Total increase
through the connection, in four years, 59,000.

Thus, I think, without any disposition to boast in
the least degree, I may say, in the fear of God‘; that,
under the Divine guidance of the Great Redeemer,
the Methodist Episcopal Church, in point of prosperity and increase of number in her ministry and
membership, stands without an equal in the Protestant world since the days of the apostles. O, that she
may keep humble, and never move her old landmarks! ‘ .

Our venerable Bishop MiKendree, of whom I have
spoken freely in another part of this narrative, who
labored long and suffered much as a traveling
preacher, had closed his mortal probation on March
the 5th, 1835. At the General Conference at Cincinnati, in May, 1836, Bishop Soule preached the funeral
sermon of this eminent minister and unrivaled bishop
of the Methodist Episcopal Church. That sermon
has been published and thrown broadcast over the
world, and I therefore have no need to say anything

866 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

in relation to its merits. But I wish to say a few
brief things of Bishop MlKendree himself.

If my information be correct, he was born in King
William County, Virginia, 6th of July, 1757. In an
extensive and glorious revival of religion,‘ under the
ministerial labors of John Easter, a real son of thunder and of consolation too, MlKendree embraced religion and joined the Methodist Episcopal Church.
In a few months he was licensed to preach, and was
appointed to a circuit. He was very didident and
distrustful of his own abilities as a preacher. The
members of the Church did not receive him kindly.
This he told me himself, and under the discouragement he met with from his brethren, he left his circuit, conceiving that he was mistaken about his call
to the ministry, but he fell into good hands among
the preachers, and they advised, cheered, and comforted him, and soon he entered the work again.

These were the times of the schism created in the
Church by James OlKe1ly, who had a great influence
over MlKendree, and for a little while he inclined
to leave the Methodist Episcopal Church and go with
this popular schismatic. But he was not hasty, and
narrowly watched the spirit and course of OlKelly,
until he became thoroughly satisfied that OlKelly
was of a wrong and wicked spirit, and that the great
moving ' cause of OlKel1yls disaffection was disappointed ambition. He then gave up OiKelly, fully
satisiied that Bishop Asbury and his preachers were
right, and from this to the day of his death he never
wavered or doubted on the grand land—marks of
Episcopal Methodism.

Bishop MlKendree was the gentleman as well as

E"!-._ Christian minister. He was a profound theologian,
‘ gnd understood thoroughly the organic laws of ecclesi

—rx:'ran_ cnnrwnramr. 86"

sstic government; he was a dignified, shrewd parliamentary presiding oiiicer, a profound judge of human
nature, and one of the strongest debaters and logical reasoners that ever graced an American pulpit.
At an early period of his ministry he was transferred
to the Western‘ Conference, and, considering the
hardships, privations, and sufferings of frontier life,
and the delicacy of his constitution, he bore it all
with great cheerfulness and resignation, ‘and truly he
was, in hislfeelings and habits, a Western man and a
Western bishop. When his end drew near, death
found him duly prepared for his change, and on his
dying pillow and amid‘ surrounding friends, he was
enabled to ' proclaim, “ All is Well? He died in
Sumner County, Tennessee State, at his brothers
Dr. MiKendree, and was buried in his brotheris fami
ly burying ground, where all that is mortal of Bishop
MiKendree will repose till the general resurrection.

Dr. Jennings, of Baltimore, was employed to Write
his life for publication, and after making some progress in theiwork, declined its prosecution any further.
Then the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, in 1840, requested Bishop Soule to
prepare a history of his life and labors for publication, but by some strange neglect, Bishop Soule delayed doing so till the unhappy division of the Church,
and then Bishop Soule seceded from the Methodist
Episcopal Church, and joined the Church, South, and
Isuppose if ever the life of Bishop MiKendree is published at all, the Methodist Episcopal Church will be
deprived of the beneht of it. It is to be regretted
that this work has been so long delayed, and we think
unnecessarily so.

868 AI1'1‘0BIOG-BA.PKY- or

CHAPTER XXV.

THE NEW-SCHOOL PREACHER.

IN the fall of 1836, our conference was holden in
Rushville, Illinois State. Bishop  R. Roberts attended and presided. My field of labor had for four
years been the Quincy District. My constitutional
time was out, and I was again appointed to the Sangamon District, which was composed of the following
appointments: Jacksonville Station, Jacksonville Circuit, Winchester, Springfield Station, Sangamon, Flat
Branch, Athens, Pecan Mission, Beardstown Mission,
nine in all. It will be perceived that Beardstown
was this year first formed into a distinct station, and
Dr. P. Akers appointed missionary. It will also be
noticed that the Illinois Conference, at this date, not
only reached to the northern limits of the State, but
had spread with the constantly increasing population
into Wisconsin and Iowa Territories, and covered, in its
missionary stations, almost the entire unbroken Indian
country, now called the Minnesota Territory, and we
had thirteen presiding-elder districts, and at our annual conference, held in Jacksonville, Morgan County,
September 27th, 1837, we had over one hundred and
thirty traveling preachers, and over twenty—one thousand members. Any one of our traveling preachers
was liable to be sent from the mouth of the Ohio and
Wabash Rivers nearly to the head waters of the Mississippi, a thousand or twelve hundred miles, and all
the northern part of our conference was frontier work

rrxrnn cruvrwnxenr. 8633

or Indian wilds. Hard were our labors, but glorious
was our success.

This year, 1837, J. T. Mitchell was appointed to
the Jacksonville Station, and we had a blessed revival of religion in the station, and a number were
added to the Church. At one of our quarterly meetings there was a minister who was what was called a
New-School minister, and he was willing to work anywhere.‘ When the mourners presented themselves at
the altar of prayer, he would talk to them, and exhort
them to “change their purposefi and assured them
that all who changed their purpose were undoubted
Christians. I plainly saw‘ he was doing mischief, and
I went immediately after him, and told them not to
depend on a change of purpose in order to become a
Christian, but to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ
with a heart unto righteousness, and they should be
saved. Thus I had to counteract the false sentiments
inculcated by this New-School minister. It is very
strange to me to think these educated and homemanufactured preachers do not understand the plain,
Bible doctrine of the new birth better. They say
man is a free agent in so far as to changehis purpose, and in changing his purpose he is constituted a
new'creature. Thus he makes himself a Christian by
his own act without the Spirit of God. ,

This year we had a gracious work of religion in the
town of Winchester, in the Winchester Circuit. We
had no meeting-house or church built there at this

time to worship in, and when our quarterly meeting‘

came on the friends had procured an uniinished frame
building, large and roomy, to hold the quarterly
meeting in. There was a very large concourse of
people in attendance. The house was crowded to

overdowing; our seats were temporary; no altar, no
24

O70 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

pulpit, but our meeting progressed with great interest
The members of the Church were greatly revived,
many backsliders were reclaimed, and scores of weeping and praying sinners crowded our temporary altar
that we had erected. There happened to be at our quarterly meeting a
fresh, green, live Yankee from down East. He had
regularly graduated, and had his diploma, and was
regularly called, by the Home Missionary Society, to
visit the far-off West——a perfect moral waste, in his

_view of the subject; and having been taught to believe that we were almost cannibals, and that Methodist preachers were nothing but a poor, illiterate set of
ignoramuses, he longed for an opportunity to display
his superior tact and talent, and throw us poor
upstarts of preachers in the West, especially Methodist preachers, into the shades of everlasting darkness

He, of course, was very forward and omcious. He
Would, if I had permitted it, have taken the lead of
our meeting. At length I thought I would give him
a chance to ease himself of his mighty burden, so I
put him up one night to read his sermon. The frame
building we were worshiping in was not plastered,
and the wind blew hard; our candles flared and gave
a bad light, and our ministerial hero made a very
awkward out in reading his sermon. The congregation paid a heavy penance and became restive;
he balked, and hemmed, and coughed at a disgusting rate. At the end of about thirty minutes the
great blessing came: he closed, to the great satisfaction of all the congregation.

I rose and gave an exhortation, and had a bench
prepared, to which I invited the mourners. They
came. in crowds; and there was a solemn power rested
on the congregation. My little hot-house reader

PETER cuvrwnremr. 871

seemed to recover from his paroxysm of a total failure, as though he had done all right, and, uninvited,
he turned in to talk to the mourners. He would ask
them if they did not love Christ; then he would try
to show them that Christ was lovely; then he would
tell them it was a very easy thing to become 9. Christian; that they had only to resolve to be a Christian,
and instantly be or she was a Christian. I listened
a moment, and saw this heterodoxy would not do; that
it produced jargon and confusion. I stepped up to
him, and said:

“ Brother, you donlt know how to talk to mourners.
I Want you to go out into the congregation, and exhort sinners?

He did not appear the least disconcerted, but at
my bidding he left the altar, and out he Went into
the crowd, and turned in to talking to sinners. There
was a very large man, who stood a few steps from
the mourners, who weighed about two hundred and
thirty pounds; he had been a professor, but was
backslidden. The power of God arrested him, and he
cried out aloud for mercy, standing on his feet. My
little preacher turned round, and pressed back through
the crowd; and coming up to this large man, reached
up, and tapped him on the shoulder, saying,

“Be composed; be composed?

Seeing, and indistinctly hearing this, I made my
way to him, and cried out at the top of my voice,

“Pray on, brother; pray on, brother; therels no
composure in hell or damnation?

And just as I crowded my way to this convicted
man, who was still crying aloud for mercy, the little
preacher tapped him again on the shoulder, saying,

“ Be composed; be composed, brother?

I again responded:

872 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

“Pray on, brother; pray on, brother; there is no
composure in hell ii

I said to the throng that crowded the aisle that led
to the altar,

“Do, friends, stand back, till I get this man to the
mourneris bench?

But they were so completely jammed together
that it seemed almost impossible for me to get
through with my mourner. I let go his arm, and
stepped forward to open the way to the altar, and
just as I had opened the aisle, and turned to go back,
and lead him to the mourneris bench, the Lord spoke
peace to his soul, standing on his feet; and he cried,
“Glory to Godfi and in the ecstasy of his joy, he

reached forward to take me in his arms; but, fortunately for me, two men were crowded into the aisle

between him and myself, and he could not reach me.
Missing his aim in catching me, he wheeled round
and caught my little preacher in his arms, and lifted
him up from the floor; and being a large, strong man,
having great physical power, he jumped from bench
to bench, knocking the people against one another on
the right and left, front and rear, holding up in his
arms the little preacher. The little-fellow stretched
out both arms and both feet, expecting every moment to be his last, when he would have his neck
broken. 0! how I desired to be near this preacher
at that moment, and tap him on the shoulder, and
say, “Be composed; be composed, brother P But
as solemn as the times were, I, with many others,
could not command my risibilities, and for the moment, it had like to have checked the rapid flow of

good feeling with those that beheld the scene; but
you may depend on it, as soon as the little hct-bed
parson could make his escape, he was missing.

PETER OARTWBIGHT. 878

Our annual conference was held in Alton this fall,
September 12th, 1838. Owing to the low stage of
water in the Ohio River, Bishop Soule was detained
on the Way, and did not reach Alton till the fourth
day of the Conference. He not being present when
We organized, I was elected president of the Conference till the bishop arrived.

In the fall of 1839, our Illinois Conference was
held in Springlield, Sangamon County; here We
elected our delegates to the eighth delegated General
Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church. I
was one of the delegates, and this was the seventh
General Conference to which I was elected. Our
General Conference sat in Baltimore, May 1st, 1840.
At this Conference, the unhappy agitation of slavery
was revived. The two ultra parties had their representatives there. The slavery party from the South
contended that slavery was no disqualiiication for the
episcopal oflice. The abolitionists from the North
contended that slavery was a sin under all circumstances. This party was led on by 0. Scott; and
they urged that it should not only be a test of oiiice,
but of membership, in the Methodist Episcopal
Church in the slaveholding states, as Well as the free
states. Our Committee on Episcopacy had recommended the election of two more bishops; believing
that if we Went into an election of these oiiicers of
the Church, a conflict on the subject would ensue,
and believing that the then present incumbents of
that oflice could discharge all the labors necessary
for the healthy action of the Church, I flung myself
against the election of any more bishops at that Conference. In this, nearly all the conservative members of the General Conference joined me, and thereby

, defeated_ the ‘designs of both the ultra parties, and

f

874 -AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

every aspiring expectant for that ofiice, for the time
being, and, in all probability, a rupture in the Church.
At this General Conference, the following additional
annual conferences were formed: Rock River, North
Ohio, Memphis, and Texas, all in the West and
Southwest. Rock River Conference was stricken off
from the Illinois Conference, and consisted of the
following presiding-elder districts: Chicago, Ottawa,
Mount Morris, Burlington, Iowa, Indian Mission,
Plattville, and Milwaukie; eight in number.

The Illinois ponference consisted of the following
presiding-elder districts, namely: Danville, Mount
Vernon, Vandalia, Lebanon, Jacksonville, Spring‘ field, Quincy, Knoxville, and Bloomington; nine in

number. We had in Rock River Conference, 6,585
members, and 75 traveling preachers; in Illinois
Conference, we had 24,687 members, and 103 traveling preachers. North Ohio Conference was stricken
off from Ohio Conference; the Memphis Conference
was stricken oil‘ from the Tennessee Conference; the
Texas Conference was taken from Mississippi Conference, and had three presiding—elder districts,
namely: San Augustine, Galveston, Rutersville; having 18 traveling preachers, and 1,853 members.
Thus you see in the two original divisions of the
work, namely, East and West, the East had sixteen
annual conferences; and the West, with her enlargements, had -sixteen annual conferences; making, in
all, thirty-two, besides .the Liberia Mission Conference and the Canadas, which were under foreign
governments.

The Eastern division of the work had, in members,

466,561; in traveling preachers, 3,125; the membeft '

ship in the West was, 37 5,433; traveling preachers
we had, 1.447. Total in members, 841,994; in travrnrnn canrwnrenr. 875

eling preachers, 4,57 2. Increase in four years in the
East was, in members, 60,500 ; in the Western division
was over 11,200.

Here I wish to remark that the abolition party up
to this time had universally, as far as I knew, opposed
most strenuously the Colonization Society; and it
really appeared to me that if they could not effect an
immediate emancipation, and a restoration of the people of color to equal rights and privileges with the
whites, they did not care what became of them. I will
state a case. In Natchez, Mississippi, the Methodist
Episcopal Church had erected a good, substantial
church at a considerable cost. The galleries of the
church were appropriated for the use and beneht of
the colored people. Some time in 1839 or 1840, a
fearful tornado had swept over the town of Natchez,
and done a great deal of damage; and among the
rest, it had well-nigh overturned the Methodist
Church, so that it was not safe to worship in it. The
society was weak, and comparatively poor. In this
situation they were deprived of any suitable place to
worship in, either the whites or blacks.

The delegates from the Mississippi Conference came
on to the General Conference, and asked aid of their
Eastern brethren, and of the members of the General
Conference, to rebuild, or refit their church; and a
collection was taken up in the Conference for this
purpose; and if my memory serves me, the members
of the'General Conference gave them over one thousand dollars; but our abolition brethren would not
give anything, alleging that the Church or the Gospel
could do no good to either the slaves or slaveholders,‘
so long as slavery existed among them. I went to
those members of the General Conference who refused,
 up-.igd_ to reason the case with them; but all in

1‘.

87 6

vain. I urged that these poor slaves could not - help
themselves; they were in bondage, not of choice, but
from circumstances beyond their control; and we
ought not to withhold the Gospel from them, for it
was all the comfort these poor slaves could have in
this life, or to fit them for happiness in the life to
come. But no; it was upholding and countenancing
slavery, and, therefore, their consciences would not
let them contribute anything. Now look at it; who
does not see that there was a wrong and fanatical
spirit which actuated them, and that their consciences,
for solidity and rotundity, very much resembled a
ramis horn. But this false view has prevented many,
very many, from doing their duty by these poor
‘children of Ham.

In the fall of 1840-41, I was appointed to Jackson
ville District; and on September 15th, 1841, our annual conference was holden in Jacksonville. Bishop
Morris presided. The Jacksonville District embraced
the following appointments, namely: Carrollton Station, Carrollton Circuit, Grafton, Whitehall, Winchester, Jacksonville Station, Jacksonville Circuit, and
Manchester, eight appointments. In the course of
this year, we had a camp quarterly meeting, for
the Winchester Circuit, in what was called Egypt.
We had a beautiful camp-ground, a few miles from
Winchester. There was a general turn-out among
the members, who tented on the ground. William D.
R. Trotter was the circuit preacher.

We had been threatened by many of the baser sort.
that they would break up our camp-meeting; and
there was a general rally from the floating population
of the river, and the loose-footed, cloggery-haunting,
 renegades of the towns and villages all
onhd. .'],?hey- .came and pitched their tents a few,

AUTOBIOGRAPHY on

-9- on o

rarnn canrw-n—1enr. 877

hundred yards from the camp ground. Many also
came in wagons and carriages, bringing whisky and
spirits of different kinds, pies, cigars, tobacco, etc.
We had many respectable tent-holders and proper
omcers on the ground, but I plainly saw we were
to have trouble, so I summoned the tent-holders
and friends of good order together, and we adopted
rules to govern the meeting, and then urged them,
one and all, to aid me in executing those rules for
the maintenance of good order. But I thought there
was a disposition in some of the friends to shrink
from responsibility, and that they must be roused to
action.

When we were called to the stand by the sound of
the trumpet, I called the attention of the congregation
to the absolute necessity of keeping good order. I
stated that my father was a Revolutionary soldier, and
fought for the liberties we enjoyed, and all the boon he
had left me was liberty; and that, as the responsible
omcer of the camp-meeting, if the h-iends of order and
the sworn ofhcers of the law would give me backing,
I would maintain order at the risk of my life. My leoture roused the friends of order, and they gave me
their countenance and aid; but the whisky sellers and
whisky drinkers, nothing daunted, commenced their
deeds of darkness. Some were soon drunk, and interrupted our devotions very much. I then ordered
several write, and took into custody several of those
whisky venders and drunken rowdies; but these row»
dies rose in mob force, and rescued the whisky seller
and_ his wagon and team from the oiiicer of the law
The officer came running to me, and informed me of
the rising of the mob, and that the whisky man was
given up, and was making his escape; and it appeared
 hewas verymnqh scared. .I told himto sum878 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

men me and five other men that I named, and I would
insure the re-taking of the transgressor, in spite of any
mob. He did so. We rushed upon them and stopped
team. The man that had transgressed drew a weapon,
and ordered us to stand off; that he would kill the first
man that touched him: and as one of the men and
myself that were summoned to take him rushed on
him, he made a stroke at my companion with his
weapon, but missed him. I‘ then sprang upon him
and caught him by the collar, and jerked him ever the
Wagon bed, in which he was standing, among his barrels. He fell on all-fours. I jumped on him, and told
him he was my prisoner, and that if he did not sup
render I should hurt him. The deputy sheriff of the
county, who was with the mob, and a combatant at
that, ran up to me, and ordered me to let the prisoner
go. I told him I should not. He said if I did not, he
would knock me over. I told him if he struck te
make a sure lick, for the next was mine. Our oilicer
then commanded me to take the deputy sheriff, and I
did so. He scufiied a little; butdinding himself in
rather close quarters, be surrendered.

We then took thirteen of the mob, the whisky
seller, and the sheriff, and marched them off to the
magistrate, to the tune of good order. They were
lined by the justice of the peace; some paid their
line, some appealed to court. This appealing we
liked well, because they then had to give security,
and this secured the line and costs, which some of
them were not able to pay.

This somewhat checked them for a while, but they
rallied again, and gave us trouble. There was one
man, a turbulent fellow, who sold whisky about a
quarter of a mile off. He had often interrupted us

by selling whisky at our ctmpomeetings. He genus

rnrnn canrwaxenr. 879

ally went armed with deadly weapons, to keep of
oflicors. I sent the constable after him, but he had a
musket, well loaded, and would not be taken. He
kept a drinking party round him nearly all night;
however, toward morning they left him, and went off
to sleep as best they could, and he lay down in his
wagon, and went to sleep, with—his loaded musket_by
his side.

Just as day dawned, I slipped over the creek and
came up to his wagon. He was fast asleep. I reached
over the wagon bed and gathered his gun and ammunition; then struck the wagon bed with the muzzle
of the musket, and cried out, “Wake up! wake up W
He sprang to his feet, and felt for his gun. I said,
“ You are my prisoner; and if you resist, you are a
dead man W He begged me not to shoot, and said
that he would surrender. I told him to get out of the
wagon, and march before me to the camp ground;
that I was going to have him tried for violating good
order and the laws of his country.. He began to beg
most piteously, and said if I would only let him escape
that time, he would gear up and go right away, and
never do the like again. I told him to harness his
team, and start. He did so. When he got ready to
go, I poured out his powder, and fired off his musket
and gave it to him; and he left us, and troubled us
no more.

On Sunday night, the rowdies all collected at the
Mormon camp. It was so called, because some Mormons had come and pitched a tent a quarter of a mile
from our encampment,. with whisky and many other
things to sell. They ate and drank; and by way of

mockery, and in contempt of religion, they helda camps-medting; they preached, prayed, called for
mcinnerd, shouted, and kept up a continual annoy880 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

ance. They sent me word they would give me ten
dollars if I would bring an ofiicer and a company to
take them; that they could whip our whole encampment. They fixed out their watchers.

I bore it, and waited till late in the night; and
when most of our tent-holders were retired to rest, I
rose from my bed, dressed myself in some old shabby
clothing that I had provided for the purpose, and
sallied forth. It was a beautiful moonlight night.
Singly and alone I went up to the Mormon camp.
When I got within a few rods of their encampment, I
stopped, and stood in the shadow of a beautiful sugartree. Their motley crowd were carrying on at a
mighty rate. One young man sprang upon a barre], and called them to order, saying he was going to
preach to them, and must and would have order, at
the risk of his life. Said he, “My name is Petal
Cartwright; my father fought through the old war
with England, and helped to gain our independence,
and all the legacy.he left me was liberty. Come to
order and take your seats, and hear me W

They obeyed him, and took their seats. He then
sung and prayed, rose up, took his text, and harangued
them about half an hour. He then told them he
was going to call for mourners, and ordered a bench
to be set out; and it was done. He then invited
mourners to come forward and kneel down to be
prayed for. A vast number of the crowd came and
kneeled, more than his bench could accommodate.
This self-styled preacher, or orator of the night, then
called lustily for another bench; and still they crowded to it. A thought struck me that I would go and
kneel with them, as this would give me a fine chance
to letloose on them at a proper ‘time ;' but as I had
determined to rout the whole company and take their

PETER cnnrwnrenr. 881camp single-handed and alone, I declined kneeling
with the mourners. So this young champion of the
devil called on several to pray for these mourners; he
exhorted them almost like a real preacher. Several
pretended to get religion, and jumped and shouted at
a fearful rate. Their preacher by this time was pretty
much exhausted, and became thirsty. He ordered a
pause in their exercises, and called for something to
drink; he ordered the tent-holder to bring the best
he had. 1
- Just at this moment I fetched two or three loud
whoops, and said, “ Here! here! here, omcers and
men, take them! take them! every one of them,
tent-holders and all W and I rushed on them. They
broke, and ran pell-mell. Forttmately, five or six
little lads were close by, from our encampment, who
had been watching me raise the shout, and rushed
with me into their camp; but all the motley crowd
fled, tent-holders and all, and the lads and myself
had not only peaceable, but entire possession of all
their whisky, goods, chattels, and some arms, and not
a soul to dispute our right of possession. Thus you
see a literal fulfillment of Scripture, “The wicked
ileeth when no man pursueth ii or, “One shall chase
a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight}!
There are but very few hardened wretches who
disturb religious worship but what at heart are
base cowards; this I have proved to my entire satisfaction throughout my ministerial life, for more than
fifty years. I will here say, on Monday, the day after
the rout of the Mormon camp, the power of God fell
on our congregation, and the whole encampment was
lighted with the glory of God. The Church, or
members of the Church, were greatly blessed, and
felt fully compensated for all the toil and trouble that

aw AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

they had been at in pitching their tents in the grove
and waiting upon the Lord a few days and nights.
Hardened sinners were brought to bow before the
Lord, and some of them were soundly converted.
And I will record it to the glory of the stupendous grace of God, that the young man who had
been the ringleader in the ranks of these disturbers
of Godls people, and the mock preacher in the Mormon camp the night before, was overtaken by the
mighty power of God, and awfully shaken as it were
over hell. He fell prostrate before God and all the
people he had so much disturbed, and persecuted,
and cried for mercy as from the verge of damnation,
and never rested till God reclaimed him, for he was
a wretched backslider._ I had known him in Tennessee, and had often preached in his fathefs house.

Of the disorderly fellows who had been arrested and
ji/rwd, and had appealed to the court, hardly one of
them came to a good end, or died a natural death;
some ran away to Texas, some were stabbed in

affrays « of different -kinds; it seemed as if God had '

put a mark on them, and his fearful judgments followed them even into strange and distant -lands. When
their appeals came on for trial in court, there were
two distinguished lawyers who volunteered to conduct the prosecution against them; one of them was
the lamented General Hardin, of Morgan County, who
afterward fell in Mexico in General Taylorls army, at
the memorable battle of Buena Vista, while fighting,
or contending with Santa Anals unprincipled minions; but he died like a brave soldier and subordinate oflicer. Peace to his memory! He was considered a worthy member of the Presbyterian; Church,
and a stanch friend to good order.

The other lawyer, Mr. Sanbourn, though somewhat

PETER C.-tR'I‘WRIGH.'1‘. 883

dissipated at times, was a talented gentleman of the
bar, and a friend to religious order. These gentlemen, without fee or reward, volunteered their services
to prosecute these wretched disturbers of the worship
of God, and by. their eloquent appeals to the jurors
made these transgressors quail before the public bar
of their country; and these suits, first and last, cost
those offenders against the morals of their country
over three hundred dollars, showing them clearly
that the way of the transgressor is hard. I must remark here that I was much pleased with the decision
of Judge Lockwood, who presided at the trial; his
decision was substantially this, that no matter what
the articles were that were sold at a place of worship,
if it disturbed the peace and quiet of the worshipcrs, it was punishable by the statute that was enacted for the protection of worshiping assemblies ; that
as a free people, where there was no religious test, we
had a right to assemble and establish our own forms,
or rules of order, and that anything which infracted

those rules of order made to govern a worshiping

congregation, the law made a high misdemeanor,
and therefore those who transgressed those rules
were punishable by the law. Our present law to
protect worshiping congregations is too loose and obscure. In the hands of good oflicers of the law, the ,

present statute will protect people in the sacred right
to worship God; but in the~hands of corrupt officers
it is often construed to screen offenders, and thereby
give encouragement to disorderly persons to trample
with impunity on the rights of religious people. I
have often wondered why legislative bodies of men
should be so reluctant to pass a stringent law on
this subject. If people donlt like the forms of worship of any religious denomination, let them stay

0

884 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

away; but if they will attend their religious assemblies, they ought to behave themselves; and if they
will not behave and conform, they ought by law to
be compelled to do it, or punished severely for tramplillg tmder foot the rights of a free people assembled
for the express purpose of peaceably worshiping
God. The good book is 1'ig11t when it declares,
“Willem the wicked hear rule the land mournethfl
and that “1'ig;11teo11s11ess exalteth a nation, but sin is
a 1'epr0:1ch to any people ;‘i but we still hope to see
better days, better laws, and better administrators
of law. The Lord hasten it in his time.

rrrmn oanrwnmnr. 385

CHAPTER XXVI.

CHURCH IN A CABIN.

- IN the fall of 1842 our Illinois Conference was
holden in Winchester, Scott County, September 14th;
Bishop Roberts presided, and I was continued on
the Jacksonville District. The reader will indulge
me in saying a few things about my own immediate
neighborhood. When I settled here in 1824, there was
no society nearer than five miles on Rock Creek, to
which place my family had to go for circuit preaching and class-meeting every Sunday, if they attended

anywhere. There was in my immediate settlement
but one single member of the Methodist Church, be'sides my own family. This member was a widow

lady, a very fine woman, and I think a consistent
Christian. . - ' ‘ '
The country was entirely new and almost in a state of
nature: we had no churches to worship_in; nearly all
the citizens lived in newly-built cabins: We thought
we would open our cabin for preaching, and did so,
and invited the neighbors to come and hear the word
of God, and worship with us. I formed a small class
of about twelve, including three of my own family,
and we kept circuit preaching in our humble dwelling for fourteen years, during which time our little
class continued with various successes and depressions from year to year. Sometimes by emigration
we increased considerably, and then, when these new

emigrants would select homes for themselves, and
25

886 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or.

move off, we would be reduced almost to the number
with which we started.

About this time my wifels health was very poor, so
that entertaining preaching every two weeks, and
class-meeting every Sunday, became a little too
much for her strength. I determined to build a
church; but how was it to be done? The society
was small and poor, the citizens outside of the society
were comparatively poor, and not friendly to the
Methodists; but I determined to build -a house to
worship God in, and accordingly I opened a subscription, had trustees appointed, gave a lot of ground to
build the church on, and subscribed one hundred
dollars toward its erection. But when I presented
my subscription paper to neighbors round, there were
‘many objections and excuses; some wanted it for
school purposes as well as a Church; some said if I
would make it "a Union Church for all denominations,
they would then help, but they would not give anything if it was to be deeded to the Methodist Episcopal Church. To these objections I answered, No,
friends; a church should never be a school-house;
and as for a Union Church, I never knew one built
on this principle but what became a bone of contention and created strife, and ended in confusion; that
a church should always belong to some religious denomination that would take care of it, and I was
going to build a church for the Methodists; if they
would help me I would thank them; and if they did
not see proper to do so, I would try without their
help as best I could. Our help amounted to but
little, but we commenced, and finally succeeded in
building a neat little church, twenty-four by thirty
feet, which cost us about six hundred dollars, of
which I had to pay about three hundred. I strug4|

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 387

glad hard, and sometimes thought my load was too
heavy to get along with, but my creed was never to
back out unless I found myself wrong.

Shortly after we finished the house, Brother Heath,
now of California, and Brother H. Wallace, of the
Griggsville District, Illinois Conference, were our circuit preachers, and it pleased the Lord to pour out
his Holy Spirit upon our congregation and settlement
generally, and we had a glorious revival, resulting in

about forty conversions and accessions to the Church.
I then thought that the use I had made of the $300

in building the church, was the best investment I had ‘

ever made in all my life. We called the house
“ Pleasant Plains Church?

Long since our little church became too small, and
we have enlarged it so that it is now thirty feet by
fifty. Our society increased so that a division has

taken place, and another very respectable church has

been built a few miles off, and the two societies number near one hundred and eighty members, and the
time is not distant when another church must be erected a few miles south of the old stand. See what the
Lord has done for us, under all the forbidding circumstances that attended our little history in the last
thirty years. Praise the Lord!

I beg leave here to say that the iirst church, as far
as I know, ever built in Sangamon County and Sangamon Circuit, was on Spring Creek, six miles West
of Springfield. It was really a log-cabin, about eighteen feet by twenty, with a log partition cutting off a
small part of it for a class-room. Here was one of
the oldest classes ever formed in Sangamon Circuit.
In this little house the society met and worshiped for
many years; and, on the lot donated for the church
and burying-ground, the circuit erected a large and

888 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

comfortable camp ground, and many, very many,
glorious camp-meetings were held here, and I may
safely say that hundreds of souls were born into the
kingdom of God on this consecrated ground; and
many of those who sung and shouted the high praises
of God on this ground have long since fallen victims
to death, and are now employed in singing praises to
God and the Lamb, around the throne in heaven.

This camp ground was called “Wattersis Camp
Ground? He lived near it, but years gone by he
left the Church militant for the Church triumphant
above. This spot is sacred to me, as several of my
children were converted on it, and many of my best
friends in heaven, as well as on earth, were converted
here, and we have sung, and prayed, and shouted
together, and I have a strong hope that We shall
shortly sing together in heaven, and this singing and
shouting will last forever. Amen.

In 1840-41, Alton Station, that had been attached to
the Lebanon District, Charles Holliday presiding elder,
was attached to the Jacksonville District, N. Hobart
in charge. In the fall of 1842-43, N. S. Bastion and
C. J. Houts were appointed to Alton. Our quarterly
meeting came off in the dead of this winter; and
although it was bitter cold weather, we had a good
congregation, and Divine power was present to heal.
Many were converted and deeply penitent, and we
found it necessary to protract the meeting. Mourners,
in crowds, came to the altar for the prayers of the
Church. Right in the midst of our revival, the keeper
of the Eagle Tavern took it into his heart (not head,
for that was nearly brainless) that he would stop our
revivals; so he proclaim ed that he was going to have a.
splendid free ball the next evening at the Eagle Tavern,
and disnatched his runners and ticketed nearly the

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 889

whole city. Among the rest he sent me a ticket to the
church, where we were having a very good meeting.

Just before the congregation was dismissed I rose in .

the pulpit and read my ticket to the ball, and then
announced that I could not attend the Eagle Tavern
ball, for the reason that I was going to have a.
Methodist ball in the church the same evening, and
requested the whole congregation to attend the

I Methodist ball, and get as many more to come with

them as theycould; that my invitation they might
consider as a free ticket; that I was sure we would
have a better fiddler than they possibly could scare
up at the Eagle Tavern. The thing took like wildIire. The wickedest persons in the congregation‘ electicneered for the Methodist ball, and cried out shame
on the tavern-keeper. When the evening came, after
all the drilling and drumming of the tavern-keeper,
he could not get ladies enough to dance a four-handed
reel. He succeeded in getting two little girls and
some men, and these mean fellows had well-nigh
danced‘ the children to death. Our church was
crowded to overflowing. That night the arm of the
Lord was made bare, and the mighty power of God
was felt through the numerous crowd. Many came
to the altar as weeping penitents, but rose therefrom
with triumphant shouts of “ Glory to God in the
highest, peace on earth, good-will toward men?

I now beg leave to relate an incident which occurred at this meeting; I will do it as delicately as I
well can. Among the crowd that came to the altar
there were many women, and among them two goodlooking, well-dressed young ladies, who were deeply
affected; it seemed as if the great deep of their hearts
was broken up. I was informed that they were under
ill-fame, and an old sister in the Church was so dis890 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

turbed about them that she wanted me to drive them
from the altar, for fear we should be reproached and
bring down persecution on the Church. I told her to
be quiet, and let them alone, “For? said I, “ they
must have religion, or be lost forever? But the old
sister would not rest; she ran to Brother Bastion and
told him. He was a very sensitive man. He came
to me and whispered, telling me they must be ordered
away directly; it would ruin our meeting and stop
the work. I begged him to let them alone. “ Nowfl
said I, “ brother, on the other side of the altar there
are a dozen men that, in all probability, are guilty of
as base conduct as these young women; why donlt
you go and drive them from the altar? Do let them
alone. Do you go and talk to the men, and I will
attend to these females; they must not be driven from
the altar of prayer? But two of our old, squeamish
sisters, when I turned away from Brother Bastion, renewed their importunities with Bastion, and, while my
attention was called to regulate the congregation,
Bastion went and ordered these two women from the
altar. They retired away back to a vacant seat and
sat down, and wept bitterly. As soon as I discovered
what was done, I followed those women to their seats,
and talked with them and encouraged them, saying,
“ Although you may be rejected by mortals, God will
not reject or spurn you from his presence. Mary
Magdalene had seven devils, yet Christ cast them all
out; the man in the tombs had a legion of devils in
him, but Christ dispossessed them all? They asked
me to pray for them. “Yesfl said I, “ with all my
heartfl and we knelt down and prayed. It seemed as
if their hearts would break with the sorrow and
anguish they felt; and then, to punish those sensitive
old -sisters, I went and made them come and pray $1rnrnn GABTW.B1GHT. 891

‘them, and before we closed our meeting one of them
professed to be converted, and I have no reason to
doubt it. The other left the house weeping. She
never returned to our meeting. Perhaps she was forever lost on account of this uncalled-for rebuke.

The next time we opened the doors of the Church,
to take in members, a number came and joined. This
young woman, who had experienced religion, advanced to the foot of the altar, but would not come
and give me her hand. I saw she wanted to join, but
was afraid, not having confidence to do so; and she
said, afterward, she thought the Church would not
receive her. I went to her, took her by the hand,
and asked her if she did‘ not desire to join the Church.
She said, with streaming eyes, “ Yes, if the Church
can possibly receive me, and grant me the lowest seat
among Godls people?

I lived to see this woman in other and after years,
and with iirm and unfaltering steps she lived up to
her profession, and thoroughly redeemed herself from
degradation, in the estimation of all who knew her.
Now, dear reader, think of it. Did Christ reject the
woman taken in adultery, or the woman of Samaria
at the well, or any other poor wretched sinner, male
or female, that ever came to him with a broken and
contrite heart? Think of the significant words of the
POW:

“ None are too vile, who will repent.

Out of one sinner legions went,
The Lord did him relievejl &c.

It is a little singular why men, and women too,
should feel such sensitiveness concerning females of
ill-fame more than they do in relation to men; BSPG-3
gially when they make efforts to reform tiheir 1iV9§

892 AUTOBIOGRAPHY orand live religious, but it is so, though I cannot see
any just reason for it.

This conference year, 1842-43, was a memorable
one in many parts of our beloved Zion. Jacksonville
District shared largely in revival influences. Several
hundred were soundly converted, and ever live hundred joined the Methodist Episcopal Church in the
bounds of the district. We not only had the abovenamed revival in Alton, but Brother Bird had a prosperous year on the Carrollton Circuit; Brother J. B.

Houts considerable prosperity on the Whitehall Cir-'

cuit; Brother Grubbs had a fine revival in the Jacksonville Station, but perhaps it was a jubilee to the
Winchester Circuit, under the labors of Brother N orman Allen, and those that worked side by side with
him pretty near the whole year.

Naples, a beautiful little town on the east bank of
the Illinois River, was one of the appointmentsin the
Winchester Circuit. The citizens were kind and
friendly; but, with a few exceptions, they were very
wicked, and had long resisted and rejected the offers
of mercy; but at a protracted. meeting gotten up and
superintended by Brother Allen, this wicked little
town was awfully shaken by the power of God; many
tall sons and daughters of dissipation were made to
quail under the power of God. From day to day,
from evening to evening, they crowded the place of
worship, and, with unmistakable signs of penitence,
prostrated themselves at the mournersl bench. The
cries of the penitent and the shouts of the converted
were heard with awe and wonder by the Wicked multitude that stood around. Deism gave way, Universalism caved in, skepticism, with its coat of many
colors, stood aghast, hell trembled, devils fled, drunkards awoke to soberness, and, I may safely say, all

rnrna canrwnremr. 893

ranks and grades of sinners were made to cry out,
“ Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved W
The cries ‘of penitents were not only heard in the
church, but in the streets, in almost all the houses,
by day and by night. Many were the thrilling incidents that attended this revival in Naples. More
than one hundred were converted, and joined the
Church, and the whole face of the town was changed;
and although some of them fell back into their old
habits of vice, yet many of them stood firm as pillars
in the house of God. The subjects of this revival
were from the child of ten or twelve years to the
hoary-headed sinner that stood trembling on the
verge of the grave.

Before this meeting closed in Naples, which was
crowned with such signal success, our quarterly meeting commenced in a little town in the same circuit
called Exeter. There Satan had long reigned without
a rival, wickedness of all kinds abounded, and what
made it the more deplorable, the wickedness of the
people was sanctified by a Universalist priest or
preacher, who assured them all of eternal salvation
in heaven, irrespective of their moral conduct here
on earth. I have thought, and do still think, if I
were to set out to form a plan to contravene the laws
of God, to encourage wickedness of all kinds, to corrupt the morals and encourage vice, and crowd hell
with the lost and the wailings of the danmed, the Universalist plan should be the plan, the very plan, that
I would adopt. What has a Universalist, who really
and sincerely believes that doctrine, to fear? Just
nothing at all ; for this flesh-pleasing, conscience-soothing doctrine will not only justify him in his neglect
of duty to God and man, but gives fallen nature an
unlimited license to serve the devil with greediness,

894 euromoeaarnv or,

in any and every possible way that his degenerate,
fallen soul requires or desires.

A few years ago I had a neighbor who professed to
be a confirmed Universalist. He contended with me
that there was no devil but the evil disposition in
man, and that there was no hell but the bad feelings
that men had when they did wrong; that this was all
the punishment anybody would suffer. When this
neighboris father lay on his dying bed, (a confirmed
Universalist, professedly,) there was a faithful minister of Christ believed it his duty to visit this old Universalist, and warn him of his danger, and try to
awaken his conscience, if not seared, to a just view
of his real situation. The minister, however, failed
in his faithful attempt and well-meant endeavors;
for the old man, then on his dying pillow, was greatly
offended at the preacher, and told him he did not
thank him for trying to shake his faith in his dying
moments. This neighbor of mine, and son of this
old, hardened sinner, was greatly enraged at the
preacher, and cursed and abused him in a Violent
manner. A few days after the demise of the old man,
he, in a furious rage, began to abuse and curse the
preacher in my presence, and said,

“ D n him, I wish he was in hell, and the devil
had him? ‘

I stopped him short by saying, “Pooh, pooh, man,
what are you talking about? There is no hell but
the bad feelings that a man has when he does wrong,
and no devil but the evil disposition that is in man."
Thus answering a fool according to his folly.

“Well? said he, “if there is no hell, there ought to
be, to put such preachers in? ,

“Now, sir? said I, “ you see the utter nntenablenees
of your creed, for a man, even in trying to do good

 

PETER cnvrwnremv 895

honestly, draws down your wrath, and, in a moment,
you want a hell to put him into, and a devil to torment‘ him, for giving you an offense, and for doing
what no good man ought to be offended about. But
God must be insulted, his name blasphemed, his laws
trampled under foot, yet he must have no hell to put
such wretches in, no devil to torment him. Now I
would be ashamed of myself if I were in your place,
and let the seal of truth close my lips forever hereafter?

Although he was confounded, he still clave to his
God-dishonoring doctrine, waxing worse and worse,
till it was generally believed he was guilty of a most
heinous crime. '

But to return to the narrative. From the iirst sermon in Exeter, at the quarterly meeting, there were
visible signs of good, and although the weather was
intensely cold, yet our Church was crowded beyond

its utmost capacity. The power of God arrested many careless sinners, and waked up many old formal professors of religion. There was a large compan)‘ of young unfledged Universalists who came to
look: on and mock; and so ignorant were they, that
they did not imagine they would run into any possiblo danger of taking these “Methodist iitsfl as they
called the exercises that were going on. There were
two sisters, young ladies, carried off with the soul-destroying doctrines of the Universalists, in attendance.
In pressing through the crowd, I saw one of them was
deeply aifected, and weeping. I went and talked with
her. She saw her wretched condition. I invited her
to go to the altar with the mourners; she consented,
and I led her there. I talked and prayed with her;

she was ‘deeply engaged. Her sister -did not know

for some time that she was at the mournaersl hneh,

396 ‘AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

but presently some one told her. At this she flew
into a violent rage, and said, at the -risk of her life,
she would have her out of that disgraceful place. I
happened to turn my face toward the door, and saw
her coming; the house was very much crowded; some
tried to stop her, but she rushed on. I rose and met
her in the crowded aisle, and told her to be calm and
desist. She made neither better nor worse of it than
to draw back her arm and give me a severe slap
in the face with her open hand. I confess this rather
took me by surprise, and, as the common saying is, she
made the fire fly out of my eyes in tremendous
sparkling brilliancy; but collecting my best judgment‘, I caught her by the arms near her shoulders,
and wheeled her to the right about, and moved hei
foward to the door, and said, “Gentlemen, please open
the door; the devil in this Universalist lady has got
lighting hot, and I want to set her outside to cool?
The door was opened, and I landed her out with this
assurance, that when she got in a good humor, and
could behave herself like a decent lady ought to do,
then, and not till then, she might come in again. I
then closed the door, and set a watch to keep it to
avoid further disturbance. ‘

I had hardly returned to the altar when the young
lady I had led there rose and gave us a heavenly
shout, and then another, and another, till five
in rapid succession raised the shout. It ran like
electricity through the congregation; sinners wept,
quaked, and trembled, and saints shouted aloud for
joy. Thus our meeting continued for a number of
nights and days, and many souls were born into the
‘kingdom of God. The whole country around for
miles came to our meetings, were convicted and converted, and great was the joy of the people of

PETER CABTWRIGHT. 897

God.‘ ' Over one hundred professed religion, and
nearly that number joined the Methodist Episcopal
Church. i

There was a gentleman in this place who had been
very wicked, a noted gambler, by the name of,
W——t; he was an esquire. He got under serious
concern for his salvation, and sent for me; I went
and prayed with him. After talking with him a little
he got up deliberately, went to his desk, took out his
cards, stepped to the iire, and pitched them in, making a whole burnt-offering of them. Shortly after
this he found peace, and was, as I believe, soundly
converted to God. He seemed to have the innocence
and simplicity of a child. He was very zealous
for God, and gave great promise of doing good. He
had a brother-in-law and sister in Nauvoo, among
the self-deluded Mormons. His sister professed to
have the of tongues, and his brother-in-law the
gift of healing all manner of diseases, and the interpretation of tongues. .

This brother, in his zeal for God, was impressed that
he must go to Nauvoo to convince his brother-in-law
and sister, and all the rest of the Mormons, that they
were Wrong. I tried to dissuade him, knowing they
were artful and cunning, and adepts in practicing
frauds and religious jugglery, and that he was just in
a state of mind to be deceived, without any experience
of the devices of the devil, especially of his power to
transform himself into an angel of light; but, despite
all my remonstrances, go he must, and go he did; and,
as I predicted, they were ready for him. They told him
that he was just right as far as he had gone; that the
Methodists were right as far as they had gone, and
next to the Latter Day Saints, alias Mormons, were
the best people in all the land, but they had stopped

898 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

short of their grand and glorious mission; that they
were afraid of persecution‘, and had shrunk from their
duty; that if they had followed the light they would
have taken the world, and that the best and holiest
men and women among the Mormons had been members of the Methodist Church. They told him if he
would join the Mormons and live faithful, that in a
very little time he would have the gift of tongues,
and the gift of healing, so that by faith he < would
raise the dead as did the first Christians. The fatal
bait was gulped down; they took him to the river
and ducked him; and when I last saw him he ‘was in
daily expectation of these great gifts. I told him he
would never receive them; and he promised me if he
did not, he would leave them. What has become of
him I know not, but it is probable he is at Utah, and
has fifteen or twenty wives.

I will name another incident connected with this
revival. There was an interesting young man, well
educated, and gentlemanly in all his conduct, from
some of the Eastern states. He boarded at a house
I frequently visited. He was serious; I talked to him,
and he frankly admitted the real necessity of religion,
and said, for his right hand he would not lay a straw
in the way of any person to prevent him from getting religion; but he said he was not ready to start
in this glorious cause, but that be fully intended
at some future time to seek religion. I urged him
to submit now; that in all probability he never would
live to see so good a time to get religion as the present. He admitted all I said, and wept like a child;
‘mt I could not prevail on him to start now in this
heavenly race.

As our meeting was drawing to a close, I was uncommonly anxious to see this young man converted,

irnrnn cuvrwnrenr. 899

but I was not permitted to see it. Some little time
before we closed the meeting, a messenger arrived for
me to go to another town where the work of religion
had broken out, and they greatly needed ministerial
aid. The day after I left this young man he was taken violently ill. His disease was rapid, all medical aid
failed, and he was shortly given over by his physicians to die. He sent post-‘haste for me to come to
him. Ihastened to him, but never to the last moment of my recollection shall I ever forget the bitter lamentations of this young man. “ O W said he,
“if I had taken your advice a few days ago, which
you gave me in tears, and which, in spite of all my
resistance, drew tears from my eyes, I should have
now been ready to die. Godis Spirit strove with
me powerfully, but I was stubborn, and resisted it.
If I had yielded then, I believe God would have saved
me from my sins; but now, racked with pain almost
insupportable, and scorched with burning fevers, and
on the very verge of an eternal world, I have no hope
in the future; all is dark, dark, and gloomy. Through
light and mercy I have evaded and resisted God, his
Spirit, and his ministers, and now I must make my
bed in hell, and bid an eternal farewell to all the
means of grace, and all hope of heaven; lost! lost!
forever lostlli

In this condition he breathed his last. It was a
solemn and awful scene ; mournfully I turned away
and wept bitterly. I never think of this scene but
with mournful feelings. God forbid that I should die
the death of such a one! But how many are there
that have lived and died like this pleasant young
man; approve the right, but choose the wrong; put
off the day of their return to God; wade through
tears and prayers of ministers and pious friends; ti-ll

400 AUTOBIOQBAPHY or

they make the dreadful plunge, and have to say,
“ Lost! lost! lost! forever lost W O, sinner, stop and
think before you further go! Turn, and turn now.

I hastened to Winchester, where the brethren had
rallied, and were engaged in a glorious revival of
religion. They had sent off for Brother Akers, who
had been with them several days, hattlingsuccessfully
for the cause of true religion, and was made the honored instrument of much good to many souls. I met
Brother Akers between Jacksonville and Winchester;
he was compelled to leave for his regular field of
labor. When I met him, he exclaimed, “ One woe
is past, and behold, another cometh W The Campbellite preachers, and many of their members, had
rushed into our meeting, and tried to hinder or stop
the blessed work by drawing our people into foolish
controversy. Brother Akers had used the artillery
of truth very successfully against this false form of
religion. To this he referred when I met him as he
was leaving and I was hastening to the field of
battle.

When I got to the meeting, I found a blessed work
in prosperous progress. ‘ It really seemed to me that
the Campbellites, and especially their preacher, were
as restless as fallen demons. They tried.to'draw off
our laboring members into vain and hurtful debates;
and instead of encouraging mourners to seek on, they
tried to confuse their minds, and throw doubts and
diiiiculties in their way; and all round, and in the
congregation, they were busy in this way, to confuse
the minds of the people, and draw them off from
seeking God. At once I saw through their plan, and
the bad effects of such a course, if permitted to be
carried on. When, at our first coming together after
my arrival, I forbade all controversy of this kind, and

PETER can-rwnrenrr. am

told our brethren they must not indulge in it any
‘more, and said to all that were opposed to the glorious work in progress, if they did not like it they must
and should desist from entering into debates about it
in the congregation, the most of the Campbellites
desisted, or slily opposed; but their preacher continued boldly to provoke debate. He rudely attacked,
in the time of our altar exercises, one of our local
preachers.

When I was informed of it, I went straight to him,
and told. him he must not do so. He said he was a
freeman, and would do as he pleased. “ Nowfl said
I, “ Mr. S., if you do not desist, and behave yourself
tike a decent man ought to do, I will have you arrested as a disturber of our religious order?

He said that all this work was wrong; that it was
undue excitement, and it was his duty to oppose it;
and he would like to attack it at head-quarters, and
just then and there to debate the question with me.

“ Now, sir? said I, “if you think to provoke me to
condescend to turn aside from carrying on this glovious work to debate with you, the evil spirit that
prompts you does but deceive you; for it seems to me
it would be like loading a. fifty-six to kill a udy; and
if you donlt like the work and our meetings, go away
and stay away; your room will be better than your
company?

I nonplused him considerably, and measurably
silenced his batteries, but he was very restive. At

-1 length the power of God arrested some of the members of his Church. A very fine and meek woman
in their Church, who had been baptized for the remission of sins, but never felt any evidence of her
acceptance with God, and was not satisfied with her

condition, became very much affected, and wept bit26

4% AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF

terly on account of her unconverted state. I went to
her, at the request of her husband, who, though not
at that time a professor of religion, had been raised
by Methodist parents, and was friendly. I asked her
if she was happy.

She said, “ No, far from it?

I asked her if she was willing to go and kneel at
the altar, ask God to bless her, and give her a sensible
evidence of the pardon of her sins. .v :

She said, “Yes? ,

I started to lead her to the altar, when one of her
Campbellite sisters took hold of her, and said, “What
are you going to do ?? " . '

She said, “ I am going to the altar, to pray for religion? A

“ 0? said the other, “ you have religion. You
were baptized, and in that act of obedience your sins
were all Washed away; and you ought to be satisfied
with your religion, and not disgrace your Church
by going to a mourners? bench, among the deluded
Methodists?

She replied, “I know I was baptized for the remission of sins, and you all told me that in this act
of obedience to Christ I should be forgiven, and be
made happy; but I know it is all a deception, and
false, for I knowI have no religion; and I am determined to seek it with these Methodists, for if I die as
I am, I must be lost forever? .

“ 0? said the Campbellite lady, “ you must not
gO.97

I then interposed, and said to the lady, “ Let her
go. She shall go to the altar if she wants to ;? and I
accordingly led her there. She dropped on her knees,
and shortly afterward her husband kneeled at the
same altar, with the great deep of his heart broken

PETER CARTWRIGH1 408

up; and they never rested till they were both soundly
converted to God, and were enabled to sing,

“How happy are they, who their Saviour obey)‘

with a zest which they lfad never felt or enjoyed before.

The work of God went on with great power, and
the slain of the Lord were many.‘ Presently, in going
through the congregation to hunt up the wounded
sinners and lead them to the altar, to my great astonishment and surprise I found my Campbellite lady,
who tried to prevent the one I had led to the altar
first, sitting down with her face in her hands, and her
eyes suifused in tears. She was much agitated. I
laid my hand on her shoulder, and said to her, “Sister, what is the matter? Have these deluded Methodists got hold of you? or have you got a Methodist
spasm W e

She screamed right out, and said, “ God be merciful to me, a poor, deluded, Campbellite sinner I"

“ O,ll said I, “ will not water save you V

“O, no, nofl she responded; “I am a poor, deluded
sinner, and have no religion, and if .I die as I am
must be lost, and lost forever. Will you pray for me W

“Yesfl said I; “ but now you must go to the Methzvdistsl despised mournersl bench?

“With all my heartfi said she; and I partly led
and partly carried her there, and if I ever heard a
poor sinner plead with God for mercy, she was one.

When it was known that Mrs. , a Campbellite,
was at the mournersl bench, it awfully shocked some
of her fellow-members in that Watery regiment. She
was in such an agony and such good earnest, I almost
knew it would not be long till she found the blessing,
and while I was leading some other convicted persons to the altar, the Lord powerfully converted this

 

404 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Campbellite heroine. She sprang to her feet, and
shouted over the house like a top, and she fell directly to pulling and hauling her Campbellite friends to
the Methodist altar, exhorting them to come and get
religion, and not for a moment longer to depend on
water for salvation, but come and try the Methodist
fire, or the fire of the Holy Ghost, and the Way she
piled up the Campbellite friends at the altar was sublimely awful. After she had got a great number
there, she took after her preacher, and exhorted him
to come and get religion, “ Forfl said she, “ I know
you have none? but he resisted and fled. Several
of his membersl children had obtained religion, and
several more were seeking it. He then started a
meeting in his own church to draw off his members

and others from the Methodist meeting, and if ever

you saw a water divinity grow sick and pale, it was
just about this time. Things were so cold at his
church that the little effort soon failed. There were
over one hundred and twenty professed religion and
joined the Methodist Church during this meeting,
and, according to my best recollection, thirteen 0
them were Campbellites. ,. 
And now let me say, my little experience and observation for many years goes to establish the following fact: Whenever and wherever the ministry and
membership of the Church live faithful, and keep
alive to God, and enjoy the life and power of religion,
they can bid an eternal defiance to all opposition,
schism, divisions, ceremonial diversities, and all the
false prophets that may arise can never stop, to any
great extent, the heavenly march and triumphs of

true religion; but when we have a formal, negligent _

ministry, that wish to substitute education for the
power of faith, and our members begin to ape the

PETER CKBTWBIGHT. 405

world, or even other proud and fashionable Churches,
you may depend upon it that, like Samson with his
eyes put out, we shall make sport for the Philistines.
For however education may be desirable, and however much the progress of this age may demand an
improved ministry, especially an improved pulpit
eloquence, I would rather have the gift of a devil-dis~
lodging power than all the college lore or Biblical
institute knowledge that can be obtained from mortal
man. When God wants great and learned men in
the ministry, how easy it is for him to overtake a
learned sinner, and, as Saul of Tarsus, shake him
a while over hell, then knock the scales from his eyes,
and, without any previous theological training, send
him out straightway to preach Jesus and the resurrection. When God calls any man to preach his Gospel,
if he will not reason with flesh and blood, but do his
duty and live faithful, my experience for it, God
will qualify him for the work if he never saw a
college. Perhaps I may say a few things right here that
may be of some little benefit to my brethren in the
ministry. You know these are the days of sore
throats and bronchial affections among preachers.
Some have laid the predisposing causes to coffee, and

' some to tobacco; some to one thing, and some to another. Now, without professing to have studied

physiology, or to be skilled in the science of medi-'

cine, I beg leave, with very humble pretensions, to
give it as my opinion that most cases of these diseases
are brought on by carelessness and inattention of
public speakers themselves. I had, for several years
previous to this great revival of which we have been
speaking, been greatly afllicted with the bronchial
affection; so much so that I really thought the days

406 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

of my public ministry were well-nigh over. This
revival lasted near five months, through a hard and
cold winter. I preached, exhorted, sung, prayed,
and labored at the altar, I need not say several times
a day or night, but almost day and night for months
together. With many fears I entered on this work,
but from the beginning I threw myself under restraint,
took time to respire freely between sentences, commanded the modulation and cadence of my voice,
avoided singing to fatigue, avoided sudden transitions
from heat_ to cold, and when I left the atmosphere of
the church, heated by the stoves and breath of the
crowd, guarded my breast and throat, and even
mouth, from a sudden and direct contact with the
chilling air, or air of any kind, got to my room as
quick as possible, slept in no cold rooms if I could
help it, bathed my throat and breast every morning
with fresh, cold water from the well or spring, wore
no tight stocks or cravats, breathed freely, and, strange
to tell, I came out of the iive monthsi campaign of a
revival much sounder than when I entered it. The
only medicine I used at all was a little cayenne pepper and table salt dissolved in cold vinegar, and this
just as I was leaving a warm atmosphere to go into
the cold air or wind; and although several years
have passed since, I have been very little troubled
with that disease, and can preach as long and as loud
as is necessary for any minister to be useful. Keep
your feet warm, your head cool, and your bowels
well regulated, rise early, go to bed regularly, eat
temperately, avoiding high-seasoned victuals, pickles
and preserves, drink no spirits of any kind, and there
will be no need of your ever breaking down till the
wheels of life stop, and life itself sweetly ebbs away.
Our conference this year, 1843, was held in Quincy,

PETER oanrwnmn-r. 407

~Adams County, Illinois, September 13th. Bishop

Andrew presided. This was the only annual conference that Bishop Andrew every presided in with
us. The Illinois Conference was now large, and there
were some men of ‘due talents among us. Bishop
Andrew presided with great acceptability, and had,
among our preachers, many fast friends. At this
conference we elected our delegates to the ninth delegated General Conference, that was to sit in NewYork, May 1st, 1844. P. Akers, J. Vancleve, J.
Stamper, N. G. Benryman, and myself were elected,
which made the eighth General Conference that the
brethren saw proper to send me to, to represent their
interests and the interests of the Church generally.

Up to this General Conference, there were thirty-three

annual conferences, besides Liberia. Seventeen in
the old Eastern boundary, and sixteen in the Western
division. The seventeen Eastern conferences had a
membership of 599,322; of traveling preachers, 2,400.
The sixteen conferences in the Western division had
of members, 550,462; of traveling preachers, 1,862.
Total membership in the Methodist Episcopal Church,
1,171,356; total traveling preachers, 4,282; total increase in members in four years, 276,287; of traveling preachers in four years, 774. '

It will be seen from the foregoing statistics, imperfect as they are, that the Methodist Episcopal Church,
as one branch of the great Prowstant family, prospered in these United States without a parallel in the
history of the Church of Jesus Christ, since the apostolic age. Only think of it; in despite of all the imperfections that attach to human institutions, the apostasy
of some of our ministers, (and it is a mercy of God
there were not more,) the backsliding of many of our
members, the schisms created by OiKe1ly, Hammett,

408 AUTOBIOGE-.lPEY OF

Stillwell, and the self-styled Protestant Method'mts, the
True Wesleyans-hush! O, mercy, save the mark I-—in about sixty years, more than a million of members
had been raised up and united in Church fellowship
in the Methodist Episcopal Church; and this, too, by
a body of uneducated ministers. Perhaps, among
the thousands of traveling and local preachers employed and engaged in this glorious work of saving
souls, and building up the Methodist Church, there
were not iifty men that had anything more than a
common English education, and-. scores of them not
that; and not one of them was ever trained in a theological school or Biblical institute, and yet hundreds
of them preached the Gospel with more success and
had more scale to their ministry than all the sapient,

downy D.D3s in modern times, who, instead of entering the great and wide-spread harvest-field of
souls, sickle in hand, are seeking presidencies or professorships in colleges, editorships, or any agencies
that have a fat salary, and are trying to create newfangled institutions where good livings can be monopolized, while millions of poor, dying sinners are
thronging the way to hell without God, without Gos
pel; and the Church putting up the piteous wail about
the scarcity of preachers. And now, in the evening of life, at the dreadful risk (dreadful to some, not
to me) of being called an oldfogy, and pronounced
fifty years behind the times, I enter my most solenm
protest against the tendencies of the Methodist Episcopal Church to Congregationalism, for it seems to
me wrong that the ministers of God, Divinely called
to the holy work of saving souls, should leave that
sacred work, and go and serve tables; wherefore,
let the Church look out competent and well-qualified
lay teachers and oflicers for our literary institutions,

PETER CARTWBIGHT. 409

who can buildthem up just as well as preachers, and
make “a scourge of small cords? and drive these buyers and sellers out of the temples of learning, editorships, and agencies, into the glorious harvest-field of
souls. No man, or set of men, in the same sacred
sense, is called of God to these institutions and omces,
as they are called of God (if called at all) to preach
the everlasting Gospel to dying sinners that are so
fearfully thronging the way to hell. Christ had no
literary college or university, no theological school
or Biblical institute, nor did he require his first ministers to memorize his sayings or sermons, but simply
to tarry at Jerusalem till they were endued with
power from on high, when, under the baptismal power of the Holy Ghost, should be brought to their

remembrance all things whatsoever he had commanded them. i

I will not condescend to stop and say that I am a‘

friend to learning, and an improved ministry, for it is
the most convenient way to get rid of a stubborn
truth, for these learned and gentlemanly ministers to
turn about and say that all those ministers that are
opposed to the present abuses of our high calling, are
advocates for ignorance, and that ignorance is the
mother of devotion. What has a learned ministry
done for the world, that have studied divinity as a
science? Look, and examine ministerial history. It
is an easy thing to engender pride in the human heart,
and this educational pride has been the downfall and
ruin of many preéminently educated ministers of the
Gospel. But I will not render evil for evil, or railing
for railing, but will thank God for education, and
educated Gospel ministers who are of the right stamp,
and of the right spirit. But how do these advocates
foran educated ministry think the hundreds "of com410 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

monly educated preachers must feel under the lectures
we have from time to time on this subject? It is true,
many of these advocates for an improved and educated ministry among us, speak in rapturous and exalted strains concerning the old, illiterate pioneers that
planted Methodism and Clmrches in early and frontier
times; but I take 110 flattering lmction to my Soul
from these extorted concessions from these velvetmouthed and downy D.DFs; for their real sentiments,
if they clearly express them, are, that we were indebted to the ignorance of the people for our success

rnrnn oaarwamnr. 411

CHAPTER XXVII.

THE GREAT SECESSION.

' Ar the General Conference of 1844, a solemn dise
pensation came upon the Methodist Episcopal Church,
then having more than a million of members in her
communion. Up to this time no very destructive‘divisions had taken place among us. _The small parties
that had filed oil‘, had rather been a help than a
serious injury to the Church. No division in doctrines had ever taken place, and, as a large body of
ministers and members, there was great unanimity
on the Discipline of the Church; and now the division
was narrowed down to a single point, namely, slavery
in the episcopacy. It is well understood by those
who have studied the government of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, that she has adopted an itinerant
or ‘traveling plan of ministerial operation, as the best
and most Scriptural mode of successfully spreading
the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and although we believe
there are but two ministerial orders, namely, deacons
and elders, and finding nothing in the Scriptures
contrary thereto, the Methodist Episcopal Church in
her early organization saw proper to create a separate
omce, not order, of superintendent, or bishop. By the
consent of all our traveling preachers, the bishop appoints from year to year every traveling preacher to
his field of labor; this saves a vast amount of time
and trouble in the ministry, in running about and
seeking to contract with congregations for a specified

418 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

time and stipulated amount of salary; moreover, it
cuts off the temptation of selling the Gospel to the
highest bidder, and giving the Gospel exclusively to the
rich, and leaving the poor to perish without the means
of salvation; and the poor under this arrangement ‘dnd
the fulfillment of the promise of Jesus Christ, more
fully than they can on any other plan, namely,
“ Blessed are the poor, for they have the Gospel
preached unto them? Moreover, it is the disciplinary
duty of our bishops to ordain our deacons and
elders,‘ and to travel at large throughout all our
conferences, and to have a general supervision of the
whole work; and in order to qualify them to act
wisely and prudently in changing and appointing
the thousands of itinerant preachers to their respective delds of labor, it is required of our bishops to be
constant itinerants themselves; and according to the
provisions of the Discipline of the Methodist Episcopal Church, if our bishops at any time cease to travel
at large throughout the connection, supervising and
superintending the general interests of the whole
Church, they shall forfeit the right to exercise the
duties of their office.

And right here it may not be amiss to notice, in a
few words, the supremely ridiculous and slanderous
statements that are constantly emanating from the
pulpits and presses of some of the prejudiced denominations, against the absolute and despotic power of our
bishops. They state that our bishops give all the law
of the Church, and that our preachers and people are

bound to bow to their dictum, under pain of expul-'

sion; and that all the Church property is deeded to
the bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Now,
so far from this charge being true, I assert, without
any fear of successful contradiction, that a Methodist

rnrsn oanrwnxsnr. 418

bishop has not even a vote in any of the rules or
regulations of the Church, nor even a veto power on
any rule passed by the General Conference; and as
for the charge of the bishops having all the property
of the Church deeded to them, this old, stale falsehood
has not now, nor ever had, the least foundation in
truth to rest upon; for I will venture to say that if
the whole United States and territories were examined
with a search warrant by the entire marshaled hosts
of the bigoted and malicious propagators of these
falsehoods, that not one solitary case can be found
where the Church property is deeded to the bishops
of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Why do our
opponents so constantly and so recklessly persist in
reiterating these false charges? Have they no sense
of honor or of shame left them? But none are so
blind as those that will not see ; and I solemnly fear
that those wretched editors and pamphlet writers will
have a very fearful account to render in the day of
retributive justice. But they cannot meet us in the
open f1eld of manly and honorable debate, and therefore they resort to the pitiful fabrication of false
statements in hope of gulling the ignorant part of
mankind. .

We have said, up to this time, 1844, no very serious division had taken place inthe Methodist Episcopal Church. It is true, there were a few restless
spirits, ministers, that had filed off and raised little
trash-traps called Churches, such as OlKelly, Stillwell, Hammett, the Radicals, or self-styled Protestant
Methodist Church, and the Scottites, or, as they call
themselves, the True Wesleyans. But in all these
secessions, there never had been a difference of opinion
on the cardinal doctrines of the Gospel propagated
by Mr. Wesley, and unanswerably defended by the

414 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

sainted Fletcher. So may it continue to the end of
time!

The Methodist Episcopal Church, from its first or
ganization, was opposed to slavery; and from 17 84 to
1824, in her various rules and regulations on slavery,
tried to legislate it out of the Church; and she suc_ ceeded in getting many of the slaves set free, and

bettering the condition of thousands of this degraded
race. But the legislatures of the different slave states
greatly embarrassed the operations of the Church by
narrowing the door of emancipation, and passing unjust and stringent laws to prevent manumission. At
this course of legislation, many of the citizens of the
free states took umbrage, and commenced a dreadful
tirade of abuse on the South, and threw the subject
into the arena of politics. This unholy warfare of
crimination and recrimination has been carried on
with unjustifiable violence, until we are almost brought

to a civil war, and the integrity of our happy Union is '

in imminent danger. How it will end, God only knows.

On the iirst of May, 1844, our General Conference
met in New-York. From 1824 to this time, our rules
on slavery had remained the same. The Northern
preachers of the Methodist Episcopal Church, some
of them, had taken the ultra ground that slavel1olding, under all circumstances, was sinful, and therefore,
law or no law, practicable or impracticable, all slaveholders, under all circumstances, should be expelled.
However, the more prudent and far-seeing part of our
ministers and members of the Church saw that this
was totally wrong, and threw themselves into the
breach, and prevented a fearful division of the Church;
and the fog and smoke of run-mad clerical abolitionism ended in a feeble secession under 0. Scott & Co.,
and a few of the same cloth and kidney.

PETER ciuvrwnrenr. 415

In the meantime, slavery in the South had been
rapidly gaining strength, by stringent legislative acts
and ministerial advocacy. More and more did the
legislatures of the South block up the way to practicable emancipation. This threw the North into a
fearful rage; hence there was a mutual crimination
and recrimination, and both ultra parties threw the
subject into the political arena, and appealed to Casar
instead of going to God in humble prayer, and asking
Divine direction on this fearful question. There had
at no time been a slaveholding preacher elected
to the office of bishop in the Methodist Episcopal
Church, nor was there ever. a time within my remembrance when a slaveholder, as such, could have been
elected bishop without giving strong assurances that
he would emancipate his slaves; for the plain reason,
to say nothing about the evil‘ of slavery, he never
could travel at large through the connection, as the
Discipline required, acceptably, as a slaveholder.
There were many eminent and distinguished ministers in the Southern conferences, some of whom '

would, no doubt, have been elected to the omce of
bishop but for [ their being slaveholders. Bishop Andrew had been elected to that oiiice in 1832, by the
General Conference, but it was because we ‘ verily
believed him free from the evil of slavery; and but
for the same cause of slavery, I have no doubt others
of our Southern ministers would have been elected to
that oflice. When we met in General Conference in
New-York, Bishop Andrew, by marriage and otherwise, had become connected with slavery. This fact
came upon us with the darkness and terror of a fearful storm, and covered the whole General Conference
with sorrow and mourning. Those of us who believed
slavery an evil, though not sinful in all cases, saw at

416 AL"1"0BIOGRAPHY oronce that it was utterly impossible for Bishop Andrew
to travel at large through the Methodist connection,
and discharge the important duties of that oiiice with
acceptability and usefulness, unless he would give the
General Conference assurances that he would, as soon
as practicable, free himself from this impediment.
But this he absolutely refused to do. Our Southern
brethren took the strong ground that slavery was no
impediment to the otlicial relation of a bishop of the
Methodist Episcopal Church. ‘

The true course that the General Conference ought
to have pursued toward Bishop Andrew, was to have
arraigned him for improper conduct, as the Discipline
provides for the trial of a bishop, and suspended him
from all official acts; and then, if they of the South
were disposed to secede, let them secede and set up
for themselves. Then all the humbuggery about a
division line, and of the Church property, would have
been saved. And if the division or secession of the
Church had been left to the vote of our Southern
brethren, it would have been a poor little thing; and
I think that every unprejudiced mind must see clearly
that the secession from our beloved Church was
brought about by a set of slaveholding Methodist
preachers, and not by slaveholding members, led on
by a slaveholding bishop; and every one acquainted
with the circumstances of this dreadful rupture in the
Church, and with the actions and course‘ of Bishop
Soule, will see that he was the leading spirit in the
whole affair.

However I may forgive, I shall never forget the unjustiiiable course that Bishop Soule took in dividing
the Methodist Episcopal Church.

To talk about the General Conference having power
to divide the Church and to form a division line, that

PETER esnrwmenr. 417

the ministers from either side should not cross to bear

the tidings of salvation to their dying fellow-men, is

certainly the climax of absurdity; and then to force
the members on either side of this line, north or south,
to hold their membership in a division that was not
of their choice, is despotism in the superlative degree.
Could the Pope of Rome more completely demand
passive obedience and non-resistance than did the Gen
eral Conference of 1844 in this monstrous act? And
yet the very ministers composing the General Conference who, in conjunction with their fellow-laborers
in the ministry, had praised the Methodist Episcopal
Church as the best Church in the world, and had taken
an active part in taking into said Church the hundreds
of thousands that composed her membership, assumed
to themselves the power to divide said Church, and
draw a line, and say to preachers and members,
“ Thus far shalt thou come, and no further?

I sincerely thank God, upon every remembrance
of the acts or doings of the General Conference of
1844 on this matter, that my little abilities were put
forth to prevent this catastrophe, though I was found
greatly in the minority. Yet, I am glad to say, it was
an honorable minority, which, by the whining sycophancy of the South, and uncalled-for sympathy of the
North, were overwhelmed by the vote of the majority.

I say here again, as I have elsewhere said in this
narrative, that ‘the General Conference of 1844, and
all the General Conferences that ever existed, had
no more power to divide the Church than I, as an
individual, had; and it is my deliberate opinion
that the members of the General Conference who concocted and completed this measure of so-called division of the Church, ought to refund the whole amount

of money gained by the S7outh in the Church suits,
2

418 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

and let the poor, superannuated preachers, their wives
and children, and the widows‘ and orphans of our
ministers that have been left nearly destitute of the
means of living since the death of their faithful husbands and fathers, have it as a fund for their support.

It is as clear to me as a sunbeam thatthe General
Conference had no constitutional right to form this
sham line of division that they did, and thereby force
thousands of our pious and devoted members south of
that line to take their membership in an openly
avowed slaveholding Church, or remain forever without Church privileges; and when the piteous wailings of these forsaken members, thus cut off from
the Church of their early and only choice, came up
for four years, is it any ‘Wonder that the General Conference of 1848, that sat in Pittsburgh, should virtually declare the action of the General Conference
of 1844 unconstitutional, and declare‘ that line null
and void, to all intents and purposes, and once more
authorize our preachers to go, Without limitation or
restriction,“ Into all the world and preach the Gospel
to every creaturefl Now, although this is not to be
wondered at, when we consider ‘the sympathetic, religious appeals made to that body from our lost members in the dreadful wilderness of slave territory, still
there is a wonderful and marvelous thing that confounds all my sense of justice, truth, and righteousness,
still existing in the Methodist Episcopal Church; that
is, that there are to be found members, preachers, and
editors of our Church papers, that, with run-mad
violence, oppose the reorganization of conferences in
slave territory, and are unwilling to send, or support
our preachers that are sent to preach, the Gospel of
the Son of God to these misguided and blind slaveholders, or to the poor, degraded, ignorant thousands

rarnn cuvrwnrenr. 419

of slaves that have souls to be saved or lost forever.
I am fully aware that here I tread controverted,
enchanted, and disputed ground; but, perhaps, as
this may be the last opportunity that I may have this
side the grave to be heard on this subject, I beseech
my readers, whether they agree or disagree with me
in my sentiments on this vexed question of slavery,

to hear me for a few moments without “ malice pre‘penseli or aforethought, as to the history of the rupture in the Methodist Episcopal Church, at the General
Conference of 1844. I beg leave to refer all concerned in this matter to the most excellent history
of the great secession, published by Dr. C. Elliott; a

. book which, large as it is, ought to have a place in

every library of the Methodist Episcopal Church. If
they will get this book, and turn to chapters xx, xxi,

pages 286—318, they will find all the facts concerning a

the acts and doings of the General Conference of 1844,
detailed with an impartial and truthful particularity
worthy of all commendation ; and, indeed, the book
throughout is a valuable work, and should be in the
hands of every preacher in the Methodist Episcopal
Church.

I wish to say here, I was born and raised in a slave
state, or states, and for more than sixty years have
been acquainted with the sentiments of the Methodist
Episcopal Church preachers and members on the
subject of slavery. I have seen thousands of poor
slaves converted to God; I have, I verily believe,
also seen thousands of slaveholders soundly converted
to God, whose fruit in after life gave ample evidence
of the genuineness of their religion; and since I
have had a mature judgment on the subject‘ of slavery, I have steadfastly believed it a great evil, and
without boasting I will say, I have been the agent

4% ‘ i AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

or instrument of freeing scores of the poor slaves, and
not only of their emancipation, but also of the colonization of many of them, returning them to their own country free and happy. But this all took place before
the legislatures of the slave states blocked up the way,
by stringent laws, to practicable emancipation. These
stringent laws of the legislatures of slave states were
passed chiefly from two causes: first, their inherent
love of oppression; and, second, from the extreme and
violent manner of intermeddling with the legal rights
of the slaveholders in the South by the rabid abolitionists of the North. And now, I would soberly ask, What
has all this violent hue and cry of prescriptive abolitionism done for the emancipation of the poor degraded slaves? Just nothing at all; nay, infinitely
worse than nothing. It has riveted the chains of
slavery tighter than ever before; it has blocked up
the way to reasonable and practicable emancipation;
it has engendered prejudice; it has thrown flrebrands
into legislative halls, both of the state and general governments; millions are expended every year in angry
debates; laws for the good of the people are neglected; time, talents, and money thrown away; prejudice, strife, and wrath, and every evil passion stirred
up until the integrity of the union of our happy
country is in imminent danger; and what has it all
amounted to? Not one poor slave set free; not one
dollar expended to colonize them and send them
home happy and free; and such is the unchristian,
excited prejudice, that mobs are fast becoming the
order of the day. Presses demolished; preachers of
the Gospel, hailing from free states, are hunted down
by blood-hounds in human shape; they are tarred
and feathered, and threatened with the rope if they
do not leave in a few hours; and such is the prejudice

rnrnn OABTWBIGHT. 421

produced by the angry and unchristian fulminating
thunders of this one-eyed and one-idead, run-mad procedure, that the Gospel is well-nigh totally denied in
slave states to both owners and slaves in many
places.

But I think I hear you say, Let slaveholding preachers preach to these slaves and slaveholders. But if slavery is a sin in all circumstances, how can slaveholding preachers successfully preach the Gospel to these
poor sinners? Well, say you, let the devil take them
all. 0 no, God forbid! there surely must be a better
way; these poor slaves surely are not to blame for
their condition. Are there no bowels of mercy to
yearn over them? Many of these slaveholders, from
circumstances beyond their control, are not radically
slaveholding sinners; above all men that dwell in
the South, they are entitled to our pity and commiseration, and we should surely carry the Gospel to
them, and our skirts will not be clear of their blood if
we do not.

Do We reclaim drunkards by telling them that they
steal their rum, and Lie in the meanest way of all
men to get their intoxicating beverages? No, verily;
we pity them, reason with them, and knowing the
terrors of the Lord, we persuade men; and when all
moral suasion fails, do we say drunkenness is the
open door to all sins, and therefore it is the sum of
all villainies, and that they cannot be made Christians? No. When all moral suasion fails we try by
legal enactments to put the temptation out of their
way, and‘ urge them to become Christians. Do we
induce sinners to reform, repent, and be converted,
by abusing them, and telling them of all their dirty
deeds, and saying it is impossible for persons guilty
of such dirty crimes to become Christians? No, we

422 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or , warn them, in a Christian spirit and temper, to flee
the wrath to come; we assure them that the happy
gates of Gospel grace stand open night and day, and
that Christ will turn none away empty that will come
unto him; for whosoever shall call on the name of the
Lord shall be saved. And we urge them to seek the
Lord while he may be found, and call upon him
while he is near.

I blame no man for believing that slavery is wrong
and a great evil, and every reasonable man must
deprecate its existence; and I know that there are
thousands of our Southern slaveholding citizens that
not only believe, but know from daily experience, that
it is a great evil, and would willingly make any reasonable sacrifice to rid themselves and their happy
country of it. And I believe, from more than twenty
yearsi experience as a traveling preacher in slave
states, that the most successful way to ameliorate the
condition of the slaves, and Christianize them, and
finally secure their freedom, is to treat their owners
kindly, and not to meddle politically with slavery.
Let their owners see and know that your whole mission is the salvation of the slaves as well as their
owners, and that you have not established any underground railroad, and that it is not your mission to
abduct their slaves. In this way more is to be done
for the final extirpation of American slavery than all
others put together, for these ultraists breathe nothing
but death and slaughter.

I will further state that it is my firm conviction
that every Methodist preacher sent as a missionary
herald to labor in slave territory, ought to be instructed by the ruling authorities of the Church not to meddle with slavery, but to attend strictly to his spiritual
mission. This is the waythe Wesleyan mission com\

PETER okarwnrenr. 428

mittee instructed their missionaries sent to labor in the
West Indies, where slavery abounded in its worst
forms; and if those missionaries were known to disobey those instructions, they were immediately recalled; and although these missionaries were tied up
io the one grand object of Christianizing the people,
yet finally the Gospel leaven so mightily worked,
that slavery was abolished, and universal freedom
triumphed and prevailed. Let us hope that this will
be the case with American slavery; andafter having
expended all our wrath without availing anything
worth talking about, let us now henceforth use Christian weapons, and Christiamweapons alone, and the
mighty monster will fall.

I do solemnly declare, that no circumstance ever
occurred concerning the welfare of the Church, which
aillicted me so sorely as the transactions of the General
Conference of 1844. It seemed to me that I could
not survive under the painful fact that the Methodist.
Church must be divided, and all the time of the protracted debates I knew, if the Southern preachers failed to carry the point they had fixed, namely, the tolerance of slaveholding in the episcopacy, that they
would fly the track, and set up for themselves. And
in that event, many souls would be injured, and perhaps turn back to perdition; and that war and strife .

would prevail among brethren that once were united
as a brotherly band, and that they must of necessity become a slavery Church. And I the more
deeply regretted it because any abomination sanctified
by the priesthood, would take a firmer hold on the
community, and that this very circumstance would
the longer perpetuate the evil of slavery, and perhaps
would be the entering wedge to the dissolution of our
glorious Union; and perhaps the downfall of this great

O

424 Auroisloonarnv or

republic. And though I stood alone among the dele' gates, my colleagues, of my own beloved Illinois Conference, in my vote against all these revolutionary
and divisive measures in the General Conference, it
afforded me great pleasure to learn that my course in
the General Conference was approved by an overwhelming majority of the preachers and members of
our conference. And it still aifords me unspeakable
pleasure to know that I shall not have to answer be
fore my final Judge for the sin of dividing the Method
ist Episcopal Church, a Church that, under God, I am
indebted to for all I have and am; a Church that I
have spent a long life in trying to build up, and for
the prosperity of which I have made sacrifices, and
in the communion of which I have enjoyed so many

unspeakable privileges, and all the comfort and pleasure, worth calling so, in this life.

This Church I love, and want no other on earth,
and in her fellowship I hope to live and die, and
with her members, and all other fellow-Christians, I
hope to spend a blissful eternity in adoring God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, in
the enjoyment of redeeming grace and dying love.

rrrxn canrwnran-r. 436

CHAPTER XXVIII.
mm urcrrvn nun: AND smvnnv.

IN the fall of 1844, our conference was held in
the town of Nashville, Washington County, Illinois. Here the concurrence of the Conference was
asked in the measures of the General Conference.
Brother Stamper and Brother Berryman, who had
voted with the South, took their stand for concurrence, and I took my stand for non-concurrence; and
after we had debated the subject fully, the vote was
taken, and there was a handsome majority in favor of
non-concurrence. So the measure failed in our conference, and it failed throughout all the annual
conferences of obtaining a three-fourths vote for concurrence; and the restrictive rule remained as it was,
the recommendation of the General Conference to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Now, the plain state of fact was this: The main
body of the members of the General Conference
knew, and many of them openly said on the General Conference floor, both Northern and Southern
members, that the General Conference had no power
either to divide the Church, or the property or avails
of S the Book Concern, or the Chartered Fund, and the
act of the General Conference to divide the property
or funds of the Methodist Episcopal Church was only
passed provisionally. They knew it was unconstitutional, and their design was to change the restrictive

rule, or constitutional clause of the Discipline, so as _

426 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

to allow this division of the property, and proceeds of
the Book Concern, and Chartered Fund of the Methodist Episcopal Church. But how was this change tobc
brought about in a constitutional way? Answer. See
Discipline, Part I., Chap. ii, Sec. ii, Ans. 6, thus: “They
(the General Conference) shall not appropriate the
produce of the Book Concern, nor of the Charter
Fund, to any purpose other than for the benefit" of the
traveling, supernumerary, superannuated and wornout preachers, their wives, widows, and children. Pro
vided, nevertheless, that upon the concurrent recommendation of three fourths of the members of the
several annual conferences, who shall be present
and vote on such recommendation, then a majority
of two thirds of the General Conference succeeding
shall suffice to alter any of the above restrictions,
excepting the first article: and also, whenever such
alteration or alterations shall have been first recommended by two thirds of the General Conference, so
soon as three fourths of the members of all the annual conferences shall have concurred as aforesaid,
such alteration or alterations shall take effect?

The General Conference of 1844 recommended an
alteration in this sixth restrictive rule of the constitution of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and sent
round to all the annual conferences for a three
fourths vote of concurrence. Now, notwithstanding
this was the favorite measure of the South, and notwithstanding every member of all the seceding slaveholding Conferences, save a solitary one, voted a concurrence with this unreasonable recommendation, yet
when the votes of all the annual conferences were
counted, they fell far short of a three-fourths vote of
concurrence. '

Does it not, therefore, shock all the honorable, highPETER caarwnrenr. 427

'5

minded feelings of mankind, to know that the public
functionaries of justice could be so corrupt as to decide against the Methodist Episcopal Church in those
Church suits in favor of the Southern secedcrs, the
self-styled and self-constituted Methodist Episcopal
Church, South? I hope I may be indulged in a few
remarks on this vexed question of slavery. I hold
myself to be an unflinching conservative Methodist
preacher. I know that slavery is an evil, and a great
evil, and although the South denies this ground, and
their interested cry is abolition! abolition! that is,
with many of them, this cry has never moved me
one inch. I can only pray, “ Lord, forgive them;
they know not what they do."

Nine tenths of them, members and preachers, came
into the Methodist Episcopal Church with their eyes
open, with our General Rules, and other rules, all open
before them; if they did not like them, they should
not have joined the Church. If they joined not knowing the rules, when they came to the knowledge of
them, and then thought them radically wrong, they
should have peaceably retired, or withdrawn, and not
have rended the Church, and thrown her into violent
commotions; and turn round and abuse the Church
that under God, was the means of their salvation. They
always had tangible evidence that the Methodist
Episcopal Church would never tolerate slavery in

. one of her bishops, and they had no just right to

complain when the General Conference arrested
Bishop Andrew, and gave as the sense of that respectable body, that he should desist from the exercise
of his episcopal functions, until he rid himself of that
impediment. As a prudent Christian bishop, he
should have done this of his own accord.

On the other hand, the ultra abolitionists of the

428 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

0

North, or anywhere else, have no right to complain
of me and others, and deny us the dignified privilege
of being conservatives, and hurl their anathemas
against us, and bring a railing accusation against us
of “ pro-slavery, pro-slavery W And, indeed, they
treat us with less decent respect than God permitted
Michael the archangel to treat the devil, for he did
not allow Michael to bring a railing accusation against
his Satanic Majesty; but permitted him only to say,
“The Lord rebuke thee? Mr. Wesley never made slaveholding a test of membership; and when, in 17 84, the
Methodist Episcopal Church was organized, slavery
was not made a test of membership; it never has
been a test of membership, from the apostolic day
down to the present. I ask, then, what right have
these Babel builders to introduce a new test of membership in the Methodist Episcopal Church? They,
like the South, joined the Methodist Church under
her present rules on slavery, and did it with their
eyes open. Why did they join her? And, if they
were ignorant of our rules on slavery when they
joined, after they informed themselves, and did not,
and could not, become reconciled to those rules or
the Church, why did they not peaceably withdraw or
leave, and not keep the Church in an eternal agitation and confusion? thereby prejudicing the slaveholders in the South, cutting off our access to them

and their slaves, rending the Church, embroiling the

whole nation, which threatens a rupture of our national union, and the destructive ravages of civil

war. Before, and at the time of the Southern secession,

there were three of our Church papers, with three

Methodist preachers as editors of those papers, in the

South, paid for their services out of the funds of the

Methodist Episcopal Church. They were electedhnd

rnrna CARTWBIGHT. 429

paid to spread religious knowledge, and defend the
doctrines and the usages of the Methodist Episcopal
Church; but how did they act, and discharge the
highly responsible duties of their oihce? It is true,
they wrote many good things; but it is also true,
that they put into requisition all their tact and talent
to abuse the Church which was giving them their
bread, denouncing her as an ultra abolition Church.
Now, was this the course that honorable, high—minded
Christian ministers should have taken? Surely not.
Well, since this glorious inconsistency attached to the
South, we have elected editors in the North and
Northwest, under precisely the same circumstances
as the Southern editors who have lived on the pap of
the Church; and they have opened their batteries, denouncing her as a pro-slavery Church. “ O Consistency, thou art a jewel P? If these editors were conscience stricken on these subjects, why did they not
resign their editorial offices, and set up independent
sheets, and vent their spleen against the Methodist
Episcopal Church on their own responsibility, and
support themselves?

The middle ground between these ultra extremes
is what I call conservative ground; that is, we say, in
the language of our most excellent Discipline, that
slavery is a great evil; and the grand question is,
What shall be done for its extirpation? Now, I suppose it will be admitted on all hands, that to do as the
Southern preachers have done, that is, to plead that it
is right, and justify it by the word of God, is not, and
cannot be the way to extirpate this evil.

On the other hand, if we inquire, what has ultra
abolition done to extirpate this great evil, what must
be the truthful answer? It is simply this: With the
exception of a few negroes that they have abducted,

430 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

enticed to run away, or have been transported on
their underground railroads to Canada, to starve, and
to be degraded worse than with their lawful owners;
and the very few runaway slaves that, by mob violence, and in contravention of law, they have kept
from their legal owners, they have nct secured the
emancipation of a single slave, from Passamaquoddy to the Gulf of Mexico; nay, so far from it,
they have greatly retarded the efforts of the colonization societies everywhere; they have poisoned the
minds and inflamed the wrath of‘ slaveholders in the
South, until a decent man, and especially a minister,
hailing from a free State, can hardly pass, or repass,
in a slave territory, without the risk of a suit of tar
and feathers, and even pulling hemp by the neck occasionally. And this mighty mountain of the North,

t that for years, yea, many years, has been heaving,

bellowing, and groaning, in mighty pain, to be delivered, has brought forth; and what is it? a poor
little, insignificant m-o-u-s-e; while conservative
Methodist preachers, in many instances, who Have
inherited slaves, have set them free, or colonized
them in Africa. We have gone to slaveholders in
Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, Tennessee, Kentucky,
and Missouri, in a peaceful Christian way; and while
we never ceased to bear an honest testimony against
the moral evil of slavery, (but did not meddle with it
political1y,) we successfully persuaded many of these
slaves and slaveholders to turn to God, and obtain
religion; and we got hundreds and thousands of these
poor slaves set free. Let the many emancipated
slaves, and their former owners in the above-named
states, bear witness to the truth of what I here record.
This is the firm and impregnable ground for a true
conservative to stand upon; and this ground will save

rsrnu oanrwiuenr. $31

the Church, the Union, the slave,_;md the slaveholder;
and I .would not exchange it for all the ultraisms of the

' North and South put together, and a thousand such.

In connection with this subject I wish to say a few
things concerning a meeting I accidentally fell in
with in Cincinnati, I think in 1848; I do not think I
heard the name of the meeting; if I did, I have forgotten it; but when I give a very feeble description
of it, perhaps some of my readers may be able to
christen the brat, for it was surely begotten in the
regions, or sprang from the soil of “ Bigheadismfi and
the little things disease had turned to the “ Stiff complaint f or, in other words, I found the meeting to be
composed of a heterogeneous mass of disaffected, censured, or expelled preachers, that is, the speakers were
mostly from the Methodist, Presbyterian, and Baptist
Churches. The house was filled with almost all sorts,
sizes, and colors; black, white, and yellow, men
women, and children. They had called to the chair
one of their number as moderator. If my memory is
correct, the first speaker that rose and addressed the
motley crowd, said he had been so many years a
regular pastor of a Baptist Church in Kentucky, that
he had used all his talents and iniiuence to resist the
damning influence of slavery, but was overruled in
every attempt. He stated that the ministers and
ruling members had often met, conversed, and debated the subject, but he was overruled every time.
They would not turn slaveholders out of the Church,
nor make slaveholding a test of membership; and
amer having his righteous soul vexed for years with
their filthy conversation and conduct, he felt it was
his duty to come.out of the Baptist Church. He then
warned the members of said Church, and all others,
to come out of all slaveholding Churches: “ Come

£83 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

out, come out; touch not, taste‘ not, and handle not
the unclean thing? This speech was received with
applause by the listening crowd of many colors.

Next arose a Mr. S———h. He said he was a Protestant Methodist, but had been a member and minister of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and traveled
as such for years. He had also fought slavery for a
long time to get it out of the Church, but always
failed, for they loved the accursed thing; and that the
Methodist Episcopal Church was, to all intents and
purposes, a slaveholding and a slavery-approving
Church. The crowd clapped him while he cried,
“Come out, come out of her, my peoplefi and his
speech was greatly applauded by the mixed multitude, colored and all.

The third speaker was a Presbyterian preacher.
He said he had experienced the same trials, conflicts,
and debates with his brethren in the Church, that his
two‘ brethren who had spoken before had waded
through, but all of no avail; his conscience would
not let him remain a member or minister of a slaveholding Church any longer; he must come out; and

-exhorted all people to “ Come out, and be ye clean,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive
you, saith the Lord, and I will be your God, and ye
shall be my people, saith the Lord."

After this there arose on the floor a very respectable—looking man, and replied to most of the statements
of these three come-outers, and he showed very clearly, and by irresistible arguments, that the ground
they took was a false ground, and that they, or the
principles they advocated, were clearly disorganizing
and revolutionary in their nature, and in all their tendencies. There was a clerical gentleman sitting at my
side, who said that from personal knowledge he could

narnlt. canrwnrerr-r. 43

any that all three of these men who Hist addressed
the audience, were under charges of immorality when
they pretended to come out of their Churches on account of slavery.

I have seen a great many such preachers as above
described. When their bad conduct could not be
home with in their respective Churches any longer,
and the disciplinary excisions were about to be inflicted on them, they fled, picking some flaw, or
alleging some dreadful wrong in the Church as they
ran and cried, “ Come out, come out of her W ,0,
the infant Church. of Christ, how it suffered in its
very minority by thedmfaithfulness of its ministers.
In the very first little conference of preachers that
was organized, Judas turned traitor and betrayed the
blessed Saviour. Peter, perhaps the boldest of the
twelve, denied him with horrid oaths and bitter curses.
What do you suppose the astonished ten thought under
these appalling circumstances? Judas relented, and
hung himself for the dreadful wrong he had done
against the innocent Saviour. Peter felt compunction and wept bitterly; was mercifully reclaimed or
converted from his apostasy, and, for many years of
persecution and trial, strengthened his brethren.
What a fearful account will unfaithful preachers,
who have torn, rent, and divided the Church of
God, have to give in the day of judgment, when
the blighting curses of Heaven shall fall on their unfaithful and devoted heads. Lord, save us from unfaithfulness.

On my way to. conference at Nashville in the fall
of 1844, I was suddenly taken ill with a real shaking
ague in a large, extensive prairie, ten miles across,
and shook so severely that I could not sit in my
sulky. ,I got out and lag; down on the grass, and

\
434 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

really thought I should die for want of water. No
house or water near, no human being approached me
to aid me in any way; but after about two hours my
shaking abated, and I traveled some ' ten or twelve
miles to a camp-meeting which was in progress at
Brother Gilhamis camp ground, where I lingered a
day or two. There was a botanic doctor on the ground,

‘who lived in Alton City. ‘ He kindly took me to his

house, and, in a few days, checked my disease. The
preachers all left me, being anxious to be at conference, which was to commence on the ‘Wednesday
following. They, as well as myself, were totally in
despair of my reaching the conference. I was very
anxious to get there, for the great question, so far
as our conference was concerned, was to be settled
«of concurrence or non-concurrence -with the recommendation of the General Conference. I waited till Friday morning. I prayed for strength
,to go to conference, and, while praying, a strong im
pression was made on my mind that I could get there
I rose from my knees and determined ‘to try. The
doctor remonstrated against my attempting to go,
but I deliberately told him I was going if I died in
one mile. When he saw I was determined to try it,
he put up some medicine, and I got a good brother
to drive my horse for me and started, and, strange as
it may. appear, I mended every mile, and on Sunday
morning I reached the conference, and was able to
attend to business the balance of the session, and
especially to take a part in the debates, and carry the
vote in favor of non-concurrence. This circumstance
I have always looked upon as a kind interposition of
Providence; and, indeed, the defeat of this project by
the annual conferences was directed by God himself;
and could the Methodist Episcopal Church have got"PETER GARTWRIGHT. 485

ten justice .n the civil courts, according to the true
'merits of the case, the ill-gotten gains of the Southern
secession would have been small; but I predict that
it will not prosper with them. ‘
My appointment this fall was to the Bloomington
District, which was composed of the following appointments, namely : Bloomington, Mount Pleasant,
Monticello, Clinton, Havana, Fancy Creek, Decatur,
and Postville. This was a gloomy conference year.
We had very little revival iniiuence in our district, or
in the conference, and, indeed, scarcely any throughout the Methodist Episcopal Church. The delegates
of the General Conference from the Southern confer

. ences returned home, and appointed mass meetings

in every direction, and poured out the vials of wrath
upon the Methodist Episcopal Church, especially the
majority of the members of the General Conference.
They declared that we were all abolitionists, and
drummed up a convention of the preachers from the
slaveholding conferences. Bishop Soule presided in
it, sitting calmly on the ignited clouds, and directing
the thunder-storm; and though that convention, by
solemn vote, renounced the jurisdiction of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and formed themselves into
a separate organization; and though Bishop Soule
declared in the General Conference of 1844 that he
would not be immolated on a Northern or Southern
altar, but on the altar of the Methodist Episcopal
Church; now, notwithstanding all this and a thousand times as much, he had the very uncommon
hardihood to come round and preside in our conferences which had not seceded, and persisted in this
course, lending all his aid and influence to the secession, until the Ohio Conference gave him a glorious
ouster, and refused to let him preside over them. I

486 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

had prepared this dose for his honor if he had attended the Rock River or Illinois Conferences, but after

the rebuff the Ohio Conference gave him, prudence, s
with him, for once prevailed, and he did not attend

our conferences, but Bishop Morris attended and presided in them.

There never were more unfair and foul means resorted to by any set of ministers to divide and destroy
a Church, than was resorted to by many of these slaveholding preachers in the South; and I cannot help
blaming Bishop Soule more than all the rest. I shall
always believe that the goodness of Bishop Andrewis
heart was such that he would have voluntarily pledged
himself to the General Conference that he would, as
soon as practicable, remove the impediment; and if
he had done this, it would have been hailed, and
hailed with a shout, by the delegates from all the adhering conferences, the few ultra-abolitionists not excepted. If he had done so, how much better would it
have been for himself, for the South, for the Methodist Episcopal Church, and, indeed, for our distracted
country at large! and perhaps the blessedness of such
a course in Bishop Andrew would have told with
thrilling effect on the surrounding millions in other
governments; and unborn millions, of future generations, would rise up and call him blessed. Though he
might be dead, and gone to heaven, yet his noble,
magnanimous, Christian example would have told in
tones of thunder on an ungodly and oppressive world;
and the lucid light of his Christian example would
have shone with brilliant splendor, and the example
thus set by a Methodist bishop would have said to all

the world, “Follow me, as I have followed Christ?

The bishop in this case should have known no man,
or set of men, after the flesh. I know the preacher:

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 48'!

friendly to slavery clung to him and his case as a forlorn hope, and as the last resort to carry their point
with; namely, slavery in the episcopacy; and a fairer
subject they never could have had; for although we
think Bishop Andrew did wrong in this matter, and
greatly erred, yet we love him, and think him a good
man, and that he was every way worthy of the onice
of a bishop, slavery excepted.

My heart has bled at every opening pore, at the
untold mischief » this rupture in the Methodist Episcopal Church has and will produce, from the very
nature of things, (I mean fallen nature.) The Southern
preachers will, in self-justification, throw the blame
on the preachers of the Methodist Episcopal Church,
and thereby poison the minds of a great majority of
the slaveholding South; for they are as rabidly in
favor of slavery as the extravagant abolitionists are
against it. With the two extreme parties there is no
middle ground; for each of them, assuming that they
are infallibly right, cry out, “ They that are not for us
are against us? I have contended with these two
extremes for many years, as a preacher of the Methodist Episcopal Church, and I have often been astounded
beyond measure at the absurdities and inconsistencies
of these extreme belligerent parties; but why should
I? It is as certain for extremes to engender absurdities, inconsistencies, and self-evident contradictions,
as for effects to follow causes, or for like to go to like
philosophically. As one of these extremes has renounced the jurisdiction of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, leaving the middle ground ministers and
members of it completely and altogether in the range
and raking fire of the artillery of the Northern ultras,
I have indulged in the fond hope that these Northern.
abstractionists would, if they cannot be reconciled to

438 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

conservative, consistent Methodism, as it was from
the beginning, go and set up for themselves, and let
the old, conservative Methodist Episcopal Church
alone; but no, they seemdetermined to agitate, and
keep on agitating, till they drive us into another
inglorious secession, and they remain in peaceable

the beginning. But no, I can tell them for their
comfort, if they are within the reach of comforting
considerations, if this is their aim, they need not put
any flattering unction to their souls on this ground,
for the Methodist Episcopal Church '

“ Has fought through many a battle sore)‘

and she
“ Expects to fight through many more)?

and will stand as she is, and as she has always been;
and while there is a splinter from a shattered plank
of the old Methodist ship Zion, I intend to hold on
to her with a dying grasp, and if necessity compels,
with our dying breath cry to all around, “Don‘t give
up the ship W

I am devoutly glad that there is an overruling
Providence, where we may place our hope and confidence; and though we cannot see through or comprehend the permissive providences of God, yet if we
can, under all circumstances, trust God aright, we are
assured that “all things shall work together for good
to them that love him? May not this slavery secession from the Methodist Episcopal Church be overruled by a Divine Providence, and react, and show
that the wisdom of men is foolishness with God? and
under the overruling inter positions of the Almighty,

' rsrnn CABTWBIGHT. 489

l.1_asten,in its time‘ thetotal extinction of slavery, that
has so long placed a foul blot upon the fair escutcheon
° of our country? Who knows, or can divine? Let
us look to God, and constantly and ardently pray,
“ Thy kingdom come; thy willbe done in earth as
it is in heaven ;li use spiritual weapons, and leave all
events to God. ..

It will be found, on an examination of our Minutes,
that the year before the great Southern secession, the
in.crease of membership in the Methodist Episcopal
Church was over one hundred thousand; that in the

year of and after the secession there was a decrease 7

of over thirty-one thousand members. A great many
of these were along what was called the line, in the
border conferences, who were not numbered in either
division; and a great number, from the confusion and
dissatisfaction that arose in the Church from this rupture, attached themselves to other Churches; and
perhaps many went out that never returned to either
division, nor did they seek membership in any other
branch of the Christian Church, and perhaps were
lost forever. What an awful thought! These were
the fearful, legitimate results of schism; and, indeed,
this dreadful rupture in the Methodist Church spread
terror over almost every other branch of the Church
of Christ; and really, disguise it as we may, it shook
the pillars of our American government to the center,
and many of our ablest statesmen were alarmed, and
looked upon it as the entering wedge to political disunion, and a fearful step toward the downfall of our
happy republic; and it is greatly to be feared that
the constant agitation and unscrupulous anathemas
indulged in 11 y frenzied preachers and unprincipled
demagogues, political demagogues, that seek more for
the spoils of oiiice than the freedom of the slave or the

I40 Anronioesapnr or
good of the country, will so burst the bonds of brotherly love and the real love of country, that all the_

horrors of civil war will break upon us shortly, and
iirebrands, arrows, and death, be thrown broadcast
over the land, and anarchy, mobs, and lawless desperadoes reign triumphant; and then the fair fabric
of our happy republic will be tumbled into ruins, and
the liberties that our fathers fought for, and that cost
the blood and treasure of the best patriots that ever
lived, will be lost forever. I would beg imploringly
all honest-hearted lovers of their country, and the
liberties we enjoy, to unitedly stand up gainst every
device, stratagem, and political combination, whether
secretly or openly carried on, by dishonest intriguers,
to ruin our country.

rnrnn 'GAB'1‘WBIGH‘l‘. 441

CHAPTER XXIX.

TRAVELING PRAIRIE IN WINTER.

IN the fall of 1845, our Dlinois Conference was
held in Springfield, September 3d; Bishop Morris
presiding. I was returned to the Bloomington District, which remained pretty near as before. This
district lies in a vast, fertile prairie country, interspersed with delightful groves, and at this time was
but sparsely populated; but since has rapidly filled
up and improved. The district then extended from
the mouth of the Sangamon River, where it empties into the Illinois River, and up said river to near
the mouth of the Mackinaw River; thence east to

Bloomington, and still east to the head of the Sangamon River; thence with said river to its mouth.
There was also a part of the Decatur, and the entire
of Monticello Circuits, south of this river, appended
to the district. In the dead of winter, or in the
spring floods, it was tolerably hazardous to go through
and around this district, and very laborious to go
round it four times in the year.

In the winter of 1845-46, my round of winter quarterly meetings commenced; there had fallen a deep
snow, turned warm, and rained in torrents; then sud, denly turned intensely cold; the streams mostly froze

over, and nearly the whole face of the country was
one continued sheet of ice. This storm came upon

I me at or near Bloomington, the north edge of my

442 AUTOBIOGRAPHYOF

district. My next quarterly meeting was south of
the Sangamon River, sixty or seventy miles distant.
My friends dissuaded me from making even an attempt to go to it. I well knew it was hazardous in
the extreme; but I, as a. traveling preacher, had from
the beginning of my itinerancy, seldom ever made a
disappointment, and had a. very great aversion to
these, disappointments, having always made it a
determined point, if possible, to fill my appointments;
and if difiiculties surrounded me, I never knew
whether I could overcome them or not, till I tried;
so to try was my motto; and if, after using due dili
gence in trying, my way was so insurmountably
hedged up that I could not accomplish impossibilities, I in the main felt contented and happy; for, in
my early career as a traveling preacher, I learned
this happy lesson not to fight against Providence. So
in despite of the importunities of my friends I set out.
My way lay mostly through a dreary and uninhabited prairie, with a small blind path, which, in many
places, was rendered invisible by the snow and
ice; but, fortunately for me, my way led south, between two large branches, not far to my right and
left; and. these being considerably swollen by the late
rains, and then suddenly frozen over, I found to be
a better guide than my blind path; for when I would
miss my path, and veer too much to the right, I would
meet my branch frozen over, and wheel to the left
again; and so it would be when I would get off the
track to the‘ left hand. Thus guided, I measured
about twenty miles, and about one olclock I hove up
to a point where these two branches met and formed
a large creek, which was overflowing its banks, and
was swimming from bank tc bank. For many miles
back I had not passed a solitary house, but right

PETER GABTWBIGHT. 443

here was a little, old, solitary smoky cabin, and a
poor, dirty, ragged family, hovering and shivering
over a small fire. The man, the head of the family,
was gone out hunting. I was hungry, and asked for
food; but the good woman informed me she could not
give me anything to eat, for the best of reasons, they
had nothing for themselves. I looked around, and
plainly saw I could not quarter there that night. But
how to get on to the settlement about six miles ahead
was the question. The woman informed me, if I
could cross the branch which had guided me to the
right as I came there, and then would take the timber along the margin of the large creek, into which
my branches emptied, for my guide, in about seven
miles I would come to houses. But how to get over
this branch was the puzzle. It was at least one hundred yards across, being swollen with the last rains,
and it was frozen over, but would not bear my horse.
So I paused a minute, and thought over my condition.
I plainly saw I must retrace my steps till I could
cross this branch, and if I could not cross it at all, I
must return to the settlement from whence I had
started. So I got in my buggy, cracked my whip,
and started back. In the course of a mile or two, my
branch narrowed considerably, which inspired me
with cheering hopes.

I made several attempts to cross the branch, but
my horse broke through, and with great difliculty I
would retreat; and after retreating four or five miles,
my branch spread out largely, and became very
shallow; so in I ventured. My horse broke through,
but from the shallowness of the water, I got safely‘
across; and leaving the branch to the left, and
wheeling again south, took it for my guide, and prosently came to the main creek, which leaving to my

444 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

lefr, urged on my way for the settlement; and though"
I had to cross many ponds frozen over, and many
branches in the same condition, my home nearly
worn down, and myself cold, hungry, and much fa~
tigued, about dark I came up to a cabin, and it
looked so much like the one I had left in the point
that I passed on. The second cabin I came to, looked
better; and though a total stranger in this region of
the country, when I hailed at the gate, who should
come out but an old class-leader and exhorter in the
Methodist Episcopal Church, whose acquaintance I
had made some time before at a distant quarterly
meeting. He saluted me as one blessed of the Lord,
bid me a cordial welcome, and so did his fine sisterly
wife and children. My horse was put up, and well
cared for; and soon a good backwoods supper that
abounded in all the substantials of life, was on the
table. We sat down, and I partook with a relish only
‘known to a weary, hungry man. We had prayers,
and the most of us got shouting happy; and one of his
interesting sons, while we were all engaged in prayer,
was solemnly convicted, and after praying in mighty
agony for several hours, the Lord blessed him with a
powerful sense of the forgiveness of his sins. For hours
we sung, prayed, and shouted together, then I retired
to rest, and I slept as sweet and sound as if I had
been bedded on a divan of King Solomonls palace.
This young man shouted and praised God nearly all
night. ~
This is the way God converts sinners in the backwoods, and a very faint specimen of the way that
Western pioneer Methodist preachers planted Methodism in the valley of the Mississippi. This good old
brother remained a few years among us, and witnessed a good confession ; left the world with a triumphant

\PETER. CABTWBIGHT. M5

shout, fell asleep in Jesus, and went home to
glory! \

Next morning I started on to my quarterly meeting,
and just as I got to the bridge, on the main Sangamon
River, the high water had surrounded it, but not deep
enough -to swim my horse,who waded through, and I
passed over safely, and got to my quarterly meeting in
good time; and although the weather was disagreeable, yet the people crowded out. The word of God
took hold on sinners, many of them wept, and cried
for mercy, and found by happy experience, that
Christ had power on earth to ..forgive sins. About
twenty-eight were soundly converted to God, the most
of , whom joined the Church, and Methodism was
planted here firmly, never to be destroyed, I humbly
trust. I have often thought of this scene, and many
similar scenes through which I have passed, during
my protracted ministry; and when I look back on
them my heart grows warm, and swells with gratitude
to my heavenly Father for the sanction he has given
to my poor little ministry amid all the sacrihces and
sufferings through which I have passed, as a Methodist itinerant preacher; and to his holy name be all
the glory, both now and forever!

In the Bloomington ‘District I had many warm
personal friends, many members that I had received
into the Church in Kentucky, and some, in whose
houses I had preached in the days of my comparative
youth; and although it was a hard district for me to
travel, my family living entirely beyond its bounds,
yet I was much attached to this field of labor and the
brethren, preachers, and people. Some of these old
members had fought side by side with me in Kentucky and Western Tennessee, where and when

ifethodism had many glorious triumphs over slavery,

446 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

whisky, and superiiuous dressing. These were her
internal foes; but she not only triumphed over these
enemies, but she triumphed over her combined hosts
of inveterate and uncompromising sectarian enemies,

and attained an elevated position in the affections of

very many of the best citizens of those states. Now,

many of those brethren who sung, prayed, and preached to and with us, have fallen asleep in Jesus, and

sing and shout in heaven; while a few, and comparatively very few of us old soldiers, linger on the

shores of time, still lighting under the banners of

Christ; and our motto is, “Victory, or death W

Our next annual conference sat in Paris, Edgar
County, Illinois, September 23d, 1846; Bishop Hamline presiding. Our next, at Jacksonville, Morgan
County, Illinois, September 22d, 1847; Bishop Waugh
presiding. During the three years I was on the
Bloomington District we had general peace and some
considerable prosperity. During the last conference
year that I was on this district, some incidents occurred, which I will relate.

My winteris round of quarterly meetings commenced at Bloomington; Brother Samuel Elliott was
preacher in charge, and it was his second year. There
had fallen a very deep snow, which had greatly blocked
up the roads; and by some strange forgetfulness in
me, I started for my Bloomington quarterly meeting
a week too soon; it was very cold, and I had an open
bleak prairie to travel through. The first day, I rode
about forty miles, and late in the evening I arrived
at a very friendly brotheris house, l ut, behold! when
I went in, I found a large company, consisting of
parts of several families, that had taken shelter under
this friendly roof, from the severe cold and pitilem
storm of snow that had fallen; but all was as pleasant

PETER canrwnxenr 447

as could be expected in a crowd, in very cold weather.
When we came to retire to rest, it was found that all
the beds had to be put into requisition, to accommodate the females; what was to be done with the five
or six men of us that composed a part of the company?
Our accommodation was cared for in something like
the following way. A large fire was made up, and
plenty of wood brought in to keep it up all night.
Large buffalo robes and quilts were spread down before the fire, and plenty of blankets and quilts for
covering; and after praying together, we all retired
to rest, and though our bedding was hard, we slept
soundly.

Rising early next morning, I mounted my horse,
and started on my way to Waynesville, a little
village which gave name to one of my circuits.
Brother John A. Brittenham was preacher in charge.
He saluted me in good brotherly style, and inquired
which way I was traveling. I informed him I was
bound for the Bloomington quarterly meeting. He
said, “ That meeting is not till Saturday week; so
Brother Elliott informs me?

I was surprised, and immediately turned to the
District Book, and found it even so. Well, what was
now to be done? Shall I retrace my steps, two days
back home; and then travel over this dreary cold
road here again? Or what shall I do? Said Brother
Brittenham,

“ Stay with us, and let us have meeting every night
till just time for you to reach your quarterly meeting
in Bloomington?

“ Agreedfl said I. ..

This was a very wicked little village. The Church
was feeble, and greatly needed a revival. We sent
out, and gathered a snzall congregation, and tried to

448 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

preach to them; and there were some signs of good.
Next night our congregation was considerably larger,
with increasing evidences of good. The third night
our house was not suhicient to hold the congregation;
and there were mighty displays of the power of God.
Some shouted aloud the praise of God; some wept.
Our altar was crowded with mourners, and several
souls were converted; but, notwithstanding, the
place was made awful by reason of the power of
God; some mocked, and made sport. Among these
were two very wicked young men, ringleaders in
wickedness. After interrupting the congregation, and
profanely cursing the religious exercises of the people
of God, they mounted their. horses, and started home.
After, or about the time of their starting home, they
made up a race for a trifling sum, or a bottle of
whisky, and started 0E, under whip, at full speed;
but had not run their horses far, till the horse of the
most daring and presumptuous of those young men
flew the track, and dashed his rider against a tree,
knocked the breath out of him, and he never spoke
again. Thus, unexpectedly, this young man, with all
his blasphemous oaths still lingering on his lips, was
suddenly hurried into eternity, totally unprepared to
meet his God.

The tidings of this awful circumstance ran with
lightning speed through the village and country
round; an awful panic seized upon the multitude,
and such weeping and wailing among his relatives
and people at large, I hardly ever beheld before.
There was no more persecution during the protracted
meeting, which lasted for many days; and it seemed,
at one time, after this calamity had fallen on this
young man, that the whole country was in an agony
forsalvation. Many, very many, professed religion

PETER cnnrwarenr. 459

and joined the Church, but the exact number I do
not now recollect. .

. Before our meeting closed here, Brother Elliott,
who had kept up a series of meetings in Bloomington,
preparatory to the quarterly meeting——which meetings
had been greatly blessed—-met me in Waynesville, and
we returned to the battle-field in Bloomington again.
Our meetings were recommenced, and, with" constantly
increasing interest, were kept up night and day for a
considerable length of time. Many were convicted,
reclaimed, converted, and built up in the most holy
faith. Of the number of conversions and accessions
to the ChurchI do not now remember, but it occurs

to me that it was seventy or eighty. Brother Elliottls

labors were greatly blessed in this charge, the last
year of his pastoral labors there. .

Another incident occurred, while I was on this district, which I feel disposed to name. ‘ There were a
good many settlements and neighborhoods in the
bounds of the district where the people had become,
in opinion, Universalists, and, judging from their
morality, or rather their immorality, this doctri-ne
suited them well; and _it is ‘a little strange, but no
stranger than true, I say, without any fear of contradiction, the most of these Universalists had been
members of some Christian Church, and had backslidden and lost their religion,‘ if ever they had any.
In the course of my peregrinations I fell in with one
of their preachers, who really thought himself a
mighty smart, talented man, and was ready for debate,
in public or private, on all occasions. His assumed
boldness gave him great consequence with his hoodwinked disciples. He was very loquacious, and had
some clumsy play on words. After conversing with

him a few minutes, I took my line, common sense, and
29

460 Lnronrodnarav or

sounded him. He affected to have great veneration
for my gray hairs; but I soon found his veneration for
my gray hairs arose more from a fear of my gray
arguments than otherwise. He was a man of slender
constitution, and had been, and was then, greatly
afllicted with sore eyes, and was threatened with the
total loss of sight. He, in the course of our conversation, said there could not be any such being as a
personal devil, who could be everywhere present at
one and the same time, tempting mankind to evil; and
as for a future place of punishment called hell, there
was no such place; that the temptations of man arose
from his fallen nature and not from the devil, and
the punishment that man would suffer ‘for his evil
doings he suffered in this life, and these sufferings consisted in the compunctions of conscience for his moral
delinquencies, and in his bodily aiilictions.

f‘ Wellf said I, “ my dear sir, if your argument is
a sound one, I must draw very unfavorable conclusions
in reference to the magnitude of your crimes?

"‘ Why so W responded he.

“ Well, sir, for a very good reason. As to your
moral delinquencies, and your compunctions of conscience, ' they are best known, perhaps, to yourself;
but as to your bodily afflictions, as a punishment, I
think I can draw very fair inferences, for I cannot
conceive of a greater bodily affliction than the loss of
sight; and as your vision is almost gone, and you
have expressed your firm belief that you will lose
your sight altogether, I must, if your doctrine be true,
number you among the greatest sinners on earth, for
God is too wise to err, and too good to inflict undeserved punishinentfl I tell you his stars and stripes

were not only dropped to-half mast, but trailed in the
dust

PETER‘ GARTWRIGHT. 461

\

There were some evil reports about this preacher
and a certain landlordis lady who kept public entertainment. Another Methodist minister and myself

called to stay all night at this house, as we were on a
journey. The landlord was from home. We were
lmown to this lady, but she charged us tolerably high,
and, Universalist as she was, I think her conscience
smote her a little for charging preachers, and she
began to make a kind of apology for doing so. She
said, “Mr. Cartwright, I suppose you will think it a
little strange that I charge Methodist preachers, but
you need not, for I charge my own preacher, Mr. P

“ 0, no, madamfi said I; “not at all, not at all. If
reports about you and Mr. , your preacher, be
true, such a course, perhaps, is right, and I have
money enough to pay all Universalist bills, and they
ought to have it, for all the happiness they will ever
see is in this life; there is none for them in the life to
come? You may depend upon it apologies ceased,
and a dumb dispensation came over our fair hostess.

. Now, who does not see, from these rather desultdry
incidents, the legitimate fruits of a false foundation
that proposes to save all mankind, irrespective of the
moral temperament of the heart? or, in other words,
who does not see the fatal error of the fallacious argu~
ments that go to prove the final salvation of all mankind, without repentance toward God and faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ? How many poor, self-deluded
souls are leaning on this broken stah, and will never
be awakened to a sense of their true condition till
they hear the dreadful communication: “The great
day of His wrath has come, and who shall be able
to stand ‘W .

In the fall of 1847, at our annual conference, in
Jacksonville, our election of delegates to the General

 

452 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Conference that sat in Pittsburgh in 1848, came off,
and, for the ninth time, it pleased the members of the
conference to return me one of its delegates. This
General Conference was, on many accounts, a very
interesting one, and especially on account of the state
of things that had grown up under the late rupture in
the Church. The Southern preachers had gone from
the General Conference of 1844, with predetermination to renounce the jurisdiction of the Methodist
Episcopal Church, which was all planned and determined on before the delegates left New-York. This
is a fact clearly settled, and admits of no doubt. But
how does this course of conduct agree with the solemn
pledges publicly given to the General Conference by
the Southern delegates, that, on their return home to
their different fields of labor, they would, if possible,
allay the agitation in the South? and if there was a
rupture, it should be of imperious necessity, and not
of choice? Did they do this? Was there a single
Christian effort put forth to accomplish this? 0, no!
never, never! But a very different course was pursued. The toscin of war was sounded; the Methodist
Episcopal Church was denounced as an Abolition
Church, and the cry of self-defense was heard everywhere, from Virginia to Florida and Louisiana. To
arms! to arms! ye great American people, or these
abolitionists of the Methodist Episcopal Church will be

down upon you, and come and steal all our negroes! '

The convention at Louisville was called, a convention of delegates from the slaveholding conferences; and the delegates appeared in regular uniform, equipped and armed according to law. The
yoke of the Methodist Episcopal Church, a rampant abolition Church, was thrown oif ; a separate
organization was formed; their General ConferPETER CARTWBIGHT. 458

fence was appointed; Bishop Soule seceded from the

Methodist Episcopal Church, went over and joined
them, and acted as generalissimo. Bishop Andrew,
unhurt by the dreadful extra judicial act of the abolition General Conference of 1844, appears with all his

‘pontiiical robes, shining rather brighter by the abolition rubbing that he had gotten; two more slaveholding bishops elected; a jubilant song was sung to
the tune and words of, Farewell to abolitionists, negro
stealers, and all the croakers of the North. And,
after heaping upon the Methodist Episcopal Church
all kinds of abuse, and every opprobrious epithet
that the liery burning vocabulary of the South could
afford, the Southern General Conference, in the plenitude of their goodness and wisdom, sent a delegate
to the General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal
Church, held in Pittsburgh,in 1848, asking a mutual
and reciprocal fraternization between the Church,
North, as they misnamed us, and the Church, South.

- Now, unprejudiced reader, what do you think of this?

 

A better man and better Christian gentleman, the
whole South did not afford than Dr. Pierce, their
messenger on this embassy; but the Methodist Episcopal Church was caricatured, abused, slandered, and
in every sense maltreated by the South; and while
they were wounded and bleeding at every pore, is it
to be wondered at that this embassy failed, and that
every single member of the General Conference of
the Methodist Episcopal Church of 1848, voted against
fratemization? If they would undo the wrongs they
had inllicted, and take back their hard speeches, and
"bind themselves to a Christian course in future, then,
and not until then, could the Methodist Episcopal
Church think of a Christian fraternization.

The constitutional vote having failed to be obtained

$4 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

from the annual conferences, in order to render valid
an alteration of the sixth restrictive feature of the

Constitution, laid down in our Discipline, all the
doings of the General Conference of 1844, with respect to a division of the Church, the property or.

funds of the Church, or a line of separation, were, to
all intents, purposes, and constructions, null and void;
but still the General Conference of the Methodist
Episcopal Church of 1848 were unwilling that any
act on their part should be wanting, to settle peaceably these Church diiliculties; they, therefore, asked
again the concurrent three-quarter vote, of all the
annual conferences, to a peace measure, to stop all, or
prevent any litigation on the property question; but
before our bishops had time to submit this measure to
the annual conferences that remained nrm in the
union of the Methodist Episcopal Church, the Southern commissioners commenced a suit, thereby rendering all peaceful constitutional effortsvon Her part vain.
The unjust decisions on these suits are well known,
and will form part and parcel of the history of our
country, and especially of the unjust judicial decisions
of the court against the Church.

At the conference held at Jacksonville, September
22d, 1847, my appointment was to the Springfield
District, which was composed of the following appointments, namely: Spring-held Station, Taylorsville,
Sangamon, Petersburgh, Beardstown, Carlinville,
Hillsborough, and Sharon Mission. During this con
ference year, 1847-48, we had some splendid revivals,
and an increase of over five hundred members in
Springfield, under the faithful labors of Brother J. F.
J aquess. — Greatgood was done, andmany. souls were
converted, and added to the Chm'ch,; and, although
oomoaf thme promising -youths that joined the Church,

rsrnn oanrwnrengr. 465

under hopeful prospects, through persecution and
other unfavorable causes, fell back into their old
habits, and made shipwreck of faith, a number
stood hrm, and ornamented their profession, and one
of them is now an acceptable traveling preacher in
the Illinois Conference. Taylorsville Mission, shared,
in a considerable degree, this year, in revival innuance, under the labors of L. C. Pitner, preacher in
charge. In Petersburgh, there was also a good work,
and a considerable number converted, and a very
neat church erected, that does honor to the village,
under the industrious efforts of Benjamin Newman,
preacer in charge. .

In the fall of 1848, our conference was held in
Belleville, St. Clair County, Illinois; Bishop Morris
presiding. In the course of this year, there was a
good religious iniiuence felt in the Sangamon Circuit,
especially in several of the Southern appointments,
that are now included in the Chatham Circuit. W. S.
MlMurray was very successful here in winning over
to Christ many precious souls, There were many
conversions, and large additions to the Church; and
though he has gone to his reward, he will long live in
the affections of many in the bounds of the then Sangamon Circuit. He succeeded in erecting a decent
church on Sugar Creek, and the Society honored him
in calling it, “.ZlPJ[m~ray Chapel?

Brother MiMurray_, his Wife, and three of his chil.
dren, were all violently attacked with the cholera,
and in a few days of each other, they fell victims
to its violence; but he will long live in the s#'.e.c.tions and mmernbrance of many, especially of those
whom he was the instrument, under Gad, of csnvert:
ing. J?eace to  memory‘! andf   
take care of: and provide for the three 

456 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

children that Brother and Sister MMurmy left
behind. ‘

In the fall of 1849, our conference was held in
Quincy, Adams County, Illinois; Bishop J anes presiding. This year I was returned to the Springfield
District. There were no great revivals in the bounds

G of the district this year, though the Church in the

main was in a peaceful, healthy condition; some conversions, and some increase in the membership.

Ibeg leave here to devote a few lines in giving a small
sketch of our German work. It is only a few years
since it pleased God to awaken and convert Dr. N ast,
now editor of the German “Apologistfl He came
to America a German rationalist, or iniidel. He was
awakened and converted, under the labors of the
ministry of the Methodists. He was soon licensed to
preach, and was the first German missionary to thousands of V our foreign German population. God soon
gave him seals to his ministry; sent his awakening,
convincing power, and powerfully converted some of
his countrymen. He also raised up some of these
new converts to preach the Gospel to the Germans;
and with Dr. Nast and his co-laborers the German
Mission started. Soon, circuits were formed, and the
work of God spread through Ohio, Indiana, Missouri,
and Illinois. God raised up faithful and able German
preachers, to carry the tidings of salvation to their
perishing countrymen that were here, or coming by
the thousand to America. Many who were Catholics,
Lutherans, rationalists, and infidels, were happily
converted to God; the work spread and increased,
till stations, circuits, and districts were formed, and
are still forming; and they come the nighest to oldfashioned, or primitive Methodism, ‘of any people I
ever saw.

PETER CARTWBIGHT. 457

I was once in conversation with Brother J acoby,
and advising him to Americanize his German Methodists, when he said to me, “There are three things
that must be done to a German before you can get
him right. He must first be converted in his head,
for his head is wrong. Secondly, he must be converted in his heart, for his heart is wrong. Then,
thirdly, he must be converted in his purse, for his
undue love of money makes his purse wrong. Iffi
said he, “ we can convert him in all these respects,
we can soon Americanize him and make a good Methodist of him, and then he will stick?

It will be remembered that these Germans in the
West all belong to the Ohio, Indiana, Rock River,
and Illinois Conferences. They are doing great good,
and have been greatly prospered by the Lord. Thousands of the Germans can be reached by preachers
of their own language, that can never be reached by
English preachers. They need our aid and encouragement. Let us hold them up, and the good they
are destined to do, and the hundreds‘ of thousands that
they may be, and will be, instrumental in bringing to
the knowledge of the truth, are far beyond our most
sanguine calculations. Many of them are poor, and

"many avaricious, and either cannot or will not support the Gospel till they are converted; then they
will gladly and cheerfully give according to their
ability, and by our aiding them now, and supporting
missionaries to labor in those missionary-fields till
they are converted and able to become self-supporting, we shall do a good work.

‘What a blessing it is to have ministers to meet
those foreigners when they land on our shores, and
tender them salvation in their own language. I do
not believe we can invest our missionary donations

$ AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

so as to do as much good anywhere else asby applying
it to the support of ministers to preach to all foreigers that are crowding to our happy country; and, by
the by, this is a much cheaper plan thanto fit missionaries to go to foreign lands, and there undergo the tedious
process of learning their languages, or of preaching
to them through an interpreter; and our missionary
appropriations will go further, and accomplish more
good. And when I consider the good already done
among the foreign population that are here in our
midst from diiferent nations, it gladdens my heart. I
have been a close observer of the effect the Gospel
has had upon these foreigners, so far as they have
come under the inilnence of the usages of the Methodist Church. Their close attendance on and attention to class-meetings, prayer-meetings, love-feasts,
family prayer, and, in a word, all the means of grace,
are worthy of all commendation; for I know close
attention to these means of grace, is the reason of the
great success of the Methodist Church in other and
former years; and the want of attention to these
duties in our members now, is the grand cause of the
deadness and barrenness of the Church.

In the fall of 1850, September 18th,.our.conferenoe
was held in Bloomington, MlLean County, Illinois;
Bishop Hamline presiding. During this conference
year one of our old, well-tried, and faithful preachers,
Charles Holliday, had fallen a victim to death. I
had been long and intimately acquainted with him.
We had long lived and labored together, and nothing
contrary to Christian love ever existed between. .113
that I know of. I was called upon to preach his
funeral sermon before the Conference,‘ and did so ya
best I could from theshortand unexpected noticegiaen
.me;~that I had it to..do,.and perhaps I ca,nnot;say apiPETER CARTWBIGHT. 50

thing about this good old brother better than to transcribe, substantially, what is said in his obituary,

printed in our General Minutes, namely:

“ Rev. Charles Holliday died March '8th, 1850,
in his seventy-ninth year. He was the son of James
and Mary Holliday, and was born in the city of Baltimore, Maryland, November 23d, 1771. His parents
were members of the Presbyterian Church. They
not only trained him up in its doctrines and moral
discipline, but his education was conducted with
special reference to his entering the ministry in that
Church. His parents dying while he was in his
minority, he abandoned the idea of entering the ministry, and turned his attention to secular pursuits.
At what age he became pious we have no specinc information. In the month of May, 1793, he was '

united in marriage to Miss Sarah Watkins, -a lady of
good understanding, sound and discreet judgment,
who afterward became a devoted, pious, and faithful
Christian. The day after they were married, they,
in company, united with the Methodist Episcopal
Church, and commenced family devotions the same
evening. In 1797 he received license as a local
preacher. His license was regularly renewed annually from that time until September 30th, 1809, -at
which time he was admitted on trial in the traveling
connection in the Western Conference, and appointed
to the Danville Circuit. In October of the same
year he was ordained deacon by Bishop Asbury. In
1810 he was appointed to the Lexington Circuit,
where he remained two years, and was ordained

elder by Bishop MlKendree, October 11th, .1811;
in 1812 he was appointed to~Shelby Circuit; in 1813
he was appointed Bresiding -Elder -of Salt -River Dis-trict, where he-remained three years; in July, 1316,

460 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

being bereaved of his pious and faithful wife by death,
wholeft him with nine children, he found it necessary to locate. The certificate of his location is dated
September 7th, 1816, signed by Bishop MiKendrec.
In the former part of the year 1817, he entered into
a second marriage with Miss Elizabeth Spears. This
lady, who still lives, proved to be a devoted woman and
wife, and a kind mother and faithful guardian to his
children. His family being now provided for, he was
readmitted into the traveling work in 1817, and appointed to the Cumberland District, Tennessee Conference, where he remained four years. From 1821
to 1825, he labored as presiding elder on Green
River District, Kentucky Conference; in the fall of
1825 he took a transfer to the Illinois Conference,

' and was appointed to the Wabash District, where he

continued to labor till the meeting of the General
Conference of 1828, at which time he received the
appointment of book agent at Cincinnati, in which
he continued eight years. At the close of his term
of service as book agent he was transferred to the
Illinois Conference, and, in 1836, was appointed presiding elder of the Lebanon District, where he continued two years. He was appointed presiding elder
on the Alton District in 1838, which was the last
district on which he labored. He continued in an
effective relation to the Conference, filling such small
appointments and doing such work as his declining
strength would permit, until 1846, when he was
granted a superannuation, and in this relation he remained until the close of his useful life. He attended
the conference in Quincy in September, 1849. On
his way to that conference he was attacked with
disease of the kidneys, from which he never recovered.
-Although his suiferings"7in this his last illness were

rarxca cuvrwnrenr. 461

extreme, he frequently exulted in the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which enabled him to bear so
much suffering without complaining. He retained
his reason to the last. It had been his practice, for
thirty years, to pray three times a day in his family,
and from his devotional spirit we wonder not that his
sun of life set in great peace?

In summing up the character of our lamented
Brother Holliday, we may say, that there are few
traits of real excellence that he did not possess in an
eminent degree. As a preacher he was clear, sound,
and practical. W‘hen he indulged in doctrinal controversy, although he was decided, and expressed his
views in strong language, he was always kind and
loving to his opponent; in all the relations of life, as
a husband, a father, a pastor, a friend, a companion,
he was a most lovely and interesting man, and in the
sufferings and disappointments of life, his conduct was
characterized by that “ charity that suifereth long
and is kind? His end was peace, and many -in the
day of eternity will rise up and call him blessed.
Thus lived and thus died, one of our old members of the
Western Conference, the only conference, at the time
of our brothefs commencing his itinerant life, that
was in this natural as well as moral waste, or in "the
valley of the Mississippi. The death of Brother Holliday was a solemn dispensation to me, and having to
preach his funeral sermon to the whole conference, as
well as many others, and having but a few minutesl notice, and no time to prepare, it was a tremendous cross,
and I have always feared that I did not do justice
to the life, labors, and Christian virtues of this man
of God; but under the circumstances I did the best I
could, and ask a kind indulgence of the congregation
for all the defects of that performance. Let us unitedly

409 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

join, and devoutly pray, “ Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like hisfi as said the
text on that occasion; and if this prayer is answered,
we shall soon reach the place where funeral dirges are
never sung, and death never enters.

In the fall of 1851, September 17th, our conference sat in Jacksonville; Bishop Waugh presiding.
Here we elected our delegates to the General Conference which was to sit in Boston, May 1st, 1852;
and although the Indiana Conferences, Rock River,
Iowa, and Wisconsin, had grown up, and were organized into separate conferences that once belonged to
the Illinois Conference, yet, from the rapid increase
of population in the state, and from the increase of
members, and especially the increase of preachers,
both English and German, it was found indispensable
to divide again, and form a Southern Illinois Conference; and the delegates were instructed accordingly.
It pleased the Conference to elect me as one of this
delegation. This was the tenth time I had been honored with an election by the several annual conferences, of which I was an humble member, to represent the interests of the Methodist Episcopal Church
in the General Conference.

Bishop Hedding, our honorable senior bishop, who
died April 9th, 1852, was, at the date of our Conference, lingering, with no hope of surviving but a few
days. Bishop Hamlinels health also being extremely
precarious, all the efficient work of superintending
the interesting concerns of the whole Church, devolved on Bishops Waugh, Morris, and J anes. We all
knew that several additional bishops must be elected
at our General Conference of 1852. From this view,
together with the iniirmities of increasing years of
Bishpp Waugh, he delivered us a very impressive

rs-rna oanrwnrenr. 468

address at the close of the Illinois Conference, stating
that it was probable this was the last time he should
ever preside in our midst. This address greatly affected the whole Conference, for the bishop had presided among us with great acceptability, and we honored and loved him greatly. We all remembered
that our beloved Bishop Waugh had gone in and out
among us blameless, and that we had been greatly beneiited by his counsels, and the impartial manner in
which he had presided among us; and we always
found him orthodox in the doctrines and discipline of
the Church. He was always accessible to the bumblest preacher or member among us, and we found
him to be what I believe constitutes an old-fashioned
Methodist bishop; he raised no new standards in doctrine or discipline, but urged us to “ mind the same
things, and walk by the same good, old Methodist
rules? So may all our bishops do.

In the fall of 1851, my four years having expired on
the Springfield District, I was appointed to the Quincy
District, where I had traveled fifteen years before;
then my district extended from the mouth of the Illinois River to Galena, and, indeed, as far north as was
inhabited by the whites; and yet further still, into the
Indian country, where I superintended the mission
among the Pottawattomies. My district was then
between four and five hundred miles from north to
south, and I suppose would average one hundred
miles from east to west. I then thought the district a
small one, for when I was first appointed to a district in
the Illinois Conference, in the fall of 1826, my district
commenced at the mouth of the Ohio River, and
extended north hundreds of miles, and was not limited by the white settlements, but extended among
the great, unbroken tribes of uncivilized and unchris46¢ ‘ AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

tianized Indians; but now in 1851 how changed Wu
the whole face of the country. The district was
composed of ‘the following appointments, namely:
Quincy Station, Columbus, Warsaw Mission, Chili,
Pulaski, Rushville Station, Rushville Circuit, Havana,
and Beardstown Station, about one hundred miles
from east to west, and I suppose would average from
thirty to forty from north to south._ There was no
district parsonage and accommodations near its center.
I lived entirely out of its bounds, and had the Dlinois
River to cross and recross five or six _times each
quarter, and the ravages of many years were upon
me, so that I found it as hard to travel this small district as I did my first district in the Conference,
which covered more than two thirds of the geographical boundaries of the state. The country had not
only greatly changed, in rising glory and strength,
but I had greatly changed also; my strength was failing, so that I dreaded a journey of one hundred miles
more than I formerly did one thousand. I was well
pleased with my appointment on many accounts. I
was much gratifled to see the growing improvements
of the country; the dense population; the great increase in the membership of the Church; the large
spacious churches that were built; and in addition to
all this, I met hundreds that I had taken into the
Church in former years, when a new country tried
menis souls. They gave me a cordial reception, and
welcomed back their old presiding elder, and gave
me unmistakable evidences of their friendship and
brotherly love. '

But, notwithstanding all this, and a thousand good
things that I could say with truth and sincerity, I
found that Methodism, in some places, had gone to
seed, and was dying out, and, to use our back-woods

rnrnn canrwnxsnr. 465

language, some of the prominent and leading members
of the flock had become butting rams, or jumping
ewes, or sullen oxen, or kicking mules. These things
gave us trouble. One of my preachers, for some

cause unknown to me, had become greatly prejudiced
against me; he was appointed this year to the ,Warsaw Missionary Station. This young, flourishing little
city of Warsaw stands on the eastern bank of the
IMissis_sippi, hard by the Fort Edward military post.
We had a small, though respectable little society
here, but no church to worship in. The brethren
had rented a little, old, dilapidated frame, every way
unsuitable, and in an out—of-the_-way place. The
Presbyterians had a small church; and when our
quarterly meeting came on, they offered it for our
use. The preacher in charge accepted the offer, but
said perhaps we might protract the meeting. They
replied we might have it as long as we pleased; we
might go on and protract the meeting if We saw proper. The family of my preacher I was not acquainted
with; and he, being prejudiced against me, had made
a bad impression on the mind of his wife against me.
However, she came to meeting, and the Lord blessed
her, for she was a very good woman. The Lord also
reached the heart of their interesting little daughter,
and she oined the Church. After this, the preacher‘s
wife expostulated with him, and told him to lay aside
his prejudices against me, alleging that I must be a
good man, for the Lord had blessed and was blessing
my labors in a powerful degree. The old brother
surrendered, and gave up his prejudices, and we became very friendly.

The power of God fell on the congregation almost
every coming together; and we had crowded congregations by day and by night. Several were awakened
30

486 AUTOBIOGBAP-RY-' or

and converted. We protracted the meeting, and
intended to extend it over several Sabbaths; but
were cut short by oiiicial information that the congregation who owned the church wanted to use it themselves after Friday night. We concluded our meeting,
thankful for small favors; but did firmly believe that
this unceremonious deprivation of the Presbyterian
or Congregational church arose from jealousy, or fear
of our success. If we judge wrong in this matter,
we devoutly hope to be forgiven by the Lord.

The quarterly meeting which we have been speaking of was holden the first days of February, 1852.
Our expulsion from the church, in the manner above
stated, created considerable dissatisfaction, and produced a determination, both in and out of our little
society, to build a church that we could call our own,
without the danger of being turned out of it at
any time. Accordingly, a lot was selected, and
a subscription opened to accomplish this desirable
object, and from the amount subscribed by the citizens, together with several hundred dollars obtained
abroad, we succeeded the next year in erecting a neat
little- brick church to worship in; and our quarterly
meeting the next year was held in it, namely, the first
Sabbath in February, 1853. This meeting was attended with great power. James I. Davidson was
preacher in charge this year, whose labors were
greatly blessed and owned of God. I tried to preach
during our protracted quarterly meeting about ten
times, to large and crowded congregations. Sinners
were deeply convicted, and a great many, I verily
believe, obtained religion. Over twenty joined the
Church, among them some good, respectable citizens,

whom we hope to meet in heaven, and unite in praising God forever.

PETER caarwnrénm. 467

But right here I wish to say, that in most of our
revivals many men and women of bad habits and illfame become operated on, profess religion, and join
the Church. This has long been, and now is, a great
objection by many to these revivals, and it has been
the cause of considerable persecution to the Church.
But it should be remembered that the economy of the
Church, in saving souls, is compared by Jesus Christ
himself to a iisherman casting his net into the sea,
and inclosing a multitude of iish, both good and bad.
But who ever condemned the fisherman, because his
net gathered bad as well as good hsh? or who ever
drew the erroneous conclusion that the net was bad,
because there were some bad fish inclosed in it? The
net is to be thrown, the iish, bad and good, are to be
inclosed, and then the net is to be drawn to shore, on

dry land, and all alike, both good and bad, taken

from their natural element. Then, and not till then, '

the process of assorting them is to commence.
The Methodist Church, in our humble opinion,

stands, in this respect, on preéminently Scriptural

ground. They give every sinner a chance, and take
them on probation for six months, not as members, but
under the care of the Church, on trial for membership;
and surely, if they do not in that time give satisfactory
evidence of their sincerity and fitness for membership,
it is not likely they ever Will. Well, if they do not
in that time give satisfactory evidence that they are
in good earnest in seeking their salvation, what then?
Expel them? No; for they are not members to expel.
What then? We simply drop them, and consider
them no longer probationers for membership; leave
them ‘where we found them; we have at least tried
to do them good, and have done them no harm.
This is the safety-valve of the Methodist Episcopal

468 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Church; six months on trial for membership. How

dreadfully have other sister Churches been troubled _

in their mode of operation! They generally believe
that a Christian can never fall away so as to be finally
lost, and that it is wrong to receive any into the
Church who are not Christians. Well, in order to get
people into the Church, they are often found hurrying them into a profession of religion when they have
none; and then, when such fall away, with what
astonishing mortification they have to confess they
were mistaken; that these souls were deceived; that
they never had any religion! and yet they hurl their
anathemas at Methodist preachers for taking persons
as probationers for membership without religion,
while they have actually done infinitely worse, for
they have taken them into the Church as full members, and as Christians too, when they were not.
Now, if our economy is wrong, what must theirs be?

God bless the citizens of Warsaw, and increase
their mercies a hundredfold, for the many acts of
kindness shown to me the two years I was laboring
among them.

In the fall of 1841, Milo Butler, a transfer from the
Michigan Conference, was appointed to the pastoral
charge of the Quincy City Station. It was constituted
a station under my former presidency in ‘the Quincy
District, and had existed as a stationpformore than
fifteen years. The Church had ebbed and iiowed,
sometimes in prosperity and sometimes in adversity.
There were some fine, substantial members here; but
they at this time, 1851, were in a cold state, evidently
on back ground. Brother Butler was greatly afflicted,
and so were his family, this year. He labored faithfully, according to his strength.

We had a small refreshing in the Church this winPETER GARTWRIGHT. 469

ter, chiefly under the acceptable labors of Brother
Wilson, brother-in-law to Doctor Butler. L. C. Pitner was appointed to Quincy Station in the fall of
1852; and during the months of December, 1852, and
January, 1853, a glorious revival broke out, such as
had never been in Quincy before. It really seemed
as though it would at times overwhelm the whole city.
High and low, rich and poor, old and young, bowed
before the mighty power of God. Many of almost all
kinds of education became the subjects of the converting grace of God, and joined the Church; and when
our second quarterly meeting came off, in January,
our Church, though large, was filled at love-feast to its
utmost capacity. The city mission‘ charge, under the
pastoral care of James L. Crane, belonging to the
Griggsville District, shared largely in this blessed revival, and our German Methodist Church caught the
holy fire; and it was supposed that over one thousand
were converted and added to the different charges
and Protestant Churches in the city of Quincy during
this happy year. Most of them have proved faithful,
and are honoring the profession they have made; but
some of them have fallen asleep in Jesus, and are
numbered with the Church above.

During the two years I was on this district, we had
good times in Rushville Station and Rushville Circuit, Ripley Mission, Pulaski, and Columbus Circuits; a number were converted and joined the
Church in all these places. About the 20th of September, 1852, we had a camp-meeting at Sugar Grove,
in the bounds of the then Columbus Circuit. Brothers J. I. Davidson, Butler, and Pitner came to our
aid, and labored like men of God; but what was better still, the Lord came and made one in our midst.
The word was preached in demonstration of the

470 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Spirit and the power of God; the Church was
greatly built up, and many sinners were convicted
and soundly converted, and about sixty were added
to the Church.

This conference year was a great and prosperous
one to the Church; and the two years I spent on the
Quincy District, I number among the most pleasant
of my life. Still we had some trials and disputes in
the Church which gave us trouble, but the Lord, we
trust, overruled all, and great good was done; the
Church increased in numbers, in deep piety, in close
attention to her peculiar institutions that God has so
long blessed and prospered. My strength was failing
from increasing years, and long and constant itiner
ant labors; I lived on the east end of the district,
and I had to cross the Illinois River very often,
which in winter was frequently frozen over for
months, and in spring the banks were overflowed;
and I had often to ferry live miles across the water
extending from bluff to bluff ; and when the winds
were high, I have been detained for days together,
causing me to risk my life, and to miss my appointments. Under these circumstances, I was impelled to ask the bishop to change the form of the
district, and make the river the line. a

Our Conference in the fall of 1852 was held in the
town of Winchester, Scott County, Illinois; and in the
fall of 1853, the 12th of October, at Beardstown, Cass
County, Illinois. Bishop Scott was our presiding
bishop, and a pleasant president he was. It was at
this Conference the above alteration in the Quincy
District was made, and the Pleasant Plains District
formed. This district was composed of the following appointments, namely: Beard.sto,wn Station.
Heredosia (now Concord) Circuit, Havana, J ackse_nrnrnn OAB!'W3IG£'.l‘. in

ville Circuit, Sangamon, Virginia, and Island Grove;
3 very pleasant, convenient little district indeed.

I had now been a traveling preacher for more than
forty-nine years, and was sixty-eight years of age. I
had been appointed presiding elder by Bishop Asbury, at the first Tennessee Conference, held in Fountain Head, in the fall of 1812, which is now fortythree years since; and in all these forty-nine years of
my life as a traveling preacher, I had never asked of
the appointing power of the Church for any appointment, nor for any accommodation in an appointment;
and although some of my brethren have thought that

I was greatly favored with accommodating appoint-.

ments, I here call upon all the bishops that have given
me my appointments for more than fifty years to bear
me witness that the appointments given me by them,
were unasked for by me. i At this conference at Beardstown, in the fall of
1853, for the first time in my life, I did ask to be appointed to the Pleasant Plains District, if appointed
to a district at all, but at the same time said I would
greatly prefer a small circuit. Let Bishop Scott and
his council bear witness in this matter. There was
another strong reason, aside from my -age and infirmities, that urged me to ask this accommodation;
namely, that I might gain some time to write this
sketch. But, alas! leisure time to write seems to be
almost out of the question with me; I am appointed
on so many conference committees, have to attend so
many dedications of churches, to preach so many
funeral sermons, besides all the important duties of the
district, that leisure time with me is a very rare thing.
And such have been my Church engagements, and
such the length of time between the occasional hours
or days devoted to this narrative, that when I have

472' AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

recommenced writing‘ I had entirely forgotten what I
had written last, especially the connection of subjects;
and this has cost me a great deal of labor and loss of
time; hence if there are some repetitions, unconnected incoherencies, I hope they will be regarded and
inspected with this motto:

“ That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me."

1 think it about time now to return and say a few
things about our General Conference of 1852, which
sat in Boston. When in Pittsburgh, at the General
Conference of 1848, the New-England brethren pleaded hard for the General Conference of 1852 to be appointed in Boston, they alleged that New-England.

had never had a General Conference. I observed to
Brother Crandall, and other New-Englanders, rather
jocosely, that, judging from the Yankees that I had
seen‘ out in the West, I was a little afraid to venture
myself in the General Conference among the Bostonians; for almost all that I had seen in the West had
assumed such high ground, professed such mighty educational attainments, that we poor illiterate Western
backwoods preachers could. hardly hold an intelligible conversation with them; and that we were
afraid to Start any proposition whatever; and when
we met them, we could only stand and look at them,
and make ready to answer questions.

To this, Brother Crandall pleasantly replied, “Why,
sir, you have never seen a genuine Yankee in the
West; those you have seen are runaways, or pretenders or impostors; they are an adulterated set of scapegallows fellows; but come to Boston, and we wiL
show you a real live, green Yankee?

“ Very Well? Said I, “ Weill go for Boston?

PETER GARTWRIGHT. 473

When a number of the delegates from different
Conferences met in New-York, on their way to Boston,
we took the cars, a crowd of us together, and on our
iron horse snorted toward the land of the Puritan
metropolis, leaving the Empire City and State far
behind.

Just about the time we entered the limits of the
State of Massachusetts, our conductor proclaimed a
halt of ten minutes; I dashed out without my hat; I
wanted water, and as I had no relish for being left by
the cars, I ran and watered, and with a quick step
returned, and took my seat. I discovered that a good
many of the preachers were indulging in a hearty
laugh, and, as I thought, at my expense.

Said I, “ Gentlemen, what are you laughing at W

One, somewhat composing his risibilities, answered,

“ How dare you enter the sacred, classic land of the
pilgrims bareheaded W

“ My dear sirf said I, “ God Almighty crowded
me into the world bareheaded, and I think it no
more harm to enter Massachusetts hareheaded than
for the Lord to bring me into the world without
a hat? _

There were several ladies sitting hard by, though I
had not observed them; they pulled down their vails,
and chuckled over my speech for miles. When we

got to Boston, I expected to see no one that I had

ever seen but a few of the Methodist preachers that I
had become acquainted with at the General Conferences of former days; but I was very agreeably
disappointed in this respect, and especially when I
learned that Mr. Merrill, with whom I had formed a
pleasant acquaintance at MiKendree College, Illinois,
some years past, was then living in Boston, and had
petitioned for Dr. Akers and myself to board with

474 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

him during General Conference. This Brother Merrill was the son of Rev. John A. Merrill, a fine old
Methodist preacher of olden times, with whom I had
been long acquainted, who had borne the glad tidings
of the Gospel successfully to thousands; witnessed a
good confession, lived faithful, died happy, and has
gone safe home to heaven. I found myself very
agreeably situated in this kind and generous family.
Brother Merrill was intelligent, easy, and pleasant in
conversation. His friendly little wife was kind,
courteous, and easy in her manners; and her mother,
a line, intelligent old lady. All were easy, familiar,
and agreeable. We were also favored with the company of Brother J. F. J aquess, who was collecting
books for the female college in Jacksonville. My
fear was, that I would get into a family that were
cold, stiff, and distant in their manners. One of
these formal, distant, ceremonious families was always
a prison to me, and well calculated to make me feel
unhappy, and far from home; but it was otherwise
here.

The second Sabbath in Boston, I was appointed to
preach at Church-street Church at eleven olclock. I
took for the text, Hebrews x, 22. We had a large
congregation; several preachers present; and supposing that most of my congregation had hardly
ever seen or heard of me, and that they were an
educated people, and had been used to great preaching, I put on all the gravity that I well could command; I tried to preach one of my best sermons, in a
plain, grave, sober manner; and, although I never
thought myself a great preacher, yet I really thought
I had done very near my best that time. Well, when

I came down from the pulpit, a brother preacher introduced me to several of the prominent members of

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 475

the congregation; and as I was introduced to ‘them,
they asked me very emphatically,

“ Is this Peter Cartwright f_rom Illinois, the old
Wester pioneer W

I answered them, “ Yes, I am the very man?

“ Wellfl said several of them, “ brother, we are
much disappointed; you have fallen very much under
our expectations; we expected to hear a much greater
sermon than that you preached to-day?

“ Well, brethrenfl said I, “ how can it be helped?
I did as well as I could, and was nearly at the top of
my speed? '

I tell you this was cold encouragement; I felt great
mortification; I hastened to my room and prayed
over it a while. That night they had appointed me
to preach at North Russell-street. There was a full
congregation, and a good many preachers present. I
read for the text, Job xxii, 21. Ihad asked God for help;
and when I took my text, I determined to do my very
best, and did so; but failed, as in the forenoon, to
meet the expectations of the people. And as I came
down into the altar, I was again introduced to some
of the brethren; and although they did seem to doubt

that I was Peter Cartwright from the West, the oldpioneer, yet they, in cold blood, informed me that I
had fallen under their expectations, and as good as
told me that my sermon was a failure. N ow was not
this too bad? I tell you they roused me, and provoked what little religious patience I had; and I
rather tartly replied to one, i that I could give people
ideas, but I could not give them capacity to receive
these ideas, and left them abruptly; and in very
gloomy mood retreated to my lodgings, but took but
little rest in sleep that night. I constantly asked myself this question, Is it so, that I cannot preach? or

476 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

what is the matter? I underwent a tremendous crucifixion in feeling.

The next day, I told Dr. Cummings not to give me
any other appointment in Boston during the General
Conference, “ forfl said I, “ your people here have
not got sense enough to know a good sermon when
they hear it?

The Sabbath following I spent in Lynn, and had
good meetings; then I went the next Sabbath to Fall
River, and preached for Brothers Allyn and Upham,
and had a pleasant time. Some time in the following
week, old Brother Taylor came to me and told me I
must preach at his church the next Sabbath, at the
Bethel Charge; and said, Dr. Akers and Brother J. F;
Wright had both tried to preach in his church, and
both failed; “ and," said he, “ you are the forlorn
hope. If you iiash, no other Western preacher shall
preach in my church any more during the General
Conference."

Said I, “ Brother Taylor, you need not think that
any of us Western men are anxious about preaching
to you in Boston; your way of worship here is so
different from ours in the West, that we are confused.

'Therels your old wooden god, the organ, bellowing up

in the gallery, and a few dandiiied singers lead in
singing, and really do it all. The congregation
wonlt sing, and when you pray, they sit down instead
of kneeling. We donlt worship God in the West by
proxy, or substitution. You need not give yourself
any trouble about getting a Western man to preach
in your church; we donlt want to do it, and I do not
think that I will try to preach in Boston any more,
unlessiyou would permit me to conduct the services
after the Western manner?

Said Brother Taylor to me, “ Brother, you must

PETER CARTWBIGHT. 477

preach to us at the Bethel; andfl said he, “ roll up

your sleeves, and unbutton your collar, and give us areal Western out?

My reply was this: “ If you will let me regulate
your congregation, and preach as we do in the West,
I have no objection to preaching to your congregation, or anywhere in Boston?

“ Very well, at it you gof was his reply.

In the meantime, I had learned from different
sources, that the grand reason of my falling under
the expectations of the congregations that I had addressed was substantially this: almost all those curious incidents that had gained currency throughout
the country, concerning Methodist preachers, had
been located on me, and that when the congrega‘ tions came to hear me, they expected little else but

a bundle of eccentricities and singularities; and when
they did not realize, according to their anticipations,
they were disappointed, and that this was the reason
they were disappointed. So on Sabbath, when I
came to the Bethel,we had a good congregation; and
after telling them that Brother Taylor had given me
the liberty to preach to them after the Western fashion,
I took my text Matthew xi, 12; and after a few
commonplace remarks, I commenced giving them
some Western anecdotes, which had a thrilling e&‘ect
on the congregation, and excited them immoderately,
I cannot say religiously; but I thought if ever I saw
animal excitement, it was then and there. This

broke the charm. During my stay after this, I could ~

pass anywhere for Peter Cartwright, the old pioneer
of the West. I am not sure that after this I fell under
the expectations of my congregations among them.

I will say that a more generous, hospitable, and
social people I never found anywhere than in Boston.

478 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Their sociability and friendly greetings reminded me
more of our Western manners than anything I ever
found among total‘ strangers, and many of them are
sincere, devout Christians; but their mode of worship
I do most solemnly object to, so far as their pews,
promiscuous sittings, and instrumental music are concerned. The salaries of their organists and choirs are
expenses unjustified by the word of God. i I also take
exceptions, in many instances, to the moral character
of the persons employed in these departments. The
evils that result from mixed sittings of male and female, which are always attendant on the pew system,
are neither few nor small. The choir practice destroys congregational singing almost entirely, and has
introduced the awkward and irreverent practice
among congregations of turning their backs on the_
sacred desk, and facing -about to the choir, and this
whole system has a tendency to destroy the humble
practice of kneeling in time of prayer, and contributes largely to the Church-dishonoring practice of
sitting while the prayers of the Church are offered
up to God. I shall not attempt a labored argument
here against these evils, for I suppose, where these
practices have become the order of the day, it would
be exceedingly hard to overcome the prejudice in favor of them, though I am sure, from every observation
that I have been able to make, that their tendencies
are to formality, and often engender pride, and destroy the spirituality of Divine worship; it gives
precedence to the rich, proud, and fashionable part of
our hearers, and unavoidably blocks up the way of
the poor; and no stumbling-block should be put in the
way of one of these little ones that believe in Christ.
I found the Bostonians to be a liberal people in
their contributions for benevolent purposes. It fell

PETER canrwnrenr. 479

to my lot to be a solicitor for pecuniary aid to erect
a church in Warsaw, Quincy District, Illinois Conference, and the members of the General Conference and
citizens of Boston gave me several hundred dollars
for that object.

I will close this chapter by saying that the General
Conference that sat in Boston, in 1852, was the tenth
General Conference which I attended, or was elected to.
These General Conferences had sat in Cincinnati, Pittsburgh, Baltimore, Philadelphia, and N ew-York ; and
though we were treated very friendly in all these
cities, yet the General Conference in Boston was more
highly honored by all classes of citizens than any

that I ever attended; and, sure enough, to use the

trite saying of Brother Crandall, I found live, green
Yankees by the thousands, and some of them very
talented, and most of them well educated; the poor
among them are cared for, the children are gathered
up in all directions and sent to school; but, after all,
it would make a Western man laugh, in spite of his
gravity, to hear‘ a New-Englander talk of his great
farm, containing all of two acres, and hear him tell
how much it cost him to remove the stone off the
farm, how much to manure it, how much to cultivate
it; then the sowing of the products, the marketing of
it, and the real product in cash. They will really
talk scientincally about it. I could not but think of
the contrast, for we have some farmers in Illinois that
have from one to five thousand acres in their farms,
in active, actual, productive, profitable cultivation.
Hail, Boston l live forever.

480 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

CHAPTER XXX.

GENERAL CONFERENCE IN BOSTON .

Tm: General Conference of 1852 was held in Boston. Our old beloved Bishop Hedding had just died
and left us. From the precarious state of Bishop
Hamlinels health, and despairing of a recovery, he tendered to the General Conference his resignation of the
office of bishop, to which we had elected him in 1844,
and we accepted his resignation, and, as we have elsewhere said, we had but three bishops left. Brothers
Waugh and Morris were getting pretty well advanced
in life, and Bishop J anes, though in the prime of life, °
was failing from his excessive labors. Our Church
was extending throughout this vast continent, and in
Liberia, Germany, South America, and other different
and distant nations; and as our Discipline very properly provides that our bishops should travel at large
throughout the connection, it was clearly seen that
we must strengthen the episcopacy by electing a sufficient number to visit, personally, all parts of our
widely-extending connection. Accordingly, a resolution was adopted with great unanimity, that we elect
four additional bishops; and after exchanging and interchanging our opinions and views concerning the
men proper to be set apart to this ofiice, it was declared, with great Imanimity, that Brothers Scott,
Simpson, Baker, and Ames be elected.

A diiiiculty had taken place in the Ohio Conference concerning a pewed church. One of our good

PETER CART‘WRIGrH'1‘. 481

preachers, in aiding and defending those brethren that
were in favor of the pew system, had been considered
guilty of imprudence, and the Ohio Conference passed a vote of censure on this brother, and from this be
appealed to the General Conference. The debates on
this appeal brought on the controversy on the subject
of pews. The General Conference cleared this brother from the censure. Then followed sundry motions
to change the Discipline on the subject of pewed
churches; and, finally, our ' old, well-tried rule was
changed to what it is in our Discipline now. This
was a real Yankee triumph. However, many of the
members of the General Conference voted .for this
change, hoping to stop one source of Church litigation hereafter, and they may so far succeed as to prevent any future appeals to the General Conference ;
but they have, at the same time, opened a thousand
doors for strife and contention, in all cases where there
is any considerable division or diEerence of opinion
on the subject in our societies. ‘ The pew system is
inevitably at war with the best interests of the
Church, for no honorable, high-minded man, who is

a poor, and unable to buy or rent a pew, but will feel

himself degraded to intrude himself into a pewed
church; and that form of worship adopted in any
Church which goes to exclude the poor, contravenes
the Divine law,‘ and prevents the realization of that
blessedness that God has provided for the poor. Fifty
years ago there was not a member or preacher among
the thousands in the Methodist Episcopal Church
that thought of having a pewed church. But since
the Church has risen in numerical strength, and become ‘wealthy, this system of pewed churches is fast
becoming the order of the day. The pew system

must necessarily be extremely offensive to the Lordis
31

4,82 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

poor, and we should all remember the words of Jesus
Christ, that it were better » that a millstone were
hanged about our necks, and we drowned in the
depth of the sea, than that we should offend one of
those little ones that believe on him. For my own
part, I always feel embarrassed when, as a stranger, I
enter a pewed church, and how mortifying it is to be
directed by the sexton to some back, dirty," or dingy
seat, and I involuntarily ask, “Are ye not partial ‘Pl
Leaving the pew system for future adjudication of
the Church, we sincerely. hope that its evils Will, witl»
the pious, work its entire overthrow, and the restora

tion of free seats in all the Churches, which so admi

rably agrees with a free Gospel. .

I hope, if I make a few remarks right here on
the speculations published not long since in the
National Magazine, by its talented editor, on the
qualifications of the bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church, it will not be considered the unpardonable sin. Brother Stevens seems to think that our
present bishops, at least some of them, have talents
of too high a grade to be buried in the unimportant
and comparatively small oflicial duties of their oilice,
and that it would be better to select men of less useful, business talents to perform the small duties of a
bishop, reserving those men of a high grade of talent
for more important business matters or interests of the
Church. I must confess that the position my respected brother takes took me rather by surprise, but my
surprise was not so much at the talented editor of the
National taking this position, as at the position itself;
but then, why sheuld I be surprised at any position
taken in this educational, advanced age of the wo1‘.‘l,
seeing that I am an old dispensationist, and fifty years
behind the times? I have been acquainted personally

PETER! CARTWRIGHT. 488

with every bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church
(save Dr. Coke) from her commencement to the present, and though I have awarded to all of our bishops
a high grade of talent, yet it never entered my mind
for the iirst time that any of them had any talents to
spare, or that were not necessary to be brought into
requisition /to superintend all the important interests
of the Methodist Episcopal Church. When I consider
the responsible duties of a bishop in our Church, to
constantly travel at large throughout the entire bounds
of our ministerial fields of labor, to oversee the temporal and spiritual interests of the whole Church, to
assign, from year to year, the thousands of traveling
preachers to their most appropriate fields of labor,
and many other important duties too tedious to enumerate in this connection, I must frankly say I have
never had the first spasm or fear of getting men of too
high a grade of talent, yea, of business talent, to perform the functions of their office with credit to themselves and promotion of the best interests of the
Church of God. Moreover, though I may not admire
the manner of these speculations of my beloved and
talented editor, yet, should they tend to check the
high aspirations of disappointed expectants, some
good may result. ‘

It is a trite saying, that revolutions never go backward; but if the speculations of my brother are not
driving things backward, then I must be very much
in the dark. But the theory we have just noticed
very forcibly reminds me of what" is alleged to be
the custom of the members of the Established Church
of England, namely: If parents have a smart and
promising son, or sons, he, or they, are selected for
the bar, or for the medical department, or some other
prominent position, ani they are educated accord484 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

ingly; b11t if they have a stupid boy, that promises
very little usefulness to the world, or at least promises
to shine not very brilliantly, he is immediately designated for the ministry, for then he can be supported
by the state, and not by his acceptable and useful
talents. 0, What a reproach to the Gospel of the Son
of God, and what a withering curse to the Church!

At our conference at Beardstown, October 12th,
1853, as I have already said, I was appointed to
Pleasant Plains District, and bade an affectionate
adieu to Quincy District. I do not know that I was
ever appointed to any field of labor that I felt more
attached to than I did to the Quincy District, and
should have been glad to have spent at least two
years more; b11t the best of friends in this life must
part; we part, however, with a blessed hope of meeting in another and better world. I hardly ever left
a field of ministerial labor but I felt sorrowful, and
indulged in very gloomy reilections. Here are hundreds of my best earthly friends, whom I have lived
and labored with in great peace and harmony; we
have preached and prayed together; often been
happy and shouted the high praises of God together,
many of whom are my spiritual children that God
has given me. We have labored and suffered together, but now, for the last time, we splice hands,
and bid each other finally farewell, till we meet in
the general resurrection. When I remember how
swift time flies, and how soon God will call his suffering children home, then and there let us meet, where
painful separations forever cease.

Before I close this feeble sketch of my long life, 1
wish to give a very brief sketch of a few of my fellowlaborers who suffered long and endured much in

spreading Methodisml in these Western wilds, and

PETER CARTWRIGHT 485

thereby rescue from oblivion their names and worthy
deeds, that generations to come may know their indebtedness to the early pioneer Methodist preachers,
for the moral order in a great and good degree that prevails in the vast regions of the West. Whatever may
be justly attributed to education and other instrumentalities, the present, as well as future generations,
owe, and will owe, a debt of gratitude to the indomitable courage and pious labor of early suffering
Methodist preachers for the great and good order of
this vast wilderness. When they entered it as
preachers of the Gospel, very few ministers of any
other denomination would brook the hardships and
undergo the privations that must necessarily be endured in preaching the Gospel in these sparsely populated and frontier regions. But hardly had the early
emigrant pitched his tent, raised his temporary camp,
or log-cabin, when the early Methodist traveling
preachers were there to preach to them the unsearchable riches of Christ; and how many thousands who
had withstood the offers of life in the old settlements
or states, have been followed into the wilderness by
these early Methodist preachers and won over to
Christ. Many ministers of other Churches waited
till flourishing towns, villages, and populous settlements had formed and improved the country, and
could give them a good fat salary; and then they
came and entered into the labors of these old pioneers. People, unacquainted -with frontier life, and
especially frontier life fifty or sixty years ago, can form
but a very imperfect idea of the sufferings and hardships the early settlers of these Western states under-‘

went at that day, when Methodist preachers went
from fort to fort, from camp to camp, from tent to
tent, &om cabin to cabin, with or without road or

486 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

path. We walked on dirt floors for carpets, sat on
stools or benches for chairs, ate on puncheon tables,
had forked sticks and pocket, or butcher knives, for
knives and forks, slept on bear, deer, or buffalo skins
before the fire, or sometimes on the ground in open
air for downy beds, had our saddles or saddle—bags
for pillows instead of pillows of feathers, and one new
suit of clothes of homespun was ample clothing for
one year for an early Methodist preacher in the
West.

We crossed creeks and large rivers without bridges
or ferry-boats, often swam them on horseback, or
crossed on trees that had fallen over the streams,
drove our horses over, and often waded out waistdeep; and if by chance we got a dug-out, or canoe, to
cross in ourselves, and swim our horses by, it was
quite a treat.

0, ye downy doctors and learned presidents and
professors, heads of the Methodist literature of the
present day, remember the above course of training
was the colleges in which we early Methodist preachers graduated, and from which we took our diplomas!
Here we solved our mathematical problems, declined
our nouns and conjugated our verbs, parsed our
sentences, and became proficient in the dead languages of the Indian and backwoods dialect.

Suppose these illiterate early Methodist preachers
had held back, or waited for a better education, or
for these educational times, where would the Methodist Church have been to-day in this vast valley of
the Mississippi? Suppose the thousands of early settlers and scores of early Methodist preachers, by some
Providential intervention, had blundered on a Biblical
Institute, 01' a theological factory, where they dram
up little pedantic things they call preaches; sup.

rrrnn onnrwnmn-r. _ 487

pose ye we would have known them from a ramis
horn? Surely not.

Jesse Walker, known to thousands in Illinois, Missouri, Indiana, Tennessee, and Kentucky, was a native
of Virginia. His age has gone from my recollection. His commencement as a preacher was in the
local order, and as such he moved to West Tennessee.
This was about ‘the time of the great Cumberland
revival; and though he had a very limited education,
and his preaching powers were not very profound,
yet he could preach a plain, practical sermon; and
he was a powerful exhorter.

In the fall of 1803 Brother Walker was received
on trial into the traveling connection, in the Western
Conference, and appointed to travel the Red River
Circuit, in Cumberland District; John Page was his
presiding elder. He was this year blessed with glorious revivals, and received a great many into the
Church. In 1804 he was appointed to the Livingston
Circuit. This was a new field of labor which I had
formed the year before under the elder. Here his
family was greatly afflicted, and he lost by death two
of his children; but Brother Walkeris labors were
greatly blessed, and many seals were added to his
ministry.

In 1805 he remained on the same circuit, with
Hartford Circuit attached to it. His labors this year
were greatly blessed. A great number were converted and joined the Church. In 1806 Brother Walker

- was appointed to Hartford Circuit; this was also a

prosperous year in many additions to the Church.
In 1807 he was appointed to the Illinois Circuit, for
it will be seen, that the Illinois and Missouri States
both belonged to Cumberland District. _ Here he
entered the prairie wilderness, and spent a successful

488 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

year on that circuit. In 1808 he was appointed to
Missouri, still further in the wilderness of the West;
as usual, he had several revivals. In 1809 a new
district was formed, called Indiana District, embracing Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri States, and J.
Walker was appointed to Illinois Circuit. In 1810
and 1811, he was appointed to, and traveled with acceptability and usefulness, the Cape Girardeau Circuit, in Missouri. In the fall of 1811 the name of the
Indiana was changed to Illinois District, S. Parker,
presiding elder; and in 1812, Brother Walker was
appointed to the Hlinois Circuit again.

It should be recollected, that in 1812 the General
Conference sat in New York; this was the first delegated General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal
Church. At this General Conference, the Western
Conference was divided into two, called Ohio and
Tennessee Conferences. In 1815 the Missouri District was formed; and in 1817 he was appointed to
that district. Right here it should be remembered,
that the General Conference which sat in Baltimore,
May 1st, 1816, divided the Tennessee Conference,
and formed a Missouri Conference. The Missouri
Conference was composed of two presiding-elder
districts, namely, Illinois and Missouri, though it
embraced four states, namely: Arkansas, Missouri,
Illinois, and Indiana. The Missouri District covered
two states west of the Mississippi, Arkansas and Missouri. The Illinois District covered the states of
Illinois and Indiana. These four states were all frontier ground; desperate, long, lonesome rides, and
little or no support for preachers or presiding elders;
and, if our districts were as large and hard to travel
now as then, we should not have as many young

"Firing expectants for that office as abound in our.

rmnn CARTWBIGHT. 489

conferences. In 1818 and 1819, he carried successfully the Gospel to thousands of the scattered frontier
settlers in Missouri and Arkansas, and many in the
day of judgment from those poor frontier regions will
rise up and call him blessed.

I think it was in the fall of 1819 our beloved old
Brother Walker, who had traveled all his life, or
nearly so, came over to our Tennessee Conference,
which sat in Nashville, to see us; but, 0! how
weather-beaten and war-worn was he; almost, if not
altogether, without decent apparel to appear among
us. We soon made a collection, and had him a
decent suit of clothes to put on; and never shall I
forget the blushing modesty and thankfulness with

which he accepted that suit, and never did I and.

others have a stronger verification of our Lordis
words, “That it is more blessed to give than to receivefl In 1820 he was appointed Conference Missionary, and sustained" the relation of missionary to
the Missouri Conference from 1821 to 1824.

He was instructed, in 1824, to pay attention to the
Indians in the bounds of Missouri. During these
years of extensive missionary travel, he visited St.
Louis, which was almost Wholly given to Romish
idolatry. There was no Methodist society or church
in the city, and perhaps no Protestant church in the
place. It had been settled from an early day with
French Catholics. In his visit to this place, he saw
its deplorable moral condition, and resolved to seek a
way to carry the Gospel to its perishing thousands.
But how was he to do it? and how was he to be
supported while doing it? Means of support he had
none. . He made it a matter of prayer, and asked aid
of God. Accordingly, he made his stand in the city,
and took up a day school of A, B, C scholars, by

490 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

which he supported himself, and all he made over he
applied to the erection of a small church, which, if
my memory is not at fault, was the first Protestant
house of worship in the city. God did not despise
the _day of small things, but crowned his efforts with
signal success, so much so, that he not only succeeded
in building a church, but gathered a congregation in
it, and raised a Methodist Society which remains to
this day; and Methodism has spread through the
city, so that there are many charges, and a good many
splendid churches erected, and several thousand members in the different branches of Methodism.

In 1824 the Missouri Conference was divided
by the General Conference, which sat in Baltimore.
The Illinois Conference was organized. Brother
Walker was appointed missionary to the settlements
between the Illinois and Mississippi Rivers, and
to the Indians in the vicinity of Fort Clark, (now
Peoria.) He traveled extensively, and preached
through this entire new country, raised several societies, one at Fort Clark, penetrated into the Indian
country, visited their chiefs, made known his wishes
to establish missions and schools among them, and
met a friendly reception by their chief men, especially among the Pottawattomies; and in 1826 he was
appointed missionary to that tribe of Indians. He
was continued in this mission in 1827 and 1828, and
having obtained a grant from the Indians to a section
of land, he built houses, opened a farm, preached to
the Indians through an interpreter, established a
school, and had some prosperity; and had it not been
for the corrupting influences of white men, in selling
whisky to the Indians, and corrupt white men that
cheated the Indians out of their annuities, there is no
doubt but these Indians would have become civilind

PETER GARTWBIGHT. 491

and Christianized. What a fearful account these
unprincipled white men will have to render at the
judgment for the demoralization and destruction of
the Indians. I thank God, during my superintendence
of this mission, While Brother Walker was missionary
among them, we had the pleasure of seeing the hopeful
conversion of several of them, and of baptizing them,
and receiving them into the visible Church of Christ.

In 1828 Brother Walker was succeeded in the
mission by Brother Isaac Scarritt, and was sent to
the Peoria Circuit, where he labored with his accustomed usefulness and acceptability. In 1829 he was
returned to the mission among the Pottawattomies,
which was located on Fox River, about twenty miles
from Ottawa, where it empties into the Illinois River.
In the meantime, the government had bought out the
Indian claim; and although the Church had spent
some thousands of dollars in its establishment, We lost
it. The mission premises were reserved for one of
the half breedQ, and Brother Walker was, in 1830, appointed to Chicago Mission, where he succeeded in
planting Methodism in this then infant city. In
1831 he was appointed to the Des Plaines Mission,
and organized many small societies in that young and
rising country.

In 1832 there was a Chicago District formed, of
mostly missionary ground. Brother Walker was superintendent of this missionary district, and missionary
to Chicago town; and although he was well stricken
in years, and well-nigh worn out, having spent a
comparatively long life on the frontiers, yet the old
man had the respect and confidence of the whole
community; and in 1833 was continued in the Chicago Missionary Station. This year closed his active
itinerant life. He had done efective and e$cient

493 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or service as a traveling preacher for more than 
years, and had lived poor and suifered much; had
won thousands of souls over to Christ, and built up
and firmly planted Methodism for thousands of miles
on our frontier border. ‘

In 1834, he asked for and obtained a superannuated
relation, in which relation he lived till the 5th of
October, 1835, and then, being at peace with God
and all mankind, and having fought a good fight, and
finished his course, and kept the faith, he was ready
for the messenger, and left the world in holy triumph;
and his redeemed spirit rose triumphantly, and entered
heaven, to be hailed and welcomed home by the thousands to whom, in the Divine economy, he had been
the honored instrument of salvation; and I hope
to meet him in heaven before very long. He was
the first minister who, by the authority of the Methodist Church, gave me my first permit to exhort. We
have fought side by side for many years; we have
suEered hunger and want together; we have often
wept, and prayed, and preached together; I hope we
shall sing and shout together in heaven. Peace to
his memory!

SAMUEL H. Tnomrson was born in Westmoreland
County, Pennsylvania, March 16, 1786. He had a
pious mother, who very diligently instructed young
Samuel in the general principles of our holy religion,
according to the Calvinistic views of the Presbyterian
Church, for which Church through life he entertained
a high regard, though he repudiated the Calvinistic
doctrines. He received a good common English education for that early day, and was considered an honorable, high-minded young man. In his eighteenth year
he joined the Methodist Episcopal Church, as a seeker

PETER cxnrwmenr. 4%

of religion. For two years he sought an experimental
knowledge of the forgiveness of his sins; and while
engaged in secret prayer, a peaceful answer was
granted to him, though not such an evidence of pardon as he desired; but shortly afterward, during
family prayer, he obtained a clear evidence of the

regeneration of his fallen nature, and immediately .

commenced exhorting his associates to seek God,
and was licensed to preach. In the fall of 1810 he
was received on trial as a traveling preacher, in the
Western Conference, holden at Cincinnati, which was
then the only conference west of the mountains. He
was appointed to the Whitewater Circuit, Indiana
District, Ohio. Here young Thompson was received
kindly, and preached successfully. In 1811 he was
appointed to the Nolliechuekie Circuit, in East Tennessee; in 1812, to Clinch River Circuit. In both
these circuits he labored zealously, and was useful.
In the fall of 1812, he was ordained a deacon. At
the division of the Western Conference, he fell into
the Tennessee part, and in 1813 was appointed to the
Knoxville Circuit,‘ where his labors were greatly
blessed. In 1814 he was appointed to Christian
Circuit, and there were in this circuit added to his
ministry. many seals. .

In the fall of 1814 he was ordained an elder, and
in 1815 he was appointed presiding elder of the Missouri District. He remained on this district in 1816.
Vast was the frontier country that Brother Thompson
explored on this district; and he successfully planted
the standard of the Gospel» and of Methodism in
many log-cabins and frontier. settlements, and won
many laurels for his Master in this wilderness of the
West, and the Lord gave him many souls for his hire.

- At the General Conference of. 1816, the Missouri

494 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

Conference was stricken off from the Tennessee Conference; and in 1817 he was appointed to the Illinois
District, which covered almost all the inhabited parts
of the State of Illinois and Southern Indiana. He
remained on this large district two years, and was

aggressive in all his ministerial labors, organizing

many societies in this new and rising country. In

1819 he was appointed to Shoal Creek and Illinois

Circuits, joined together, where his labors were greatly

blessed. Money was scarce through all this Western

country, but Brother Thompson suffered on, through

penury and want. In the meantime he had married,

and had a young and growing family to provide for.

In 1820 he remained on the Illinois Circuit, and was

instrumental in greatly building up the Church. In

1821, Brother Thompson was again placed on the
Missouri District as presiding elder, where he remained two years, still laboring and suffering for

his Master, and planting Methodism in many new
settlements, and many claimed him as the honored
instrument of their salvation; and many were the
thrilling shouts of new-born souls brought into the
.iberty of the Gospel on the tented camp-ground,
as well as from the log-cabin. From 1823 to 1826,
Brother Thompson was stationed on the Illinois District, Illinois Conference, which covered more than
two thirds of ‘the geographical boundaries of the
state; but with unfaltering steps he traveled night
and day, seldom missing his appointments, through
cold and heat, iioods or snow-storms. His labors
were greatly blessed, and there is very little doubt
that he was the most popular and useful preacher in
the state. Hundreds, if not thousands, from the Illinois District, in the great day of judgment will hail
our beloved brother, and call him blessed.

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 496

From the hard fields of labor occupied by Brother
Thompson, his poor fare, the privations he underwent,
and his extraordinary zealous pulpit labors, the very
many hardships and sufferings he endured incident
to a new country, his tine constitution began to give
way, and he found it necessary to relax his efforts in
some degree. Accordingly, he asked for and obtained a supernumerary relation, and in that relation, in
1827, he was appointed to the Illinois Circuit, where
his labors were fully equal to his strength. In‘1828
he was continued on the same circuit, and in 1829,
having recovered his health a little, he was made effective, and appointed to the Shoal Creek Circuit.

The Lord gave him a prosperous year, and made him
a blessing to many souls. In 1830 there was a new
district formed, called the Kaskaskia District, and
Brother Thompson was appointed presiding elder.
He traveled this district in 1831 and 1832, abundant
in labors and usefulness. In 1833 he was appointed
traveling agent for the Lebanon Seminary, and acquitted himself honorably. In 1834 he was appointed
to the Lebanon Circuit, and although he had preached for many years to the most of his congregations,
yet the Church hailed him as a brother beloved, and
his ministry was proiitable, and he proved a blessing
to many. In 1835 Brother Thompson sustained a superannuated relation to the conference, and the rest
from his energetic labors this year gave him some increase of strength, and he wanted to spend that
strength in doing good, and his relation in 1836 was
changed to supernumerary, and he was appointed to
Alton Station. He was this year only partial in his
labors; his constitution was fast giving way. Accordingly, in 1837 he sustained a superannuated relation
again. But his soul was restless when out of his

496 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

field of ministerial work; accordingly, in 1838, he
asked to be made effective, but the Conference gave
him a supernumerary relation, and he was appointed
to labor in the towns of Vandalia and Hillsborough;
in 1839 he was again appointed to Alton City Station, as supernumerary; in 1840 he was appointed to
labor in the Belleville Station, where he labored but
little. His physical powers evidently were fast
giving way, and in 1841 he was placed in a superannuated relation, which relation be continued to sus. tain until his redeemed spirit returned to God who
gave it, which happened on the 19th of March, 1842.

Brother Thompson labored hard, and suffered much,
for more than thirty years. _His field of labor for
those years embraced large portions of Ohio, Indiana,
Tennessee, Kentucky, Illinois, Missouri, and Arkansas
States, much of which was‘ new and on the outskirts
of civilization, destitute of means of comfortable support. In these respects his zeal, like a quenchless fire,
urged him on night and day, over.desert wastes, towering mountains, rapid rivers. He often suffered
hunger and almost nakedness in quest of lost and
wandering sinners to bring them back to God, and
thousands now in heaven will praise God forever that
this self-sacrificing Methodist preacher taught them
the way to life in their mud hovels and smoky cabins.
The last year of his eventful life, his health almost
entirely gave way, and while conhned to his bed,
from which he never rose, such was his ardent thirst
for the salvation of souls, that he requested to call in
the neighbors, and to be propped up in his bed, and
to preach one more sermon to them before he left for
heaven. His desire was granted; the room was
crowded, and such a sermon hardly ever fell from
the lips of mortal man. The power of God fell on

PETER CARTWBIGHT. , 497

the congregation ; they wept aloud, and fell in every
direction, and many will date their start for heaven
to that sermon. And now, having delivered his last
message, he said, ‘_‘ My work is done, and I am ready
to go at my Masteris bidding? '

During the few lingering moments that he remained he gave unmistakable evidence that he was at
peace with God, and all mankind, and that he had a
complete victory over the fear of death. ‘He continued in this heavenly frame of mind until he sweetly
fell asleep in the arms of Jesus, and quietly breathed
his last and went up to glory. Brother Thompson
was a gentleman as well as Christian. He was faithful in the administration of the Discipline of the
Church; very iirm, but mild. He was courteous in
manner, had a nice regard to feelings, but remarkably faithful in reproving whatever he thought wrong
in saint and sinner. He had but few personal enemies;
his soul breathed the true spirit of Christian kindness
and love. He has left behind him thousands that
claim him as the honored instrument in their conversion, and if they are faithful I have no doubt will
meet him in heaven with shouts of victory forever
and ever.

JOHN DEW was born on the 19th of July, 1789, in
the State of Virginia. In the days of his youth he
embraced religion and joined the Methodist Episcopal
Church, of which he remained a worthy _member
during life, and being deeply impressed that it was
his duty to ‘preach the Gospel, he was recommended
by his class, and obtained license to preach as a local
preacher, and then joined the traveling connection in
the Ohio Conference. In 1813 he‘ was appointed to

, the Salt River Circuit, in Kentucky, and was blessed

32

4.98 auronroenarnv or

with success. The first year of his itinerancy, 1814,
he was appointed to the Jefferson Circuit, and labored with acceptability and usefulness to the Church.
In 1815 he traveled the Madison Circuit; here he
gave good proof of his call to the ministry, and the
I/.>rd owned and blessed his labors. In 1816 he
traveled the Guyandotte Circuit, and had seals to his
ministry. This fall he located, and remained local for
eight years, but was an industrious and useful local
preacher, and was the means of doing much good in
several parts that he visited. He preached with
great acceptability in the southern part of Kentucky
and the Illinois State.

In the fall of 1824, Brother Dew was readmitted,
into the traveling connection in the Illinois Conference,
and he was appointed to travel the Illinois Circuit.
Here he labored faithfully, and did good. In 1825
he was continued on the same circuit, and at the
close of this year was transferred to the Missouri
Conference, and appointed presiding elder of the
Missouri_District. In 1827 he was stationed in St.
Louis City. In 1828 he was transferred back again to
Illinois Conference, and appointed superintendent and
conference collector for the Pottawattomie Mission on
Fox River. He was active, vigilant, and useful in
this field of labor. In 1829 Brother Dew was ap
pointed to the Galena Station, in the extreme northwest corner of the Illinois State, at least four hundred
miles from home; and such was the poverty of the
country at that time, for it was new and just in its
forming state, that he provided for his family where
they. were, and spent most of this year almost entirely
from home. His labors were blessed in this new

field of toil, and he was instrumental in planting
Methodism firmly there.

PETER CARTWBIGHT. 499

° In 1830 he was appointed to'the Lebanon Circuit,
and he acquitted himself as an able and useful minister of the Lord Jesus Christ; ediiied and built up
the Church greatly. In 1831 he was appointed to
Shoal Creek Circuit, with our beloved Bishop Ames,
andlong will he live in the recollection and Christian
remembrance of the Methodistsof Shoal Creek Circuit.
In 1832 he was again appointed to the Lebanon
Circuit, and though he had labored long and preached
much to that people, yet they received him as a messenger from God and a brother beloved, and he was
useful. .

In 1833 he was appointed to the Kaskaskia Circuit,
where he was the instrument of great good, and souls

"were converted to God. Brother Dew was continued

on this circuit in 1834. From the hard fields of
labor that he had occupied, and the little support he
had received, with a young and growing family, in
1835 he located, to gather means of support, and to
enable him to reenter the itinerant field, for his soul
was filled with holy fire, and he longed to spread the
news of salvation from pole to pole.

In 1836 he was appointed President of MlKendree
College; and in 1837-38 he was readmitted into the
traveling connection, and appointed to the Carlyle
District as presiding elder. In 1839 he was appointed to the Lebanon District, where he finished his
useful life, after an illness of about two weeks. On
the 5th of September, 1840, he left these mortal
shores for a better world, relying confidently on the
goodness and mercy of God for his salvation. He
left an amiable wife and seven children, and an extensive acquaintance and circle of devoted friends to
lament their loss.

Brother Dew had a fine order of talent as a

500 Aurronroonnrnv or

preacher, was a strong theological debater, had a
clear and sound mind, and was well qualified to defend the doctrines of the Bible against infidelity, and
the doctrines of Methodism against all sectarian
assailants. He was popular, and useful as a preacher,
labored hard, suffered much in spreading the Gospel, lived beloved, and died lamented by thousands;

. but his end was peace, and he has gone safe home to

heaven, to reap his eternal reward.

rnrna oaarwmenr. 501

CHAPTER XXXI.

GENERAL CONFERENCE IN INDIANAPOLIS.

IN October, 1854, our Illinois Annual Conference
was held in Springfield, the seat of government, and
I was reappointed to the Pleasant Plains District.
This was a year of general peace, and some prosperity
to the Church. I think we numbered about four
hundred conversions in the district this year; and
nearly that number of accessions in the membership
of the Church. In October, 1855, our annual conference was held in Paris, on the eastern side of the
state, and I was returned for the third year on the
Pleasant Plains District, which was now enlarged
from seven to ten circuits and stations. Our districts
in all the Western world are very different from down
East and Northeast. There they have from thirty to
forty appointments in one presiding eldefs district;
most of their quarterly meetings are held on weekdays or evenings,.not embracing a Sabbath. The
presiding elder goes round mostly to preside in trials
of complaints or appeals, and as a kind of fiscal agent.
Thus, no matter how talented he may be, his labors
and usefulness as a preacher are thrown into the
shade of comparative obscurity; and by the antiMethodistic usages of these large districts the presiding eldefs office is not appreciated, nor can it be
on this plan: hence the hue and cry against the
office. In the vast West there is a Sabbath embraced
in every quarterly meeting appointment, and a pre502 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

siding elderls services are properly appreciated; and
if these Northern innovators would go back to the old
landmarks of itinerancy, and not make so many little
pop-gun, forty-dollar stations, the usefulness of presiding elders would now be as it was in the palmy,
prosperous days of olden times. No wonder preachers and people complain under the circumstances;
the regular work is cut up into so many little and
comparatively unimportant stations, and so ‘poor
withal, that the support of the ministry is fast becom
ing burdensome. Go back to old Methodist preacher
usage; let every quarterly meeting embrace a Sabbath,
and then the old itinerant missionary will work well;
but persist in cutting up the work, and making little
stations, then appeal to the cupidity of these small
fields of labor, and you may expect the table of the
General Conference to groan under the petitions of
the oppressed, to change the oiiice of presiding elder,
till congregationalism is the order of the day.

This annual conference was the iiftieth that I was
entitled to a seat in, and during a half century I had
never missed attending but one of our annual sessions,
and I missed this one by sickness. At this conference
we elected our delegates to attend the twelfth delegated General Conference, which sat in Indianapolis,
May 1st, 1856. I was elected, among five other delegates, and this made the eleventh time I was elected
to represent the interests of the Methodist Episcopal
Church in Int body.

There were over two hundred. and twenty delegates
in this General Conference, from California and Oregon, and all parts of the United States and territories.
We had also delegates from the Wesleyan Methodists
in England, and from Canada; also from Ireland;
Brother J acoby, from Germany, was also present.

PETER GARTWRIGHT. 603

a From the unhappy political agitations of our country, we had anticipated troublous times in the
General Conference, especially on the subject of
American slavery. Many of our preachers who were

  strongly opposed to slavery, had suffered themselves

to become too much excited by designing demagogues.
Now it ought to be distinctly understood by all the
people, and especially by Methodist preachers, that
these demagogues care very little about human liberty,
or the freedom of the poor down-trodden African.
No; they are after the loaves and fishes, or the spoils
of office; and while they are riveting the chains of
the poor negro ten times tighter than ever before,
and threatening to rupture this Union, what do they
care, if they can ride triumphantly into office and
suck the public pap? Just nothing at all. But on
this, and almost all other long-tried and prosperous
regulations of our beloved rules and disciplinary
regulations, there were found aboard the old ship
ministers enough to keep the old, well-tried vessel
Well trimmed, and leaving in the distance these

_ innovators and spoilers of ancient Methodism. So

may it ever be.

Just so sure as a leaden ball tends to the earth in
obedience to the laws of gravity, so sure the multiplying of our stations tends to locality and congregationalism. Better, far better, for the Methodist »
Church this day that we never had a station. Put
all the work in circuits, and put on as manypreachers
as the people need, and are able to support, and let
the Church be blessed with the spice of variety and
a constant interchange of preachers. There were
several changes in the vital economy of the itinerant _
system of the Methodist Episcopal Church by which 2*‘

we have successfully spread the Gospel without 1‘

504 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or.

parallel in the history of any branch of the Christian
Church since the apostolic day. I hope to be borne
with while I make a few remarks on these matters.

At our late General Conference there were some
of the preachers who wanted a change in the time a
preacher might remain in a station or on a circuit,
namely: from two to three years. They urged the
propriety of this change; First: Because it would drive
him to reading and study in order to keep up a variety
for his hearers. Secondly: That two years was too
short a time to become acquainted with his flock, so
as to become a profltable pastor. Thirdly: They
urged that the Canadian Methodist Church, our own
child or the daughter of Episcopal Methodism in these
United States, had lengthened out the time that :1
preacher might remain in the same charge from one
to nve years, and that the Wesleyan Methodist
Church in England, who is the grandmother of the
Canadian Methodist Church, had changed the term
of service, and that it worked well; therefore it would
work Well among us.

To this I reply, First: That from nfty yearsi experience, I nnd that the return of a preacher, even the
second year, to an appointment is not as profitable as
the first. Secondly: If a preacher from sheer necesslty is to be driven to his books, and study in order
I0 keep up an interesting and profitable variety, there
will be but little pastoral duty performed, and but
little spirituality in these forced sermons, and a great
deal of his preaching will be mere lecturing, and but
nttle real spiritual sermonizing. Thirdly: The Cana~ man Methodist Church, our child or daughter, when

she requested to be set off as a separate Church from
us, on account of the civil disabilities under which
8116 labored, instead of following the illustrious footPETER CABTWRIGHT. 505

steps of her mother, the Methodist Episcopal Church
in these United States, in relation to the time that her
preachers might remain in a charge for consecutive
years, flung herself into the arms of her grandmother,
the Wesleyan Methodist Church in England, and as
the grandmother is generally supposed to be somewhat in dotage, and seldom, if ever, qualified to raise
grandchildren aright, it is reasonable to suppose that
these Canadians borrowed this radical innovation on
the itinerant plan of the Methodist Episcopal Church
from a dotard grandmother; and however well it may
work in Canada or old England, it can have no other
effect in these United States but to localize our
preachers, and iinally destroy our itinerant system;
and whenever this is done, farewell to the triumphant
success of the Methodist Episcopal Church.

There was another regulation introduced into our
late General Conference on which‘I wish to remark;
I mean the admitting into membership and ordaining
preachers who are appointed to presidencies and professorships in our universities, colleges, and various
institutions of learning, without having traveled a
single day, or having a pastoral charge as a traveling
preacher; these men, without undergoing any of the
privations or sacrifices of an itinerant life, are settled
down with large salaries. Our colleges are rapidly
multiplying, and I hope they will continue to do so,
but who does not see that in a few years our local
agents, presidents, and professors may form even a
majority of our annual conferences, and then the
itinerant system will be very much like a man riding
a race with the reins of his horseis bridle tied to a
stump. It is wrong, fundamentally wrong. The
itinerant should be kept pure and unencumbered, and 9..--'
we should look out men to serve tables, or education “

506 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

if you please, but our itinerant men should give themselves wholly to the ministry of the word. These
are politically and religiously perilous times, and
there is a solemn crisis on the Church, but I hope
God will guide the ship of State and Church. But
surely this is no time to abandon old and long-tried
usages for novel experiments.

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 607

CHAPTER XXXII.

CONVERSION OF AN INFIDEL DOCTOR. ‘

SOMEWHERE about thirty-five years ago, while I was
traveling on the Cumberland District, in West Tennessee, there lived a Dr. , who was wealthy, and
immensely popular as a practicing physician. He
had a large practice ; he was gentlemanly in his manners, hospitable, and kind. His family were very respectable; his wife was a devoted Christian and a
faithful member of the Methodist Episcopal Church.
They lived in aflluence; they were benevolent and
liberal in the support of the Gospel. I was introduced to the doctor and his amiable family at a
camp-meeting, which was held a few miles from his
residence. Having a few days to rest between my
camp-meetings, the doctor and family cordially invited me to spend those rest days at his house, and I
consented to do so. When our camp-meeting closed,
in company with several other preachers, I repaired
to the doctofs habitation. We were received cor
dially and treated princely. There was everything
earthly to make one comfortable. The family, black
and white, were called in to family worship night and
morning, and when we surrounded their bountiful
table we were invited to ask a blessing, and to return
thanks. The next morning, after we had breakfasted,
as we were seated in the parlor, the doctor informed
me that he was a total unbeliever in the Christian
religion; that he had read the Bible through and

508 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

through again and again, and that he could not receive it as a revelation from God; that he liked the

i morals that the Christian system inculcated; he liked

to encourage the Gospel, because of the good moral
influence it had upon mankind; that he felt it not
only a charity, but a positive duty to support the
Gospel; first, because it taught a pious reverence toward God; secondly, because it breathed peace and
good will to all mankind; thirdly, because it taught
truth, virtue, honesty, and benevolence in all the
civil, social, and moral relations of man as he stood
accountable to his God, and as he stood connected
with or related to all mankind.

Now, my gentle reader, you may well imagine that
I felt a little surprised, and that I felt greatly the
need of right words, or rather strong arguments and
soft words, and, after pausing for a moment, I looked
the doctor full in the face and said, ,

“Doctor, I hope you believe there isaGod. Do youif

“ Certainly? was his reply.

“Doctor, do you believe that God is too wise to
err, and too good to inflict pain or misery of any
kind on his innocent and unoffending creatures if

“ Certainly I do, sir?

“ Well now, doctor, will you be good enough, laying the Bible aside, to tell me how a wise and good
God could push into existence a race of human beings,
subject to all kinds of mental, moral, and physical
wretchedness, misery, and woe? If he is wise, just,
holy, and supremely good, how could innocent man,
coming immediately from the plastic hand of his God,
be filled with so many unholy and impure passions as
we see human nature heir to W

“I must confessfi said the doctor, “I cannot account
for it; it is wrapped in inexplicable mystery?

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 509

“ Well, doctor, seeing God is supremely good and
wise, and seeing thatman is limited in all his powers
of mind and body, and subject to so much misery
and so many errors in judgment and practice, can
we not well imagine that God, who is the supreme
source of all moral excellence, and whose tender
mercies are over all his works, would be moved by
the benignant laws of his own eternal nature, after
having created man for his own pleasure, with all his
liability to err and his susceptibility to evil, would be
prompted to give to this feeble race a rule of faith

and practice? And what else is the Bible? Nay,

would it not throw eternally into the shade all the
perfections of God, at whose almighty fiat teeming
millions of erring human beings have taken their
existence in the world, and who have no power to
control or prevent their own existence, if that God
should leave these millionslto wander in the mazes
of animal passion without a well-defined revealed rule
of faithand practice V

The doctor paused, and made a sorry reply. I saw
I had made a breach in his supposed impregnable
wall, behind which he had intrenched . himself, with
all his boasted infidelity. I saw there was not a
moment to be lost; and with haste I commenced readjusting my battering-rams, that in my next onset I
might widen the breach, and enter the citadel, and
take my infidel doctor prisoner, and silence all his
opposition to truth, when all of a sudden he said,
“Mr. Cartwright, I know you are a man of reason
and good sense; and I think I can prove to you,
beyond the power of successful contradiction, that
there is no such thing as experimental religion, and
that it is all imagination and delusion?

“Very well, doctor; try it?

510 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

. “ Well, sir,ii said he,_ “(lees not all knowledge,
either human or Divine, depend upon sensible
evidence iii

“ Yes, sir?

“ Does not faith, human or Divine, depend on
credible evidence V

“ Yes, sir? '

“Wellfi said he, “ I will state a plain, unsophisticated case. Suppose you were called upon, as a
judge or juror, to decide a case in litigation, and
there were five witnesses introduced, all ‘ of them
honorable, high—minded men, whose veracity was
never called in question, and who stood unimpeached
and unimpeachable everywhere; whose known integrity and intelligence were admitted on all sides; and
suppose a matter in controversy was brought before
you, and these hve witnesses were introduced as
credible evidence; and one of the witnesses deposed
to the facts as stated by the p1aintiff,°A., and then the
other four came forward, and with equal clearness
deposed to the facts as claimed by the defendant, B.
Now, sirfi continued the doctor, “ all things being
equal, so far as the intelligence, truth, and veracity
of the Witnesses are concerned, how would you decide
the case? Would you not instantly decide that all
the probabilities and all the possibilities were in favor
of the four who deposed to the facts stated by the
defendant, and that the one lone witness who deposed
to the facts claimed by the plaintiff must, to a certainty,
be mistaken W

I replied, “ It is altogether likely I should give
judgment for the defendant, B? .

“Well, now, sirfi said the doctor, “ you contend

that the Christian ‘religion is an experimental fact,
and that all Christians have sensible evidence of a

PETER GABTWRIGHT. .511

_change of heart, which you call religion. Man has
five senses, namely, seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling,
and feeling. On the united and concurrent testimony
of these five senses, or witnesses, all knowledge of
experimental religion depends; and all professions of
the knowledge _of facts that cannot be proved by
these witnesses, must be fallacious, and, therefore, a
deception. Now, sir}? said theidoctor, “ permit me
to ask you a few serious and solemn questions; and
I demand honest and unequivocal answers, direct.
Did you ever see religion ill

I answered, f‘ N of
' “Did you ever hear religion W

66 No.3)

“ Did you ever smell religion V

(6 No.3!

“Did you ever taste religion V

CC No.77

“Did you ever feel religion ‘W

“ Yes?

“ Now, thenfl said the doctor, with apparent triumph, “I have proved, beyond a doubt, by four
respectable witnesses, that religion is not seen, heard,
smelled, or tasted; and but one lone, solitary witness,
namely, feeling, has testified that it is an experimental
fact. The weight of evidence is overpowering, sir,
and you must give it up?

I paused, and seemed to be astonished, and greatly
perplexed; but recovering myself a little, I said,
“ Doctor, are you willing that your principles and
professional practice shall be tested by the same array of testimony as you have adduced to overthrow
revealed religion W

“ Yes, sir."

“ Well, sir, you profess to understand the science

512 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

of medicine. You have had, and now have, a large
and lucrative practice. You profess to have cured
various and complicated diseases, and to have relieved and removed many pains, in the complicated
forms in which they have attacked the human system;
and you have amassed a princely fortune by your
suceessful practice?
,“All truefl said the doctor.

“ Well, sir, do you not know that you have been
playing the hypocrite, and practicing a most wretched
fraud on the gullibility of the people Pl

“ No, sirfl he replied, very fiercely.

“ Why, doetorfl said I, “a man of your profound
science and research must certainly know that there
is no such  as pain in the human system; and
though ignorant people have thought so, yet you
know better; and whenever you have visited poor
dupes, that thought they were in great pain, and
administered medicine to them, and thus persuaded
them that you, by your medical skill, had removed
their pains, and charged them large bills, you certainly knew you were practicing a fraud on them,
and getting their money under a false pretense; for
you certainly knew that there was no such thing as
Pain‘?!

Said the doctor, rather fiercely, “ I certainly know
no such thing, sir?

I replied, “ Well, doctor, I will ask you a few questions if you please, and I demand honest and prompt
answers?

“ Very well, sirfl said the doctor.

“Well, sir, did you ever see a pain W

“ No, sir?

“ Did you ever hear a pain W

“ No, sir?

PETER CABTWBIGHT. , 518 '

“ Did you ever smell a pain W

“ No, sirfi

“ Did you ever taste a pain W

“ No, sir?

“ Did you ever feel a pain 3*

“ Certainly I did, sir?

By this time I had well-nigh taken the wind out
of the doctofs sails, and his countenance betrayed
confusion, but I rallied him, and said, “Do not be
alarmed, doctor; four respectable witnesses have testified that there is no such thing as pain in the hu
man system, and but one lone witness has deposed
that there is; therefore, the idea of there being pain
in the physical system of man islfallacious, and there
is no reality in the thing; and you ought to go and
restore the money you have taken from them, and acknowledge the fraud you have practiced on them, and
do so no more; and _I charge you, as an honest man,
to do it, and quit those fraudulent practices?

During almost all this conversation with the doctor,
his wife and family sat around and listened with profound attention, and I frequently saw the tears coursing down the checks of the doctoris Wife. The doctor
became mute, and remained silent for a considerable
time. I turnedmy conversation to the doctoris wife
and children. Just at that moment the Lord, in a
very powerful manner, blessed the pious wife of the
doctor, and she shouted aloud and blessed God for revealed religion. She ran and threw her arms around
her husbandis neck, and exhorted him, with streaming eyes and words that burned, to be reconciled to
God. I said, Let us all kneel and pray. The doctor
fell on his knees and wept like a child, and prayed
fervently. The great deep of his heart was broken

up, his infidelity gave gray, and, for the first time in

514 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

his life, he wept and prayed. All day after this he
seemed to be melted into childlike simplicity. He
lied to the woods, and earnestly sought salvation.
That night, after prayer, he retired to bed, but not to
sleep, for he prayed as in agony; and about midnight
God spoke peace to his troubled soul, and we all
awoke and got up, and joined in prayer and praise.
Such thrilling shouts I seldom ever heard from the
lips of mortal man. His conversion was the beginning of a glorious-revival of religion in the settlement,
and many were the souls saved by grace. Many of
the doctoris slaves obtained religion, and many others
of the slaves in the neighborhood. The doctor fitted
out and sent most of his slaves to Liberia. Thank
God that I ever had the privilege of preaching the
Gospel to slaves and slaveholders. Religion always
makes better slaves and better masters, and will secure the freedom of more slaves than all the run-mad
abolitionism in the World. The doctor shortly after
Was licensed to preach, and lived a pious, useful life.
God gave him many seals to his  He has
long since fallen on sleep, and gone home to Abrahamis
bosom, while I am left to linger on the shores of time
a little longer; but While I pen this little sketch my
heart grows Warm with holy hrs; and I hope soon to
meet the doctor and his lovely family in heaven, with
many, very many, of the spiritual children God has
given me. Amen.

PETER cuvrwnxenr. 515

CHAPTER XXXIII.

MEPHODIST USAGES.

I wrsn to say a few things in this chapter on the
usages of the Methodist Episcopal Church. When I
joined the Church, her ministers and members were
a plain people; plain in dress and address. You
could know a Methodist preacher by his plain dress
as far as you could see him. The members were also
plain, very plain in dress. They wore no jewehy,
nor were they permitted to wear jewelry, or superfluous ornament, or extravagant dress of any kind, and
this was the rule by which we walked, whether poor
or rich, young or old; and although we knew then as
well as we do now, that the religion of the Lord Jesus
Christ did not consist in dress, or the cut of the garment, yet we then knew and know now that extravlagant dress and superiiuous ornaments engender
pride, and lead to many hurtful lusts, directly at war
with that humility and godly example that becomes
our relation to Christ, that so preéminently becomes
Christians. Moreover, when we look around us, and
see the perishing millions of our fallen race dying
in their sins for the want of a preached Gospel, and
that this Gospel is not sent to them for want of means
to support the missionary, may we not well question
whether we are doing right in the sight of God in
adorning our bodies with all this costly and extravagant dressing? Would it not be more godlike or
Christianlike to give our money, laid out in these

516 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

unnecessary ornaments, to send the Gospel to the
poor, perishing millions that have souls to be saved
or lost forever, and will not God hold us accountable
for the use of those means and moneys that he has
given us? and would not the simple fund that might
be created by disposing of the ornaments of the members of the Methodist Church alone, send the Gospel
to hundreds of thousands, who must perish in all probability for the want of this little Christian sacrifice by
the professed lovers of Christ? The apostle James
says, “Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God? Now apply this rule
to your consciences, and I have no doubt your piety
will decide in favor of the sacrifice you ought to
make, and the good example you ought to set.

The duty of family prayer is a very important one
to the Christian. God has given the head ‘of the
family a very important and responsible position. It
is a question very fairly settled, that from the early
ages of the Christian religion, family prayer was required and expected of all who professed godliness.
If we are to bring up our children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, and if we and our household
are professionally bound to serve the Lord, how can
we be innocent before God and our families, and
habitually neglect this duty? One of the great wants
of the Church at this day is the want of more family
religion; and has not God threatened to “pour out his
wrath and fury upon the families that call not on his
name if How many happy thousands of children
will bless God forever for family prayer, or, in other
words, for praying parents, who, morning and evening,
called their little ones around them, and bowed down
before God, and prayed with and for them. 0,
parents, think of the happy results of the discharge

PETER OARTWRIGHT. 517

of this duty? Many of your children will thank
you in heaven forever, for praying for them in your
families. ‘

And yet I am sorry to hear that many of the members of the Methodist Episcopal Church shamefully
neglect this sacred duty of praying in their families.
How shall we answer it 'to God? Is not this one
among many other reasons, why so many of our
members feel almost entirely unprepared to enter
into the work of the Lord in times of revival, when
God pours out his Spirit and convicts sinners among
us ?i and perhaps if we prayed more at home, we
would be better prepared to hear the Gospel of our
salvation when we attend Church. Let no business,
let no company that visits you, turn you away from

I or cause you to neglect this duty; have your family

altar nrmly fixed, and your sacrifice always on it, and
then look up, and in the very act of asking, expect
God to send down the holy lire and consume your
sacriiice, be it great or small. I long to see the time
come when God shall abundantly revive family religion in the Church; then, and perhaps not till then,
shall we see better and more glorious times of thework of God among us.

Prayer-meetings have accomplished great good, as
practiced in the Methodist Episcopal Church; but are
they not growing into disuse among us? Some of
my earliest recollections are those Methodist prayermeetings, where men and women, young and old,
prayed in public. We know there have been fashionable objections to females praying in public, but I
am sure I do not exaggerate when I say I have often
seen our dull and stupid prayer-meetings suddenly
changed from a dead clog to a heavenly enjoyment,
when a sister has been called on to pray, who has

518 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

reverently bowed and taken up the cross, and utterance was given her that was heavenly, and she
prayed with words that burned, and the baptismal
fire rolled all around, while the house and all the
praying company were baptized from heaven, many
sinners, tall and stout-hearted sinners, have been
brought to quake and tremble before God, and have
cried for mercy, and while crying have found peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Many
weeping mourners in those prayer-meetings have
found the blessed pardon of all their sins; the members of the Church have also been greatly blessed,
and have gone on their way rejoicing in the Lord.
One of the best revivals I ever knew was commenced and carried on by a prayer-meeting among
the members of the Church without any preaching
at all. The society felt that they were on. back
ground, and they covenanted to meet every evening
for a week, and have public prayer and pray for a
revival. The first night God met them and blessed
many of their souls; the second night the Lord very
powerfully converted two souls; the meeting went
on then for about twenty days and nights, and from
one to twelve were converted at every coming together. The Saturday and Sunday on which their
meeting closed, they sent for me to gather up the
fragments, that nothing be lost. On Saturday I read
our General Rules, and explained them, and showed
the principles of the Methodist Episcopal Church.
On Sunday I preached on baptism, and opened the
doors, and received one hundred and nineteen into

the Church, and baptized forty-seven adults and thirty
children in the altar, and then marched off to the

creek and immersed twenty-seven, making in all one
hundred and nineteen accessions on trial, and one

PETER GABTWBIGHT. 519

hundred and four baptized; this was the fruit of a
prayer-meeting.

— Class-meetings have been owned and blessed of
God in the Methodist Episcopal Church, and from
more than fifty years experience, I doubt whether
 one means of grace has proved as successful in
building up the Methodist Church as this blessed
privilege. For many years we kept them with closed
doors, and suffered none to remain in class-meeting
more than twice or thrice unless they signified a desire to join the Church. In these class-meetings the
weak have been made strong; the bowed down have
been raised up; the tempted have found delivering
grace; the doubting mind has had all its doubts and
fears removed, and the whole class have found that
this was “ none other than the house of God, and the
gate of heaven? Here the hard heart has been tendered, the cold heart warmed with holy fire; here
the dark mind, beclouded with trial and temptation,
has had every cloud rolled away, and the sun of

righteousness has risen with resplendent glory, “ with ‘

healing in his wings fl and in these class-meetings
many seekers of religion have found them the spiritual birth-place of their souls into the heavenly family,
and their dead souls made alive to God.

Every Christian that enjoys religion, and that desires to feel its mighty comforts, if he understands the

nat1n'e of them really, loves them and wishes to attend them. But how sadly are these class-meetings
neglected in the Methodist Episcopal Church. Are
there not thousands of our members who habitually
neglect to attend them, and is it any wonder that so
many of our members grow cold and careless in religion, and finally blackslidei Is it not for the want
pf enforcing our rules on class-meetings that their

5% AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

usefulness is destroyed? Are there not a great
many wordly-minded, proud, fashionable members

of our Church, who merely have the name of Methodist, that are constantly crying out and pleading that
attendance on class-meetings should not be a test of
membership in the Church? And now, before God,
are not many of our preachers at fault in this matter?
they neglect to meet the classes themselves, and they
keep many class-leaders in oiiice that will not attend
to their duty; and is it _not fearful to see our preachers so neglectful of their duty in dealing with the
thousands of our delinquent members who stay away
from class-meetings weeks, months, and for years?
Just as sure as our «preachers neglect their duty in
enforcing the rules on class-meetings on our leaders
and members, just so sure the power of religion will
be lost in the Methodist Episcopal Church. 0 for
faithful, holy preachers, and faithful, holy class-leaders! Then we shall have faithful, holy members.
May the time never come when class-meetings shall
be laid aside in the Methodist Episcopal Church, or
when these class-meetings, or an attendance on them,
shall cease to be a test of membership among us. I
beg and beseech class-leaders to be punctual in attending their classes, and if any of their members stay
away from any cause, hunt them up, find out the
cause of their absence, pray with them and urge them
to the all-important duty of regularly attending classmeeting. Much, very much, depends on faithful and
religious class-leaders; and how will the unfaithful
class-leader stand in the judgment of the great day,
when by his neglect many of his members will
have backslidden, and will be finally lost?

rmmz cnvrwnrsnr. 521

CHAPTER XXXIV.

CONCLUSION.

IN 1803, or iifty-three years since, next fall, I started

to travel and preach the Gospel, being employed by
a presiding elder, in my eighteenth year. I traveled
five years as a single man. I then married, and have
traveled forty—eight years as a married man. My
wife has had nine children; seven daughters and two
sons. We raised eight of those children; lost one
lovely little daughter in her minority, but have lived
to see all the "rest married, though one has died since
she married, but died in peace. We have now living
thirty-eight. grandchildren and eight great-grandchildren. All our children are in the Methodist Episcopal
Church, and, we hope, are trying to be religious; several of our grandchildren are also in the Church, and

, trying to serve God and get to heaven. Forty-eight

years ago, I was appointed presiding elder by Bishop
Asbury; and, with the exception of a few years, have
been presiding elder up to this time, and am perhaps
the oldest presiding elder in all the Western country.
I have seen fifty-three sessions of annual conferences,
and never missed but one. I have been elected to
eleven General Conferences, from 1816 to 1856.
When I started as a traveling preacher, a single
preacher was allowed to receive eighty dollars per
annum, if his circuit would give it to him; but single
preachers in those days seldom received over thirty
or forty dollars, and often much less; and had it not

583 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

been for a few presents made us by the benevolent
triends of the Church, and a few dollars we made as
marriage fees, we must have suiered much more than
we did. But the Lord provided; and, strange as it
may appear to the present generation, we got along
without starving, or going naked.

I wish here to give a statement of my success, and
loss and gain, as a Methodist traveling preacher, for
hfty-three years, though I know it will be imperfect;
but it shall be as perfect as my old musty and rusty
account scraps will permit. And in the first place, I
have lacked, in the fifty-three years, of my disciplinary allowance, about $5,000; loss in horses to travel
with, $1,000; loss in the sale of religious books, $200;
loss in money, of which I was robbed, $150; loss in
clothing stolen from me, $50. Total loss, $6,400.

I sold about $10,000 worth of books: my per cent
age on these books would net me about $1,000; made
in marriage fees, $500; presents in money, clothing,
horses, etc., $500. Total, $2,000.

Given by me for the erection of churches and parsonages, $500; given to Missionary Society, Bible
Society, Sunday-school Union, and other benevolent
societies, $800; given to universities, colleges, etc.,
for education, $700 ; given to superannuated preachers, their widows and orphans, and other necessitous
cases, $300; given unfortunate persons, burned out,
$500. Total, $2,300. '

I have traveled eleven circuits, and twelve districts;
have received into the Methodist Episcopal Church,
on probation and by letter, 10,000; have baptized,
of children, 8,000; of adults, 4,000. I have preached
the funerals of 500, and now, after all I have done or
can do, and although I know well what a Methodist
preachefs sufering life is, and have known what it

PETER onvrwnrenr. 528

is to suffer hunger and poverty, and also what it is,
in some small sense, to abound, I feel that I have
been a very unprofitable servant.

For fifty-three years, whenever appointed to a circuit or district, I formed a plan, and named every

* place where and when I preached; and also the text

of Scripture from which I preached; the number of
conversions, of baptisms, and the number that joined
the Church. From these old plans, though there are
some imperfections, yet I can come very near stating
the number of times that I have tried to preach. For
twenty years of my early ministry, I often preached
twice a day, and sometimes three times. We seldom
ever had, in those days, more than one rest day in a
week; so that I feel very safe in saying that I preached
four hundred times a year. This would make, in
twenty years, eight thousand sermons. For the last
thirty-three years, I'think I am safe in saying I have
averaged four sermons a week, or at least two hundred sermons a year, making, in thirty-three years, R

6,600. Total, 14,600. 7

I was converted on a campground, elsewhere described in this narrative; and for many years of my
early ministry, after I was appointed presiding elder,
lived in the tented grove from two to three months
in the year.

I am sorry to say that the Methodist Episcopal
Church of late years, since they have become numerous
and wealthy, have almost let camp-meetings die out.
I am very certain that the most successful part of my
ministry has been on camp-ground. There the word
of God has reached the hearts of thousands that
otherwise, in all probability, never would have been
reached by the ordinary means of grace. Their practicability and usefulness have, to some extent, been

6£4 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or

tested this year, 1856, in my district, Pleasant Plains,
and I greatly desire to see a revival of camp-meetings
in the Methodist Episcopal Church before I go hence

and am no more, or before I leave the walls of Zion. C

Come, my Methodist brethren, you can well afford to
spend one week in each year, in each circuit, or
station, on the tented field. But there must be a
general rally; it will be but a small burden if there
is a general turn out, but if a few only tent, it will be
burdensome, and will finally destroy camp-meetings
altogether.

May the day be eternally distant, when campmeetings, class-meetings, prayer-meetings and lovefeasts shall be laid aside in the Methodist Episcopal
Church.

And now I must draw this imperfect history of my
life to a close. I am in the seventy-second year of
my natural life. I have lived to see this vast Western wilderness rise and improve, and become wealthy
without a parallel in the history of the world; I have
outlived every member of my fathefs family; I have
no father, no mother, no brother, no sister living; I have
outlived every member of the class I joined in 1800;
I have outlived every member of the Western Conference in 1804, save one or two; I have outlived every
member of the first General Conference that I was
elected to, in Baltimore, in 1816, save five or six; I have
outlived all my early bishops; I have outlived every
presiding elder that I ever had when on circuits; and
I have outlived hundreds and thousands of my cotemporary ministers and members, as well as juniors,
and still linger on the mortal shores. Though all
these have died, they shall live again, and by the
grace of God I shall live with them in heaven forever.
Why I live, God only knows. I certainly have toiled

PETER CARTWRIGHT. 525

and suffered enough to kill a thousand men, but I
do not complain. Thank God for health, strength,
and grace, that have home me up, and borne me on I;
thank God that during my long and exposed life as
a Methodist preacher, I have never been overtaken
with any scandalous sin, though my shortcomings
and imperfections have been Without number.

And now, I ask of all who may read this imperfect
sketch of my eventful life, While I linger on these
mortal shores, to pray for me, that my sun may set
Without a cloud, and that I may be counted Worthy
to obtain a part in the first resurrection, and may, 0
may I meet you all in heaven! Farewell, till we
meet at the judgment!

THE END.

'17

Digitized by GOOSE

Digitized by GOOSE

Digitized by GOOSE

Digitized by GOOSE

J‘

Digitized by GOOSE

 

l mmullna:IIrnulI.ImlmulInlllml 

3 2044 029 883 790

The borrower must return this item on or before
the last date stamped below. If another user
places a recall for this item, the borrower will
be notified of the need for an earlier return.

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt
the borrower from overdue fines.

Andover-Harvard Theological Library
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-5788

‘SE9-‘0'Z‘7'UBT'

Please handle with care.
Thank you for helping to preserve
library collections at Harvard.

