RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE

\JOURNAL

01'

MRS. JARENA 1_;EE,

ctvma

A AN ACCOUNT DRHRLCALL T0 PREACH THE GOSPEL.

Revised and corrected from the Original Manuscript, written by herself.

PHILADELPHIA :

Printed and Publishecf for the Author.
1849.

/L/«.6 5'7..7.+,5'{
bv'w—o—e—=}4—l~T-r-vi.

HARVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY
FROI
THE BEQIJEST OF
EVERT JANSEI WEIDELL
I918

Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1836,
By JARENA LEE,

In the Office of the Clerk of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

or

RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE AND JOURNAL

or if

MRS.JARENA,LEEi

 

"And it shall come to pass . . . . . . . . that It will in out my Spirit upon all nesh;
and your sons, and your daughters sh l prophecy."-Joel ii. 28.

I was born February 11th, 1783, at Cape May, tate of New Jersey.
At the age of seven years I was parted from my parents, and went
to live as a servant maid, with a Mr. Sharp, at the distance of about
sixty miles from the place of my birth.

My parents being wholly ignorant of the knowledge of God, had
not therefore instructed me in any degree in this great matter. Not
long after the commencement of my attendance on this lady, she had
bid me do something respecting my work, which in a little while
after she asked me if I had done, when I replied, Yes-—but this was
not true. '

At this awful point, in my early history, the Spirit of God moved
in power through my conscience, and told me I was a wretched sinner. On this account so great was the impression, and so strong were
the feelings of guilt, that I promised in my heart that I would not tell
another lie. I I

But notwithstanding this promise my heart grew harder, after a
while,yet the Spirit of the Lord never entirely forsoolr me, but con. tinned mercifully striving with me, until his gracious power converted
I

my soul.

The manner of this great accomplishment, was as follows: In the
year 1804, it so happened that I went with others to hear a missionary of the Presbyterian order preach. It was an afternoon meeting,
but few were there, the place was a school room; but the preacher
was solemn, and in his countenance the earnestness of his masterls
business appeared equally strong, as though he were about to speak
to a multitude.

At the reading of the Psalms, a ray of renewed conviction darted
into my soul. These were the words, composing the first verse of
the Psalms for the service: \

flLord, I am vile. conceived in sin,

Born unholy and unclean.

Sprung from man, whose guilty fall
Corrupts the race, and taints us all."

 

4This description of my condition struck me to the heart, and made
me to feel in some measure, the weight of my sins, and sinful nature.
But not knowing how to run immediately to the Lord for help, I was
driven of Satan, in the course of a few days, and tempted to destroy
rnyself. . \

There was a brook about a quarter of a mile from the house, in
which there was a deep hole, where the water whirled about among

the rocks; to this place it was 'suggested, I mustiigo arid drown
myself. i ,

At the time I had a book in my hand ; it was on a Sabbath morning, about ten olclock ;. to this place'I resorted, where-on coming to
the water I sat down on the bank, and on my looking -into it, it was
suggested that drowning would be an easy_death. It seemed as if
some one was speaking to me, saying put your head under, it will not
distress you. But' by some means, of which I can give no account,
my thoughts were taken entirely from this purpose, when I went from
the place to the house again. . It was the unseen arm of God which
saved me from self-murder. ' _ _

But notwithstanding this escape from death, my mind was not at
rest--but so great was the labor of my spirit and the fearful oppressions of a judgment to come, that I was. reduced as one extremely
ill, on which account a physician was . called to attend me, from
whichiillness I recovered in about three months.

_ But as yet I had not found Him of whom Moses and the prophets
did write, being extremely ignorant; there being no one to instruct
me in the way of life and salvation as yet. After my .recovery,I
left the lady, who, during my sickness, was exceedingly kind, and
went to Philadelphia. From this place I soon went a few miles into
the country, where I resided in the family of a Roman Catholic. But
my anxiety siill continued respecting my poor soul, on which account
I used to watch my opportunity to read in the Bible; and this lady
observing this, took the Bible from me and hid it, giving me a novel
in its stead--which when I perceived, I refused to read.

Soon after this I again went to the city of_ Philadelphia, and commenced going to the English Church, thegpastor of which was an
Englishman, by the name of Pilmore, one of the number who at drst
preached Methodism in America, in the city of New York.

But while sitting under the ministration of this man, which was
about three months-, and at the last time, it appeared that there was a
wall between me and a communion with that people, which was
higher than I could possibly see over, and seemed to make this impression upon my mind, this is not the people for you.

But on returning home at noon I inquired of the head cook of the
house respecting the rules of the Methodists, as I knew she belonged
to that society, who told me what they were 3 on which account I

5

replied, that I should not be ahle to abide by such strict rules not
even one year--however, I told her that I would go with her and hear
what they had to say.

The man who was to speak -in the afternoon of that day, was the
Rev. Richard Allen, since bishop of the African Ephcopal Methodists
in America. During the labors of this man that afternoon, I had
come to theiconclusion, that this is the people to. which my heart
unites, and it so happened, that as soon as this service closed he invited
such as felt a desire to Hes the wrath: to -come, to unite on trial with
them-I embraced the opportunity. Three weeks from that day, my
soul was gloriously converted to God, under -preaching, at the, very
outset. of the sermon. The text was barely pronounced, which was
'1 perceive thy heart is not right in the sight of Gcd,".~when there
appeared to my view, in the centre of the heart, one sin 3 and this was
malice against one particular individual, who had strove deeply to injure me, which I resented. At this discovery 1 said, Lord I forgive
every creature. That instant, it appeared to me as if a garment,
which had entirely enveloped my whole person, even to my fiugersl
ends, split at the crown of my head, and was stripped away from me,
passing like a shadow from my sight-when the glory of God seemed
to cover me in its stead. I » _

That moment, though hundreds wereytpresent, I did leap to my feet
and declare that God, for Christls sake, had pardoned the sins of my
soul. Great was the ecstacy of my mind, for I felt that not only the
sin of malice was pardoned, but all other sins were swept away together. That day was the first when my heart had believed, and my
tongue had made confession -unto salvation--the first words uttered, a
part of that song, which shall.fill eternity with its sound, was glory to
God. For a few moments I had power to exhort sinners, and to tell
of the wonders and of the goodness of Him whohad clothed me with
His salvation. 'During this the minister was silent, untilfmy soul felt
its duty had been performed,.wheu he declared another witness of the
power of Christ to forgive sins on earth, was manifest in my conversion. r t

From the day on which I first wentto the Methodist Church, until
the hour of my deliverance, I was strangely bufetted by that enemy
of all righteousness-the devil.

I was naturally of a lively turn of disposition ; and during the space
of time from-my first awakening until I knew my peace was made
with God, I rejoiced in the vanities of this life, and then again sunk
back into sorrow.~ . -.

For four years I had continued in this way, frequently laboring
under the awful apprehension, that -I could never be happy in this life.
This persuasion was greatly strengthened during the three weelts,
which was the last of Satan's power over me, in this peculiar manner,

C

on which account I had come to the conclusion that I had better be
dead than alive. Here I was again tempted to destroy my life by
drowning; but suddenly this mode was changed—and while in the
dusk of the evening, as I was walking to and fro in the yard of the
house, I was beset to hang myself with a cord suspended from the
wall enclosing the secluded spot. '

But no sooner was the intention resolved on in my mind, than an
awful dread came over me, when I ran into the house; still the tempter pursued me. There was standing a vessel of water--into -this I
was strangly impressed to plunge my head, so as to extinguish the
life which God had given me. Had I done this, I have been always
of the opinion, that I should have been unable to have released myself; although the vessel was scarcely large enough to hold a gallon
of water. Of me may it not be said; as written by Isaiah, (chap. 65,
verses 1, 2.) "I am sought of them that asked not for me; lam
found of them that sought me not." Glory be to God for his redeeming power, which saved me from the violence of my own hands, from
the malice of Satan, and from eternal death; for bad I havekilled
myself, a great ransom could not have delivered me; for it is written
—"No murderer hath eternal life abiding in him." How appropriately can I sing— *

"Jesus sought me when a stran r,
Wandering from the fold of 0d;

He to rescue me from danger,
Interposed his precious blood "

But notwithstanding the terror which seized upon me, when about
to end my life, I had no view of the precipice on the edge of which
I was tottering, until it was over, and my eyes were opened. Then
the awful gulf of hell seemed to be open beneath me, covered only,
as it were, by a spiderls web, on which I stood. I seemed to hear
the howling of the damned, to see the smoke of the bottomless pit,
and to hear the rattling of those chains, which hold the impeuitent
under clouds of darkness to the judgment of the great day.

I trembled like Belshazzar, and cried out in the horror of my spirit,
liGod be merciful to me a sinner." That night I formed a resolution
to pray; which, when resolved upon, there appeared, sitting in one
corner of the room, Satan, in the form of a monstrous dog, and in a"
rage, as if in pursuit, his tongue protruding from his mouth to a great
length, and his eyes looked like two balls of dre; it soon, however,
vanished out of my sight. From this state of terror and dismay, I
was happily delivered under the preaching of the Gospel as before
related. '

This view which I was permitted to have of Satan, in the form of
a dog, is evidence, which corroborates in my estimation, the Bible account of a hell of fire, which burneth with brimstone, called in Scrip'7

ture the bottomless pit; the place where all liars, who repentmot, shall
have their portion; as also the Sabbath breaker, the adulterer, the fornicator, with the fearful, the abominable, and the unbelieving, this
shall be the portion of their cup.

This language is too strong and expressive to  appliedtto any
state of suffering in time. Were it to be thus applied, the reality
could no where he found in human .life ; the consequence would be,
that this scripture would be found a false testimony. But when made
to Spply -to an endless state of perdition, in eternity, beyond the bounds
of human life, then this language is found not to exceed our views of
a state of eternal damnation. '

During the latter part of my state of conviction, I can now apply to
my case, as it then was, the beautiful words of the poet:

itThe more 1 strove against its power,
I felt its weight and guilt the more;
lTill»late I heard rn Saviour say, Come hither soul, am the way."

This I found to be true, to the joy of my disconsolate and despairing heart, in the hour of my conversion to God.

During this state of mind, while sitting near the fire one evening,
afterl had.heardiRev. Richard Allen, as before related, a view of
my distressed conditionso affected my heart, that I could not refrain
from weeping and crying aloud; which caused the lady with whom I
then lived, to inquire, with surprise, what ailed me; to which I an. swered, that I knew not what ailed me. She replied that I ought to

pray. I arose from where I was sitting, being innan agony, and weeping convulsively, requested her to pray for me; but at the very moment when she would have done so, some person wrapped heavily at
the door for admittance; it was but a person of the house, but this
occurrence was sufficient to interrupt us in our intentions; and I believe to this day, lshould then have found salvation to my soul. This
interruption was, doubtless, also the work of Satan.

Although at this time, when my conviction was so great, yet I knew
not that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, the second person in the
adorable Trinity. I knew him not in the pardon of my sins, yeti
felt a consciousness that if I died without pardon, that my lot must
inevitably be damnation. I f I would pray-I knew not how. I
could form no connexion of ideas into words; but I knew the .,Lordls
-prayer; this I uttered with a loud voice, and with all. my might and
strength. [was the most ignorant creature in the world; I did not
even know that Christ had died for the sins of the world, and to save
sinners. Every circumstance, however, was so directed as still to
continue and increase the sorrows of my heart, which I now know to
have been a Godly sorrow which wrought repentance, which is not to
repented of. Even the falling of thei dead leaves from the forests,

and the dried spires of the. mown grass, showed me that I too must
die in like manner. But my case was awfully different from that ad
the grass of the field, or the wide spread decay of a thousand forests,
as I felt within me a living principle, an immortal spirit, which cannot die, and must forever eitherenjoy the smiles of its Creator,.orfeel
the pangs of ceaseless damnation. r But the Lord led me on; being gracious, he took pity on my ignorance; he heard my wailings, which had entered into the ear of the
Lord of Sabaoth. Circumstances so transpired that I soon cam! to
a knowledge of the being and character of the Son of God, of whom
I knew nothing. I « r

My strength had left me. I had become feverish and sickly through
the violence of my feelings, on which account I left my place of service to spend a week with a colored physician, who was a member
of the Methodist society, and also to spend this week in going to
places where prayer and supplication was statedly made for such as
me. a
Through this means I had learned much, so as to -be able in some
degree to comprehend the spiritual meaning of the text, which the

minister took -on the Sabbath morning, as before related, which was ~

ill perceive thy heart is not right in the sightof God."-—Acts,i chap.
8, verse 21. ~ . .

This text, as already related, became the power of God unto salvation to me, because I believed. I was baptized according to tbedirection of our Lord, who said, as-he was about to ascend from the
mount, to his disciples, llGo ye into all the world and preach my gospel to every creature, he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved."

I have now passed through the account of my conviction, and also
of my conversion to God: and shall next speak of the blessings of
sanctification.

A time, after I had received forgiveness, flowed sweetly on; day
and night my joy was_ full, no temptation was permitted to molest me.
I couldsay continually with the psalmist, that "God had separatedmy
sins from me as far asthe east is from the west." I was ready continually to cry,

"Come all the world, come sinner thou,
All things in Christ are ready now."

I continued in this happy state of mind for almost three months,
when a certain colored, man, by name William Scott, came to pay me
a religious visit. He had been for many years a faithful follower of
the Lamb; and he had also taken much time in visiting the sick and
distressed of our color, and understood well the great things belonging
to a man of full stature in Christ Jesus. a .

In the course of our conversation, he inquired if the Lord had jus.9

rifled mysoul. I ansgweryed eyes. He stheniasked are if the had-sane»
tified me. I answered no 5 and that I did not know what that was.
He then undertook to instruct me further in theiknowledgo of the
Lord respecting this blessing. r . g, .- - 9
A He told rue the progress of the soul from a state of. darkness, or
of nature, was three-fold; or consistedin. three degrees, as-follows-:
First, conviction for sin. Second, justification from sin. Third, the
entire sanctification 9f the soul to  ' I thought this description
was beautiful, and imelsdiately believed in it. He then inquioed if I
would .prornise to pray for this in my secret devotions. I told him
yes. Very soon I began to call upon the;  to show me all that
was inmy heart, which wasnot according to his will. Now there
appeared to be a new struggle commencing in my soul.,»not- accompanied with fear, j-guilt, and bitter distress, air while under my first
conviction for sin, but a laboring of I the mind to know», more of the
right way of the Lord. I boganinow, to feel that mytheart was met
clean in his sight; that there yet remained the roots of bitterness,
which if not destroyed, would are long sprautup from these roots, and
overwholmjme inanew growth of the brambles and vbrushwood of
em.  . . ». . I
By the increasing light of the Spirit, I had found .th.ere~yet retrained
the root of pride, anger, self-will, with many evils, the result of fallen
nature. I now became alarmed at this discovery, and began to fear
that I had .been_ deceived in my experience. I was now greatly
alarmed, lost I should fall away frorn what Iiknew I had enjoyed;
and .-to guard against this I prayed almost incessantly, without acting
faith on the power and promises of God to keep me from falling. I
had not yet learned how, to war against taernptationof this kind. a Satan
well know that if he could succeed in. making me dishelieve my conversion, thaf he would catch me -eithergon the ground of complete
despair, or on the groundpf infidelity. For if all I had passed through
was to get for nothing, and» was but a fiction, the more ravings of a
disordered mind, ~ that..I would naturally belied to believe that there
is nothing in religion at all. i _ r ~ ' '
From this snare I was rnere'rt'o1ly.presarved, and led to believe that
there was.yet,a zgreater work than thatcf pardon. to be wrought in me;
I retired to a secret place. (after-having sought blessing, as well
ill could, for-nearly three.~months,' front the time brotliertscott had
instructed mo respecting it,) forprayaer, about four otclock in the afternoon. _ Iihad struggled long and hard, but found not the desire of my
heart. When I rose lrom my hnees,~there seemed aivoioe speaking
to me, as I yet stood .in«a postage-s-—"Aislt for sauctitieation."
When to my surprise, I rwollooted that #1 had noteven thought of it
in my-who-lo prayer. It would seemdatau had hidden the very object
from my mind, for »vrh:ioh.I had-..pur:poscl'y kneeled to pray. - But when

10

this voice whispered in my heart, saying, "Pray for sanctidoation," I
again bowed in the same place, at the same time, and said iiLord
sanctify "my soul -for Christie sake." That very instant, as if lightning
had dartedpthrough me, I sprang to my feet, and cried, wfhe Lord
has sanctified my soul !" There was none to hear this but the angels
who stooduaround to witness my joy--and Satan, whose malice raged
the more' That Satan was there, Ilrnew; for no sooner had I cried
out "The Lord has sanctified my soul," than there seemed another
voice behind me, saying liNo, it is too great a work to be done." But
another spirit said "Bow down for the witness-I received it--t/tau
art sanctified!" The first I knew of myself after that, I was standing
in the yard with my hands spread out, and looking with my face toward heaven. , J

I now ran into the house and told them what had happened to me,
when, as it were. a new rush of the same ecstacy came upon me, and
caused me to feel as if I were in an ocean of light and bliss. i

During this, I stood perfectly still, the tearslrolling in a flood from
my eyes. So great was the joy, that it is past description. ' There is
no language that can describe it, except that which was heard by St.
Paul, when he was caught up to third heaven, and heard words which
it was not lawful to utter. A

 

MY CALL TO PREACH THE GOSPEL.

Between four and five years after my sanctitioatios, on a certain
time, an impressive silence fell upon me, and I stood as if some one
was about to speak to me, yet I hadtno such thought in my heart.But to my utter surprise there seemed to sound a voice which I thought
I distinctly heard, and most certainly understand, which said to me,
W30 preach the Gospel!" Iimmediately replied aloud, "No one will
believe me." Again I listened, and again the some voice seemed" to
say--llPreach the Gospel; 1 will put words in your mouth, and will
turn your enemies to become your friends."

At first I supposed that Satan had spoken to me, for I had read that
he could transform himself into an angel of light for the purpose of
deception. Immediately I wentinto a secreteiplace, and called upon
the Lord toltnow if he had called me to preach, and whether I was
deceived or not; when there appeared to my view the form and figure
of a pulpit, with a Bible lying thereon, the back of which was presented to me as plainly as if it had been a literal fact. i

In consequence of this, my mind became so exercised, that during
the night following, I took a text and preached in my sleep. I thought
there stood before me a great multitude, while I expounded to them
the things of religion. So violent were my exertions and so loud were

11

my exclarnations, that I awoke from the sound of my own voice, which
also awoke the family of the house wherel resided. i Two days after
I went to see the preacher in charge of the African Society, who was
the Rev. Richard Allen, thesame before named»-in these pages, to tell
him that I felt it my duty to preach the gospel But as I drew near
the street in which hislhouse was, which was in the city of Philadelphia, my courage began to fail me ; so terrible did the cross appear,
it seemed that I should not be able to bear it. Previous to my setting -out to go to see him, so agitated was m-y mind, that my appetite
for my daily food failed me entirely. . Several times on my way there,
I turned back again; but as often I felt my strength again renewed,
and I soon found. that the nearer I approached to the house of the
minister, the less was my fear. Accordingly, as soon as I came to
the door, my fears subsided, the cross was removed, all things appeared pleasant--I was tranquil.

I now told him, that the Lord had -revealed it to me, that must
preach the gospel. He replied, by aslrieg, in what sphere I wished
to move in! I said, among the Methodists.- He. then replied, that
a. Mrs. Cook, a Methodist lady, had also some time before requested
the same privilege; who, itiwas believed, had done much good in the
way- of exhcrtation, and holding prayer meetings ; and who had been
permitted todo so by the verbal license of the preacher in charge at
the time. But as to women preaching, he said that our Discipline

' knew nothing at all about it-that it did not call for women preachers.
This I was glad to hear, because it removed the fear of the crossfbut no sooner did this feeling cross my mind, than I found that a love
of souls had in a measure departed from me; that holy energy which
burned within me, as a fire, began to be smothered. > This I soon perceived. '

——-— 0 how careful ought we to be, lest through our by-laws of church
government and discipline, we bring into disrepute even the word of
life. For as unseemly as it may appear now-a-days for a woman to
preach, it should be remembered thatnothing is impossible with God.
And why should it be thought impossible, heterodox, or improper for
a woman to preach? seeing the Saviour died for the woman as well as
for the man. . ~ .

F If the man rnayipreach, because the Saviour died for him, why not
the woman? seeing he died for her also. Is he not a whole Saviour,
instead of a half one? as those who hold it wrong for a woman to
preach, would seem to make it appear. Did not Mary first preach the risen Saviour, and is not the doctrine
of the resurrection the very climax of Christianity--hangs not all our
hope on this, as argued by St. Paul? Then did not Mary, a woman,

preach the gospel? for she preached the resurrection of the crucified
Son of God.

T2

But some will say that Mary did not expound the Scripture, therefore, she did not preach, inithe proper sense of the term. To this
I reply, it may be that the term preach in those primitivettimes, did
not mean exactly what it is now made to mean ; perhapsit wasa great

deal more simple then, than it is new--if it were not, -the unlearned

fishermen could not have preached the gospelat all, as they had no
learning. a l - . ~

To this it may be replied, byvtose who are determined not to believe that it is right for a woman to preach, that the disciples, though
they were fishermen and ignorant of letters too, were inspired so to do.
To which! would reply, that though «they were inspired, yet that inspiration did not save them from showing their ignorance, of letters,
and of mania wisdom; this the multitudesoon found out, by listening
to the rernarlrs of the envious Jewish priests. If then, to preach the
gospel, by the gift of heaven, comes by inspiration solely, is God
straitened: must he take the man exclusively '9 May he not, did he
not, and can he not inspire a female to preach the simple story of the

birth, life, death, and resurrection of our Lord, and accompany it too

with power to the sinnerlstheart. As for me, learn fully persuaded
that the Lord called me to labor according to what I have received,
in his vineyard. If he has not, how could he consistently bear testimony in favor of my poor labors, in awakening and converting sinners?

In my wanderings up and down among men, preaching according
to my ability, lhave frequently found families who told me that they
had not for several years been to a meeting, and yet, while listening
to hear what God would say by his poor ~female instrument, have be-lieved «with trembling-tsars rolling down their checks, the signs of

contrition and repentance towards God. I firmly believe that I have
sown seed, in the name of the Lord, which shall appear with its increase at the great day of accounts, when Christ shall come to make
uphis jewels. a

At a certain time, -I was beset with the idea, that soon or late I
should" fall from grace and lose my soul atlast. I was frequently
called to the throne of grace about this matter, but found no relief;
the temptation pursued me still.» Being more and more amicted with
it, till at a certain time, when the spirit strongly impressed it on my
mind to enter into my closet and carry my case once more to the Lord ;
the Lord enabled me to-draw nigh «to him, and to his mercy seat; at
this time, in an extraordinary manner»; for while I wrestled with him
for the victory over this disposition to doubt whether I should persevere, there appeared a form of tire, about the size of a man's hand, as
Iwas on my knees; at the same moment there appeared to-the eye
of faith a man robed in a white garment, from the shoulders down to
the feet; from him a voice proceeded, saying: "Thou shalt never
return from the cross." Since that time I have never doubted, but

1.... ___....-_..-_—~u—-—-A-<

13

believe that God will keepime until the day of redemption. Now
I could adopt the very language of St. Paul, and say, that nothing

could have separated .me from the loveof .God,~ which is in Christ

Jesus. Since that time; 1807, until the present, 1833, Ihave not even
doubted the power and goodness of God to: keep me from falling,
through the sanctincatien of the spirit and belief of the truth.

 

~ lMYt MARRIAGE.

In the year 1811,  changed my situation in 7life, having married
Mr. Joseph Lee, pastor, of a Society at Snow Hill, about six miles from
the city of Philadelphia. It became necessary therefore for me, to
remove. This was a great trial at first, as I knew no person at Snow
Hill, except my husband, and to leave my associates in the society,
and especially those who composed the band of which I was one.
None bntlthosewho have been in sweet fellowship with such as really
love God, and have together drankbliss and happiness from the same
fountain, can tell how dear such cornpauy is, and how hard it is to

part from "them. p
At Snow Hill, as was feared, I never found that agreement and

closeness in communion and fellowship, that I had in Philadelphia,
among my'yol,mg companions, nor ought I to have expected in The
manners and customs at this place were somewhat different, on which
accouht 'I became discontented in the course of a year, and began to
importune my husband to removeto the city. But this plan did not
suit him, as he was the Pastor of the Society, he _could not bring his
mind to leave them. f This afflicted me a little. But the Lord showed

i me in a dream what his will was concerning this matter. '

t I dreamed that as I was walking on the summit of a beautiful hill,
that I saw hear" me a flock of sheep, fair: and white, as if but newly
washed ; when there came walking toward me a man of a grave and
dignified countenance, dressed entirelytn white, as it were in a robe,
and looking at me, said emphatically, 9lJoseph Lee must take care of
these sheep, or-' the wolf will come and edevonri them." When I
awoke I was convinced of my error, and immediately, with a glad.
heart, yielded to the right spirit inthe Lord. This also greatly strengthened my faith in his care over them, for fear the well" should by some
means take any of them away. a The following verse was beautifully
suited to our condition, as well as to- all the little flocks of _God scattered up and down this land:

'tUs into Thy protection take,
And gather with Thine arm;

Unless the fold we first forsake,
The wolf can never harm."

14

After this, I fell into a state of general d-ebility, and in an ill state
of health, so much so, that I could not sit up; but a desire to warn
sinners to flee the wrath to come, burned vehemently in my heart,
when the Lord would send sinners into the house to see me. Such
opportunities I embraced to press home on theirconsciences the things
of eternity, and so effectual was the word of exhortation made through
the Spirit, that I have seen them fall to the floor crying aloud for
mercy.

From this sickness I did not expect to recover, and there was but
one thing which bound me to earth, and this was, that I had not as
yet preached the gospel to the fallen sons and daughters of Adamls
race, to the satisfaction of my mind. I wished to go from one end of
the earth to the other, crying, Behold, behold the lamb! To this
end I earnestly prayed the Lord to raise me up, if consistent with his
will. He condescended to hear my prayer, and to give me a taken in
a. dream, that in due time I should recover my health. The dream
was as follows: I thought I saw the sun rise in the morning, and ascend to an altitude of about half an hour high, and then become obscured by a dense black cloud, which continued to hide its rays for
about one-third part of the day, and then it burst forth again with renewed splendor. , . ' I

This dream I interpreted to signify my early life, my conversionito
God, and this sickness, which was a great afliiction, as it hindered me,
and I feared would forever hinder me from preaching the gospel, was
signified by the cloud; and the bursting forth of the sun, again, was
the recovery of my health, and being permitted to preach.

I went to the throne of grace on this subject, where the Lord made
this impressive reply in my heart, while on my knees: "Ye shall be
restored to thy health again, and worship God in full purpose of heart."

This manifestation was so impressive, that I could but hide my face
as if some one was gazing upon me, to think of the great goodness
of the Almighty God to my poor soul and body. From that very time
I began to gain strength of body and mind, glory to God in the highest, until my health was fully recovered.

For six years from this time Icontiuued to receive from above,
such baptisms of the Spirit as mortality could scarcely bear. About
that time I was called to suffer in my family, by death--five, in the
course- of about six years, fell by his hand; my husband being one
of the number, which was the greatest emiction of all.

I was now left alone in the world, with two infant children, one of
the age of about two years, the other six months, with no other dependence than the promise of Him who hath said--I will be the
widows God, and a father to the fatherless. Accordingly, he raised
me up friends, whose liberality comforted and solaced me in my state

15

of widcwhood and sorrows, I could sing with the greatest-propriety
the words of the poet. a t v
I " He helps the stranger in distress,
The widow and the fstheriess,
And grants the prisoner, sweet release."

I can say even now,.with the Psalmist, "Once I was young, but
now I am. old, yet I have never seen the righteous forsaken, norhis
seed bogging bread." I haveever been fed by his bounty, clothed
by his mercy, contfortedra d heeled. when sick, s.ucchred.when tempted, and every where uphe d byhis baud. , ~ . 3 ~

Q

 

THE summer or MY, CALL To Passer: RENEWED.

It was new eight years since I had itnade applicaion to be permitted to preach the gospel, during which time I had only been allowed to exhort, and even this privilege butseldom. This subject
now was renewed afresh in my mind; it was as a fire shut up in my
bones. About thirteen months passed on, while under this renewed
impression. During this time, I had solicited of the Rev. Bishop,
Richard Allen, who at this timejhad become *Bishopi"of the African
Episcopal Methodists in America, I to be permitted the liberty of
holding prayer meetings in my own hired house, and of exhorting
as I found liberty, which was granted me. By this means, my mind
was relieved, as the house soon dlled when the hour appointed for
prayer had arrived. i , p

I cannot but relate in this place, before I proceed further with the
above subject, the singular conversion of a very wicked young man.
He was a colored man, who had generally attended our meetings.
but not for any good purpose; but rather to disturb and,,to ridicule our
denomination. He openly and uniformly declared that be neither
believed in religion, nor wanted any thing to do with it. He was of
a Gallio disposition, and took the lead among the young people of
color. But after a while he fell sick, and lay about three months in a
state of ill health; his disease was a consumption. Toward the
close of his days, his sister who was a member of the society, came
and desired me to go and see her brother, as she had no hopes of his
recovery. perhaps the Lord might break into his mind. I went alone,
and found him very low. I soon commenced to inquire respecting
his state of feeling, and how he found his mind' His answer was,
it 0 tolerable well," with an air of great indiference. I asked him
if I should pray for him. He answered in a sluggish and careless
manner, "0 yes, if you have time." I then sung a hymn, kneeled
down and prayed for him, and then went my way.

Three days after this, I went again to visit the young man. At this

16

time there most with me twoot the sisters in -Christ. ' We found the
Rev. Mr. Cornish, of our denomination, laboring-with him. But he
said he received but little satisfaction from him. -I Pretty soon, however, brother Cornish took his leave; when myself, with the other
two sisters, one of ' which was an elderlyi woman named Jane Hutt,
the other was younger, both colored.- commenced conversing with
him, respecting hiseternal interest, and of his hcpesof a happy eternity, if any he-had: He said but 'lit~t1e~;- we then lmeeled down together and beshcght the Lord in hisibehaif, praying that it mercy were

not clear gone for ever, to shed a ray of softening grace I open the
hardness of his heart. He appeared now to be somewhat more tender, and we thought we could perceive some tokens of conviction. as
he wished? us to visithim-again,'in. a tone at voiceinot quite as indifferent as he had hitherto manifested. , ,

But two days had elapsed after this visit, when his sister came
to me in haste, saying, that she believed her brother was then dying.
and that he had sent forms. I immediately called on Jane Hutt,
who was still among us as a mother in Israel, to go with me. When
we arrived there, we found him sitting up in bed. very restless, and
uneasy, but hesoon laid down again. I ' Q
to him, by the side of his bed. ' I asked him how he was. He said,
Very ill; and added, "Pray, for me, quick 3" We now perceived
his time in this world to- be short. , .I took up the hymn-book, and
opened to a hymn suitable to his case, and commenced to sing, but
there seemed to be a Iiorror in the room—-a darltnessof a mental
kind,,whic_h, was felt.,by us,_a1l;_there being fivepersons, except the
sick young man and his nurse. t We had sung but one verse, when
they all gave over singing, on account of this uneartlhy sensation,
but myself. , I continued to sing on alone, but in a dull and heavy.
manner, though looking up to God all the while for help. Suddenly

.I felt a spring of energy awake in my heart,.when darkness gave way.

in some degree. It was but a glimmer from above. When the hymn
was finished. we alL kneeled down to pray for him. While calling
on the name of the Lord, to have mercy on his soul. and to grant
him repentance unto life, it came suddenly into my mind never to

riseifrom my knees until God should hear prayer in his behalf, until
he should convert and save his soul.

Now, while I thus continued importuning heaven. as I feltl was
led, a ray of light, more abundant, broke forth among us. There appeared to my view, though my eyes were closed, the Saviour in full
stature, nailed to the cross, just over the head of the young man.
against the ceiling of the room. I cried out, brother look up, the
Saviour is come, he. will pardon you. your sins -he will forgive. My

sorrow for the soul of the young man was gone; I could no longer i

pray—joy'and rapture made it impossible. We rose up from our

He now wished, me to come.

'17

knees, when lo, his eyes were. gazing with ecstacyi upwards ;iov'er
his face there was an expressionof joy ; his lips were clothed in a
sweet and holy smile; but no sound cameifrom his tongue; it was
heard in its stillness of bliss; full of hope and immortality. Thus, as

I held him bygthe hand, his. happy and puritied soul soared away,

without a. sigh or a groan, to its eternal rest.

I now closed his eyes, straightened out his limbs, and left him to
be dressed for the grave. But as for me, I was filled with the power
of the Holy Ghost—-the very room seemed filled with glory. His
sister and al lthat were in the room rejoiced, nothing doubting but he
had entered into Paradise; and I believe I shall see him at the last
and great day, safe on the shores of salvation.

But to return to the subject of my call to preach. Soon after this,
as above related, the Rev. Richard Williams was to preach at Bethel
Church, where I with others were assembled. He entered the pulpit, gave out the hymn, which was sung, and then addressed the
throne of grace; took. his text, passed through the exordium, and
commenced to expound it. The text he took 18 in Jonah, 2d chap.
9th verse,—" Salvation is of the Lord." But as he proceeded to explain, he seemed to, have lost the spirit ; ,when in the same instant,
I sprang, as by altogether supernatural impulse, to my feet, when I
was aided from. above toggive an exhortation on the very text which
my brother Williams had taken.

I told theml was like Jonah; for it had been then nearly eight
years since the Lord had called me to preach his gospel to the fallen
sons and daughters of Adamls race, but that I had lingered like him,
and delayed to go at the bidding of the Lord, and warn those who
are as deeply guilty as were the people of Ninevah. /

During the exhortation, God made manifest his power in a manner
sufficient to show the world that I was called to labor according to
my ability, and the grace given unto me, in the vineyard of the good
hnsbandman. — ; ~

I now sat down, scarcely knowing what I had done, being frightened. I imagined, that for this indeoomm, asl feared it might be
called, I should be expelled from the church. But instead of this,
the Bishop rose up in the assembly, and related that I had called
upon him eight years before, asking to be permitted to preach, and
that he had put me off; but that he now as much believed thatl
was calledto that work, as any of the preachers present. These
remarks greatly strengthened me, so that my fears of having given
an offence, and made myself liable as an olfender, subsided, giving
place to a sweet serenity, a holy joy of a peculiar kind, uutasted in
my bosom until then. A

The next Sabbath day, while sitting under the word of the gospel,

I felt movgd to attempt to speak to the people in a r public manner,

18

but I could not bring my mind to attempt it in the church. I said,
Lord, anywhere but here. Accordingly, there was a house not far
off which was pointed out to me; to thisI went; It was the house of
a sister belonging to the same society with myself. Her name was
Anderson. I told her I had come to hold a meeting in her house, if
she would call in her neighbors. With this request she immediately
complied. My congregation consisted of but five persons. I commenced by reading and singing a hymn; when I arose I found my
hand resting on the Bible, which I had not noticed till that moment.
It now occurred to me to take a text. I opened the Scripture, as it
happened, at the 141st Psalm, fixing my eye on the third verse, which
reads: " Set a watch,O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of
my lips." My sermon, such as it was, applied wholly to myself, and
added an exhortation. Two of my congregation wept much, as the
fruit of my labor this time. In closing, I said to the few, that if any
one would open a door, I would hold a meeting the next sixth-day
evening: wnen one answered that her house was at my service.
Accordingly I went, and God made manifest his power among the
people. Some wept, while others shouted for joy. One whole seat
of females, by the power of God, as the rushing of a wind, were all
bowed to the floor, at once, and screamed out. Also a sick man and
woman intone house, the Lord convicted them both; one lived, and
the other died. God wrought a judgment--some were well at night,
and died in the morning. At this place I continued to hold meetings
about six months. During that time I kept house with my little son,
who was very. sickly. About this time I had a call to preach at a
place about thirty miles distant, among the Methodists, with whom I
remained one week, and during the whole time, not a thought of my
little son came into my mind; it was hid from me, lest I should have
been diverted from the work I had to do, to look after my son. Here
by the iustrumentality of a poor coloured woman, the Lord poured
forth his spirit among the people. Though, as I was told, there were
lawyers, doctors, und magistrates present, to hear me speak, yet there
was mourning and crying among sinners, for the Lord scattered tire
among them of his own kindling. The Lord gave his hand-maiden
power to speak for his great name, for he arrested the hearts of the
people, and caused a shaking amongst the multitude, for God was in
the midst.

I now returned home, found all well; no harm had come to my
child, although I left it very sick. Friends had taken care of it which
was of the Lord. I now began to think seriously of breaking up
housekeeping, and forsakiug all to preach the everlasting Gospel. I
felt a strong desire to return to the place of my nativity, at Cape May,
after an absence of about fourteen years. To this place, where the
heaviest cross was to be met with, the Lord sent me, as Saul of Tar19

sus was sent to Jerusalem, to preach the same gospel which he had
neglected and despised before his conversion. I went by water, and
on my passage was much distressed by sea sicltness, so much so that
I expected to have died, but such was not the will of the Lord respecting me. After I had disembarkad, I proceeded on as opportunities
offered, toward'where my mother lived. When within ten miles of
that place, I appointed an evening meeting. There were a goodly
number came out to hear. The Lord was pleased to give me light
and liberty among the people. After meeting,*there came an elderly
lady to me and said, she believed the Lord had sent me among them;
she then appointed me another meeting there two weeks from that
night. The next day I hastened. forward to the place of my mother,
who was happy to see me, and the happiness was mutual between us.
With her I left my poor sickly boy, while I departed to do my Masterls will. In this neighborhood I had an uncle, who was a Methodist, and who gladly threw open .his door for meetings to be held
there. At the first meeting which I held at my uncleis house, there
was, with others who had come from curiosity to hear the woman
preacher, an old man, who was a Deist, and who said he didnot believe the coloured people had any souls--he was sure they had none.
He took a seat very near where I was standing, and boldly tried to
look me out of countenance. K But as I labored on in the best manner
I was able, looking to God all the while, though it seemed to me I
had but little liberty, yet there went an arrow from ' the bent bow of
the gospel, and fastened in his till- then obdurate heart. After I had
done speaking, he went ~out, and called the people around him. said
that my preaching «might seem a small thing, yet he believedl had
the worth of souls at heart. This language was different from what
it was a little time before, as he now seemed to admit that coloured
people had souls, as it was to thesel was chiefly speaking; and unless
they had souls, whose good I had in view, his remark must have been
without meaning. He now came into the house, and in the most
friendly manner shook hands with me, saying, he hoped God had
spared him to some good purpose. This man was a great slave
holder, and had been very cruel ; thinking nothing of knocking down a
slave with a fence stake, or whatever might come to band. From
this time it was said of him that he became greatly altered in his
ways for the better. At that time he was about seventy years old,
his head as white as snow; but whether he became a converted man
or not, I never heard.

The week following, I had an invitation to hold a meeting at the
Court House of the County, when I spoke from the 63d chap. of Isaiah,
3d verse. It was a solemn time, and the Lord attended the word;
I had life and liberty, though there were people there of various denominations. Here again I-saw the aged slaveholder, who notwith}

20

standing his age, walked about three miles to hear me. This day I
spoke twice, and walked six miles to the place appointed. There
was a magistrate present, who showed his friendship, by saying in a
friendly manner, that he had heard of me: he handed me a hymnbook, pointing to a hymn which he had selected. When the meeting was over, he invited me to preach in a schoolhouse in his neighborhood, about three miles distant from where I then was. During
this meetng one backslider was reclaimed. This day I. walked six
miles, and preached twice to large congregations, both in the morning and evening. The Lord was with me, glory be to his holy name.
I next went six miles and held a meeting in a coloured friundls house,
at eleven olclock in the morning, and preached to a well behaved
congregation of both coloured and white. After service I again
walked back, which was in all twelve miles in the same day. This
was on Sabbath, or as I sometimes call it, seventh day ; for after my '
conversion I preferred the plain language of the Friends. On the
fourth day, after this, in compliance with an invitation received by
note, from the same magistrate who had heard me at the above place
I preached to a large congregation, where we had a precious time:
much weeping was heard among the people. The same gentleman,
now at the close of the meeting, gave out another appointment at the
same place, that day week. Here again I had liberty, there was 'a
move among the people. , Ten years from that time, in the neighborhood of Cape May, I held a prayer meeting in a school house, which
was then the regular place of preaching for the Episcopal Methodists,
after service, there came a white lady, of great distinction, a member
of the Methodist Society, and told me that at the same school house
ten years before, under my preaching, the Lord first awakened her
She rejoiced much to see me. and invited me home with her,jwhereI
staid till the next day. This was bread cast upon the water, seen
after many days.

From this place I next went to Dennis Creek meeting house, where
at the invitation or an elder, I spoke to a large congregation of various and conflicting sentiments, when a wonderful shock of Godls
power was felt, shown everywhere by groans, by sighs, and loud and
happy amens. I felt as if aided from above. My tongue was cut _loose,
the stammerer spoke freely; the love of God, and of his service,
burned with a vehement flame within me-—his name was glorified
among thetpeople. t = a

I had my little son with me, and was very much straitened for money-and not having means to procure my passage home, I opened a
School, and taught eleven scholars, forthe purpose of raising a small
sum. For many weeks I knew not what to do about returning home,

when the Lord came to my assistance as I was rambling in the fields \

meditating 'upon his goodness, and made known to me that I might go

21,

to the city of Philadelphia, for which place I soon embarked with a
very kind captain. We had a perilous passage—a dreadful storm
arose, and before leaving the Delaware bay, we had a narrow escape
from being run down by a large ship. But the good Lord held us in
the hollow of his hand, and in the afternoon of Nov. 12, 1821, we arrived at the city. I

Here I held meetings in the dwelling house of sister Lydia Anderson, and for about three months had as many appointments asl could
attend. We had many precious seasons together, and the Lord was
with his little praying band, convincing and converting sinners to the
truth. I continued in the city until spring, when I felt it impressed
upon my mind to travel, and walked fourteen miles in company with
a sister to meet with some ministers, there to assemble, from Philadelphia. Satan tempted me while on the way, telling me that I was
a fool for walking so far, asI would not be permitted to preach. But
I pursued my journey, with the determination to set down and worship with them. When I arrived, a goodlynumber of people had
assembled, and no preacher. They waited the time to commence
the exercises, and then called upon me. I took the 3d chapter John,
14th verse for my text. I' had life and liberty, and the Lord was

I in the camp with a shout. Another meeting was appointed three

miles from there, when Ispoke from Psalms cxxxvii, 1, 2, 3, 4. My
master was with me, and made manifest his power. In the County
House, also, we held a meeting, and had a sweet waiting upon the
Lord. I spoke from Hebrews ii, 3, when the Lord gave me peculiar
liberty. At a dwelling house one night I spoke from John vii, 46,
when six souls fell to the floor crying for mercy. We had a blessed
outpouring of the spirit among us--the God of Jacob was in our
midst-—and the shout of heaven-born souls was like music to our ears.

About the month of February my little son James, then in his sixth
year, gave evidence of having religious inclinations. Once he got up
in a chair, with a hymn book in his hand, and with quite a ministerial
jesture, gave out a hymn. I felt the spirit move me to sing with
him. A worthy sister was in the room, who I asked to pray for him.
I invoked the Lord to answer and seal this prayer in the courts of
heaven. I believed He would and did, and while yet on our knees I
was tilled with the fulness of God, and the answer came. I cried
out in the joy of my heart-l.lThe dead is alivell-and ran down stairs
to inform a neighbor. Tears ran down the cheeks of my now happy
boy, and great was our rejoicing together. He had been the subject
of many prayers, and often had I thought I would rather follow him
to his grave than to see him grow up an open and profane sinner like
many children I had seen. And here let me say, the promise of the
Lord is, "ask and ye shall receive." Dear -parents; pray for your
children in childhood--carry them in the arms of faith to the mercy

22

seat, and there present them an offering to the Lord. I can say from
my own experience, the Lord will hear prayer. I had given James
the Bible as Haman gave Samuel to God in his youth, and by his gracious favor he was received. For the further encouragement of fathers and mothers to engage in this blessed work, let me refer them
to Ecclesiastes xi, 6: liln the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand, for thou ltnowest not whether shall prosper either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good."

"Sow it in the youthful mind,
Can you have a fairer neld?

Be it but in faith consigned.
Harvest, doubtless, it shall yield,

Fruits of early piety,
All that God delights to see."

In November I journeyed for Trenton, N. J. At Burlington Ispoke «

to the people on the Sabbath, and had a good time among them, and
on" Monday the 12th, in a School house. Sister Mary Owan, who had
laid aside all the cares of the world, went with me. We had no
means of travelling but on foot, but the Lord regarded us, and by
some means put it into the heart of a stranger, to convey us to the
Trenton bridge. We fell in with the elder of the circuit, who spoke

l to me in a cold and formal manner, and as though he thought my capacity was not equal to his. We went into the sister's house, where
we expected to stay, and waited a long while with our hats and cloaks
on, before the invitation to lodge there was given. In the morning I
had thought to visit Newhope, but remained to discharge my duty in
visiting the sick and aaicted three or four days in the neighborhood.
I was invited to a prayer meeting, and was called upon by a brother
to speak. I improved the offer, and made some remarks from Kings
xviii, 21. One of the preachers invited me to preach for them on
sixth day evening, which I complied with before an attentive congregation, when God followed the word_with much power, and great
was our joy. On the l7thI spoke in the morning at-11 o'clock. I
felt my weakness and deficiency for the work, and thought "who is
able for these things," and desired to get away from the task. My
text was Timothy vi, 2-7. The Lord again cut loose the stammering
tongue, and opened the Scriptures to my mind, so that, glory to Godls
dear name, we had a most melting, sin-killing, and soul-reviving
time. In the afternoon Iassisted in leading a class, when we found
the Lord faithful and true--and on the same evening I spoke from
Hebrews ii, 3.

The next day, sister Mary Owen and myself set out for Newhope,
where we arrived, after walking sixteen miles, at about six olclock in
the evening. Though tedious, it was a pleasant walk to view the
high mountain and towering hills, and the beauty and variety of na23 I

tore around us, which powerfnllyimpressed my mind with the greatness and wisdom of my Maker. At this place I stopt at the house
of the gentleman with whose wifels mother I was brought up, and_

by whom we were agreeably received. The next evening we called

upon brother Butler, where I addressed a small company, and God,

through his words, quickened some. The next night I spoke in an
Academy to algoodly number of. people, from John iii, 14. Here I
found some very ill-behaved persons, who talked roughly, and said
among other things, III was not a woman, but a man dressed in female clothes." I labored one week among them, and went next to
Lambertsville, where we experienced kindness from the people, and
had a happy time and parted in tears.

I now returned to Philadelphia, where I stayed a short time, and
went to Salem, West Jersey. I met with many troubles on my journey, especially from the elder. who like many others, was averse to
a womanls preaching. And here let me tell that elder. if he has not
gone to heaven, that I have heard that as far back as Adam Clarlrels
time, his objections to female preaching were met by the answerItlf an ass reproved Balsam, and a barn-door fowl reproved Peter,
why should not a woman reprove sin '9" I do not introduce this for

its complimentary classification of women with donkeys and fowls, _. '

but to give the reply of a poor woman, who had once been a slave.
To the first companion she said-f—iIMay be a speaking woman is like
an ass--but Ican tell you one thing, the ass seen thedngel when
Balaam didnlt." E .

Notwithstanding the opposition, we had a prosperous time at Salem;
Ihad some good congregations, and sinners were out to the heart.
After speaking in the meeting house, two women came up into the
pulpit, and falling upon my neck cried out iiwhat shall Ido to be saved ?" One said she had disobeyed God, and he had taken her children from her-he had called often after her, but she did not hearken.
I pointed her to the all-atoning blood of Christ, which is sufficient to
cleanse from all sin, and left her, after prayer, to his mercy. From
this place I walked twenty-one miles, and preached with difliculty to
a stiff-necked and rebellious people, who I soon left without any animosity for their treatment. They might have respected my message,
if not the poor weak servant who brought it to them with so much
labor.

"If they persecute you in one city, ties into another,i' was the advice I had resolved to take, andI hastened to Greenwich, where I had

a lively congregation, had unusual life and liberty in speaking, and ~

the power of God was there. We also had a solemn time in the
meeting house on Sabbath day morning, and in a dwelling house in
the evening; a large company assembled, when the spirit was with
us, and e had a mighty shaking among the dry bones. '3

On se and day morning, I took stage and rode seven miles to Woods24

town, and there I spoke to a respectable congregation of white and
colored, in a school house. I was desired to speak in the colored
meeting house, but the minister could not reconcile his mind to a
woman preacher-—he could not unite in fellowship with me even to
shaking hands as christians ought. I had visited that place before, I
when God made manifest his power llthrough the foolishness bf
preaching/l and owned the poor old woman. One of the brothers appointed a meeting in his own house, and after much persuasion this
minister came also. Idid not feel much like preaching, but spoke
from Acts viii, 35. I felt my inability, and was led to complain of
weakness—but God directed the arrow to the hearts of ,the guilty.-—
and my friend the minister gg; happggand often shouted lAmen,l' and
l/has it is, sister." We had a. wonderful display of the spirit of God
among us, and we found it good to be there. There is nothing -too
hard for the Lord to do. I committed the meeting into the hands of
the elder, who afterwards invited me to preach in the meeting house.
He had said he did not believe that ever a soul was converted under
the preaching of a woman--but while I was laboring in his place,
conviction seized a woman, who fell to the floor crying for mercy.
This meeting heldtill 12 or 1 o'clock. 0 how precious is the sound
of Jesusl name! I never felt a doubt at this time of my acceptance
with God, but rested my soul on his every promise. Thetelder shook
hands, and we parted. . .

Nov. 22, 1822, I returned to Philadelphia, and attended meetings
in and out of the city. God was still my help, and I preached and
formed a class, and tried to be useful. The oppositions I met with,
however, were numerous--so much so, that I was tempted to withdraw from the Methodist Church, lest some might go into ruin by
their persecutions of me—-but this was allowed only to try my faithfulness to God. At timesl was pressed down like a cart beneath its
shafts-p-my life seemed as at the point of the sword--my heart was
sore.and pained me in my body. But the Lord knows how to deliver
the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust till the day of
judgment to be punished. While relating the feelings of my mind
to a sister who called to see me, joy sprang up in my bosom that I
was not overcome by the adversary, and I was overwhelmed with the
love of God and souls. Iembraced the sister in my arms, and we
had a melting time together. Oh how comforting it is to have the
spirit of God bearing witness with our spirits that we are his children
in such dark hours!

~ When Satan appears to stop up our path,
And till us with fears, we triumph by faith ;
He cannot take from us, (thol oft he has tried,)
The soul cheering promise the Lord will provide.
He tells us we're weak, our hope is in vain,
J , The good that we seek we neler shall obtain;
« But when such suggestions our gjaces have tried,
This answers all questions, the ord will provide.

25

I felt a greater love for the people than ever. It appeared to me
that they erred through ignorance of my desire to do them good; and
my prayer was that nothing but love might appear in my ways, and
actuate my heart. Religion is love—God is love. But it was nothing
less than the Divine power that brought me through, for it appeared
thattthe hosts of darkness were arrayed against me to destroy my
peace and lead me away from the throne of love.

June 24, .I left the city of Philadelphia to travel in Delaware State.
I went with captain Ryal, a kind gentleman, who took me to his house
in Wilmington, and himself and lady both treated me well. I The first
night of my arrival; I preached in the stone Methodist meeting house.
I tried, in my week way, to interest the assembly from the 2d chapter of Hebrews, 3d verse—-III-Iow shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation." God was there, as we had the most delightful evideuce-and many had their eyes opened to see there was no escape
from the second death while out of Christ, and cried unto God for his
saving grace. I would that all who have not embraced the salvation
offered in the gospel, might examine the question candidly and seriously, ere the realities of the other world break up their fancied securrty.

In July I spoke in a School house to a large congregation, from
Numbers xxix. 17. , Here we had a sweet foretaste of heaven—full
measure, and running over--shouting and rejoicing——while the poor

I errand-bearer of a free gospel was assisted from on high. I wish my

reader had been there to share with us the joyous heavenly feast.
On the 15th of July I gave an exhortation in the meeting house again
to a listening multitude—deep and solemn were the convictions of
many, and good, I trust, was done.

The next place I visited was Newcastle. The meeting house could
not be obtained, and two young gentleman interested themselves to
get the Court house, but the Trustees objected, wishing to know why
the Methodists did not open their Church. The reason was til was
not licensed," they said. My two friends waited on me to speak in
the Market house, where I attended at early candlelight, and had the
pleasure of addressing a few plain truths to a crowded but respectful
congregation, from John vii, 46—lINever man spake like this man."
On Shnday the same young gentlemen invited me to give another discourse, to which I consented, before a large gathering of all descriptions.

From hereI proceeded to Christine, where we worshipped in a
dwelling house, and I must say was well treated by some of my colored friends. I then returned to Wilmington, where in a few days I
had a message to return again to C. My friends said I should have
the Meeting house, for which Squire Luden interested himself, and
the appointment was published. When the people met at the proper

26

time, the doors remained locked. Amid criesof lfshame" we left the
Church steps—but a private house was opened a short distance up
the road, and though disappointed in obtaining egress to a Church, the
Lord did not disappoint his people, for we were fed with the bread of
life, and had a happy time. Mr. and Mrs. Lewelen took me to their
house, and treated me, not as one of their hired servants, but as a
companion, for which I shall ever: feel grateful. . Mr. Smith, a doctor,
also invited me to call upon .them—he was a Presbyterian, but we
prayed and conversed together about Jesus and his love, and parted
without meddling, with each others creeds. Oh, Ilong to see the day
when Christians will meet on one common platform—Jesus of Nazareth--and cease their biclterings and contentions about non-essentials
—when "our Church" shall be less debated, but "our Jesus" shall be
all in all. .
Another family gave me the invitation to attend a prayer meeting.
It was like a "little heaven below." From here I'walked about four

miles that evening, accompanied by the house maid of Mrs. Ford, 9. a

Presbyterian, who said she knew her mistress would be glad to see
me. Mrs. F. gave me a welcome--said she felt interested in my
speaking, and sent a note to a Methodist lady, who replied that my
labor would be acceptable, no doubt, in her Church that afternoon.
When I came in, the elder was in the pulpit. He gave us a good
sermon. After preaching, this lady spoke of me to the elder; in consequence, he invited me to his pulpit,~saying lihe was willing that every one should do good." My text was Hebrew ii, 3. Though weak
in body, the good Master filled my mouth and gave me liberty among
strangers, and seldom have I spent so happy a Sabbath. Mrs. F. had
a colored woman in her family one hundred and ten years of age,
with whom I conversed about religion—how ~ Christ had died to redeem us, and the way of salvation, and the poor old lady said llshe
wished she could hear me every. day." I also called upon another,
one hundred and sixteen years old, who was blind. We talked together about Jesus-—-she had a strong and abiding evidence of her
new birth, and ins. few weeks went home to heaven. Here she was
long deprived of the light of the sun, and the privilege of reading Godls
blessed word 5 but there her eyes are unsealed, and the Sun of righteousness has risen with healing in his wings. '

There glory beams on all the plains,
Which sight to her is givenThere music rolls in sweetest strains,
And s otless beauty ever reigns,
An all is love in heaven.

I left Mrs. Fordis and walked about three miles to St. George, with
a recommend to a Mrs. Sutton, a noble-minded lady of the Presbyterian order, where I was generously treated. Here I preached in the

27

School house to a respectable company-—had considerable weeping
and a profitable waiting upon the Lord. I accepted an invitation from
a gentleman to preach in a Methodist Church three miles distant-—
found there a loving people, and was highly gratified at the order and
decorum manifested while [addressed them. Mrs. Smith took me
home with her, whol found to be a christian both in sentiment and
action. By invitation, Iwent next to Port Penn, and spoke with freedom, being assisted of the Lord, to a full house, and had a glorious
feast of the Spirit. The next night found me at Canton Bride, to
which place I had walked—-spoke in a School house, from Math. xxii,
41--iiwhat think ye of Christ 2" The presence of the Lord overshadowed us-believers rejoiced-some were awakened to believe
well of my Master, and I trust are on their way to glory. In Fieldsborongh, also, we had gracious meetings.

At Smyrna I met brother C. W. Cannon, who made application for
the Friendis Meeting house for me, where the Lord blessed us abundantly. We attended a Camp-meeting of the old connexion, and got
greatly refreshed for the King's service. I rode ten miles and delivered a message from the Lord to a waiting audience-i--the Master assisted, and seven individuals, white and colored, prostrated themselves
for prayer. Next day I rode to Middletown-—spoke in a School house
to a white congregation from Isaiah lxiii, 1, and a good time it was.
In the morning at 11 oiclock, I addressed a Methodist Society, and in
the afternoon at 3 oicloclr, spoke under a tree in the grave yard, by_
the road side, to a large audience. Squire.Maxwellis lady, who was
present, invited me home to tea with herself and nieces, and a Quaker

_ ' lady showed her benevolence by putting into my hand enough to help

me on my journey. The Lord is good-what shall I do to make it
known? I rode seven miles that night, and gave an enhortation after
the minister had preached, and felt happier than a King.

I now travelled to Cecil county, Md., and the first evening spolre
to a large congregation. The pastor afterwards baptised some adult
persons—and we all experienced the cleansing and purifying power.
W e had a baptism within and without. I was next sent for by the
servant of a white gentleman, to hold a meeting in his house in the
evening. He invited the neighbors, colored and white, when I spoke
according to the ability God gave me. It was pleasant to my poor
soul to be there-—Jesus was in our midst-and we gave glory to God.
Yes, glory—-glory be to God in the highest. itGod forbid that I should
glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ." I boast not myself. Paul may plant and Apollos water, but God giveth the increase.
I tried also to preach three times at a place 14 miles from here-had
good meetings-backsliders were reclaimed and sinners convicted of
sin, who I left in the hands of God, with the hope of meeting and recognizing again iiwhen we arrive at home." * * * "* *

28

Returned back to Middletown. The next day the preacher of the
circuit conveyed me to his place of appointment at Elkton. We had
a wonderful outpouring of the spirit. At Frenchtown I spoke at 11
olcloclr, where I realized my nothingness, but, Godls name hepraised,
be helped me in the duty. Went again to Middletown, and from
there to Cantonls Bridge, .and talked to the people as best I could.
Seven miles from this place I found, by the direction of a kind Providence, my own sister, who had been separated from me some thirtythree years. We were young when last we met, with less of the
cares of life than now Each heart then was buoyant with mildly
hopes and pleasures-—and. little did we expect at parting that thirtythree years would pass over us, with its changes and vicissitudes, ere
we should see each otherls face. Both were much altered in appearance, but we knew each other, and talked over the dealings of the
Lord with us, retracing our wanderings in the world and lithe days
when life was young.lf

ttOur days of childhood quickly pass,
And soon our happiest years are runAs the pure dew that gems the grass
Is dried beneath the summer sun.
Therels such deceit—-such guile in men,
Who would not be a child again ?"

During this visit I had three meetings in different directions in gentlemenls houses, and a prayer meeting at my brotherls, who did not
enjoy religion. A My good old-friend Mr. Lorton happened to be there,
who told the people that he had been to my house--that he knew
Mr. Lee (my husband) intimately, and that he had often preached for
him while pastor of the Church at Snow Hill, N. J. p

I next attended and preached several times at a camp meetinng,
which continued five days. We had pentecostal showers-—-sinners
were pricked to the heart, and cried mightily to God for succor from
impending judgment, and I verily believe the Lord was well pleased
at our weak endeavors to»serve him in the tented grove. The elder
in charge, on the last day of the camp, appointed a meeting for me
in a dwelling house. Spoke from Acts ii, 41 The truth fastened in
the hearts of two young women. who, afterI was seated, came and
fell down at my side, and cried for God to have mercy on them-we
prayed and wrestled with the Lord, and both were made happy in
believing, and are alive in the faith of the gospel. The next morning
a brother preacher took me to St. Georgetown. From there I took
stage to Wilmington, and called on my friend Captain Rial, in whose
family I spent two days and nights. Went to Philadelphia to attend
a camp-meeting. Returned again to W--, where I was taken sick
with typhus fever. and was in the doctorls hands for some days—but
the Lord rebuked the disease, gave me my usual health again, and I
returned back to Philadelphia.

29

The Bishop gave me an invitation to speak in Bethel Church; but
here my heart fluttered with fear at the, commencement» in a manner v
known but to those who feel their unworthiness in addressingnew and
large assemblies. My text was in Isaiah 1:. 10, 11. Previous to dismission, the Bishop gave me another appointment in Wesley Church
for first day morning, where I labored to encourage believers, from
Ephesians ii, 19. The comforter was with us—-we were sprinkled as
with clearwater from above--the hands of those that were hanging

down were lifted up, and we truly had a refreshing season. Glory to

God for the manifestation of His Spirit. "Now therefore ye are no
more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and
of the household of God." .

On the ensuing Thursday night, in Union Church, I had the opportunity of speaking a word for my Saviour again, and recommeneed
the impenitent to see to it that they took the advice of my text, in
Rev. iii, 18. The Lord searched the heart as he did Jerusalem with
a lighted candle, and there was a moving of the Spirit among the
people.

From Philadelphia I travelled on foot thirty miles to Downingtown,
and gave ten sermons while there; and remember the cold day in December I walked sixteen miles from the above place to brother Wellsl,
where I staid one week, and labored both among colored and white.
They had one class there. Three miles further, I talked on Lordls
day to an apparently hardened people, and next night preached in a
School-house, after a ride of ten miles. - The call of the Lord was for
me now to go to West Chester, N. Y., wheretl remained a little period
with brother Thomas Henry and brother Miller; preached in a Schoolhouse and in the Wesleyan Methodist Meet'ing-house- When prepared to go home, a request was sent me to preach in the Court-house
of the county, to which I rode ten miles, and addressed the citizens
on two evenings. ' The Lord strengthened his feeble instrument in the
effort to win souls to Christ, for which my heart at this time was
heavily bnrthened.— Next morning I left for Westhaven, where I visited a School of boys and girls, and was much pleased to see them
engaged and improving in their studies. How great the difference
now, thought I, for the mental and moral culture of the young than
when I was a child !

In the month of June, 1823, I went on from Philadelphia to New
York with Bishop Allen and several Elders, (including our present
Rev. Bishop Brown,) to attend the New York Annual Conference of
our denomination, where I spent three months of my time. We arrived about nine o'clock in the'evening. -As we left the boat, a person
fell into thedock, and notwithstanding the ed'ort made to save and
find him, he was seen no more. iin the midst of life we are in death.'
On the 4th of June I spoke-' in the Asbury Church, from Psalms c, 33.

I

30

I think I never witnessed such a shouting and rejoicing time. The
Church had then but recently adopted the African M. -E. discipline.
On the 5th I brought my master's message to the Bethel Church-—
Text Isaiah lviii, 1. "Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy voice like a
trumpet, and show my people their transgressions. and the house of
Jacob their sins." The spirit of God came upon me; I spoke without
fear of man, and seemed willing even there to be ofered up; the
preachers shouted and prayed. and it was a time long to be remembered. '

June 6. Spoke in the Church in High Street, Brooklyn, from Jer.
ix, 1--iiOh that my hand were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, thatI might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter
of my people." In these days I felt it my duty to travel up and
down in the world, and promulgate the gospel of Christ, especially
among my own people, though I often desired to be released from the
great task. The Lord had promised to be with me, and my trust was
in his strong arm. 2 . A

Iienouncing every worldl thing,
Safe lneath the shadow o thy wing,
My sweetest thought henceforth shall be

That all I want I nd in thee,
-In thee, my God, in Thee.

I left my friend in Brooklyn, and went to Flushing, L. I. Here we
had quite a revival feeling, andtwo joined society. Visited Jamaica
and Jericho; spoke in brother Bis dwelling, in the church, and under
a tree. Went to White Plains to the camp-meeting ; the Lord was
with us indeed; believers were revived, backsliders reclaimed, and * s
sinners converted. Returned and spent a little time in Brooklyn,
where I addressed the people from Rev..iii, 18, and John iii, 15.

July 22. Spoke in Asbury Church from Acts xiii, 41--7iBehold ye
despisers, and wonder and perish)? I pointed out the portion of the
hypocrite, the liar, the Sabbath-breaker, and all who do wickedly and
die in their sins; they shall be to the judgment bar of Jehovah, and
before an assembled universe hear their awful sentence, ifDepart~fnom
me, ye cursed, into everlasting tire, prepared for the devil and his angels,",whil,e the righteous shall be received "into life eternal." On
the 28th I went to Dutch Hill, L. I., and spoke before a congregation
of white and colored, in a barn, as there was no other suitable place.
I felt happy when I thought of my dear Redeemer, who was born in
a stable andlcradled in a manger, and wehad a precious season.
Brother Crolrcr, of Brooklyn, and father Thompson were with me, at
whose feet I desired rather to sit and learn, they being experienced
"workmen that needed not to be ashamed." But the Lord sends by
whom he will. i a

The next Sabbath I weakly attempted to address my friends in

31

New York again. Took the words in Math. xxviii, 13, for my text?llSay ye, his disciples came by night, and stole him away while we
slept.l' The place was greatly crowded, and many came who could
not get in. A class met here, to which the preacher invited all who
desired to" remain, and thirty persons tarried. He called upon me to
lead, but He who led Israel over the Red Sea assisted, and it was a
gracious time with us. Some who remained from curiosity were made,
like Belshazzar, to tremble and weep, while the spirit strove powerfully with them. One experienced religion and joined society. I expect in the resurrection morning to meet many who were in that little
company, in my Fatherls house, where we shall strike hands no more
to part; where our song of redemption shall be raised to" God and the
Lamb forever. Dear reader, if you have not, I charge you to make
your peace with God while time and opportunity-is given ,*and be one of
that number who shall take part and lot in the first resurrection. Though
I may never see you in the flesh, I leave on this page my solemn entreaty that you delay not to obtain the pardoning favor of God; that
you leave not the momentous subject of religion to a sick bed or dying
hour, but Now, even now, seek the Lord" with full purpose of heart,
and he will be found of thee. "If any man sin," he has advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteousil

"Oh that the world might taste and see
The riches of his grace;
The arms of love that compass me,

Would all mankind embrace."

I visited a woman who was laying sick upon her death-bed. She
told me "she had once enjoyed religion, but the e&my had cheated
her out of it." She knew that she, must die in a very little while,
and could not get well, and her agony of soul, in view of its unprepared state for a judgment to come, awoke every feeling of sympathy
within me. Oh! how loud such a scenecalls upon us to be llfaithful
unto death"—-then shall we lireceive a crown of life.l' Also visited
Mrs. Miller, who once "tasted that the Lord was good," but had ceased
now to follow him. She had been a Methodist for many years-got
her feelings ipjrrfed through some untoward circumstance-had fallen
from grace, and now was sick. A good sister accompanied me? we
conversed with Mrs. M., sung an appropriate hymn, and -my friend
supplicated the throne of grace in her behalf. She had frequently felt
the need of a returning Saviour, and during prayer her heart became
melted into tenderness. She cried aloud for mercy, wrestled like
Jacob for the witness, and the Lord, faithful and true, "healed her
hackslidingsfl and we left her happy in his father. Praise the Lord
for his matchless grace. I entertained no doubt of her well-grounded
hope; and on seeing such a. display" of Godls power, I was lost in
wonder, love and praise. Let the backslider hear and take courage.

.7 -....-..-.—~.v.._,~.¢<—- -s-u-.--we-—-v-v

32

Let all who are out of Christ hear the invitation--"Repeat yeandbe
converted, for God hath called all men everywhere to repent."

"Without reserve give Christ your heart,
Let him his righteousness impart-AThen all things else helll freely give,
With him you all things shall receive?

With a sereneand tranquilmind I now returned to Philadelphia.
The Bishop was pleased to give me an appointment at Bethel Church,
but a spirit of opposition arose among the people against ihe propriety
of female preaching. My faith was tried—yet I felt my call to labor
for souls none the less. "Shall the servant be above his Master?"
The ministers of Jesus must expect persecution, if they would be faithful witnesses against sin and sinners—but shall they, ii awed by a
mortalls form, conceal the word of God W Thou God knowest my
heart, and that thy glory is all I have in view. Shall I cease from
sounding the alarm to an ungodly world, when the vengeance of offended heaven is about to be poured out, because my way is sometimes beset with scoffere, or those who lose sight of the great Object,
and stop on the road to glory to contend about non-essentials? Rather
let the messengers of God go on—let them not be hindered by the
fashions and customs of a gainsaying and mis-loving generation, but
with the crown in view, which shall deck the brow of those only
who are it faithful unto death"-—let them " cry aloud and spare not."
Who regarded, the warnings of Noah? who believed in his report?
Who among the antidiluvians, that witnessed the preparations of this
righteous man to save himself and family from a deluge of waters,
believed him any thing else than a fanatic, deluded, and beside himself '! Let the servants of Christ gird on the armor, and tilisten to
the Captainis voice: ii Lo I am with you always, even unto the end."
With the promise of my Lord impressed upon my mind, I remained
at home only a week, and walked twenty-one miles to Lumbertown,
and preached in the Old Methodist Church and our African Church.
Brother Joshua Edely was then a deacon there, and held a quarterly

~ meeting soon after my reaching the place. He also appointed a lovefeast in the morning, when the love that true believers enjoy at such
scenes made the place akin to heaven. While here I spoke as the
Spirit taught me from Solomon's Songs.
refreshing to the thirsty soul-and we had a shout of the king in the
camp. I shall never forget the kindness I received here from dear
sister G. B. May the blessings of heaven be hers in this and the
world to come. 7

I travelled seven miles from the above place to Snow Hill on Sabbath morning, where I was to preach in the Church of which I was a
member 5 and although much afflicted in body, I strove, by the grace
of God, to ,perform the duty.

It was a happy meeting-—.

This was once the charge of Joann \/

83

Lu. In this desk my lamented husband had often stood up before
me, proclaiming the "acceptable year of the Lord"--here he labored
with zeal and spent his strength toinduce sinners to be " reconciled to
God"—-.-here his toils ended. And could. it be, that a poor unworthy
being like myself should be called to address hisformer congregation,
and should stand in the same pulpit! The thought *made me tremble. , My heart sighed when memory brought back the image, and
the reminiscences of other days crowdedupon me. But why. my
heart. dost thou sigh? He has ceased_ from his labor, and I here see
his works dofollow. It will be enough, if these, the people of his
care, press on and gain the kingdom. It will be enough, if, on the
final day, flfor which all other days were made,l' we pass through
the gates into the city, and live again together where death cannot
enter, and separations are unknown. Cease then, my tears-a little
while, my fluttering heart! and the turf that covers my companion,
perchance, may cover thee—-a little while, my soul ! if faithful, and
the widowls God will call thee from this valley of tears and sorrows
to restin the mansions the Saviour has gonetto prepare for his people.
ll Good what God gives—just what he, takes awayfi I ' My mind was next exercised to visited _Trent'on, N. J. I spoke for
the people there, but soon had felt the cross so heavy. 'Perhaps it
was occasioned through grieving over the past, and my feelings of
loneliness in the world. A sister wished me to go with her to Bridgeport—where Ifound brother_0r_win, then elder over that church.
He gave me an appointment. We had a full house, and Godls power
was manifest among the people, and I returned to the elderis house
rejoicing. The following day I walked fourteen miles to a meeting,
where also we were greatly favored with the presence of God. Soon
after this, [thought of going home to Philadelphia. Igot about three
miles on foot, when an apparent voice said it I thou goest home than
wilt die."_ I paused for a moment, and not comprehending what it
meant, pursued my journey. Again I was startled by something like
a tapping on my shoulder, but,?on turning round, I found myself alone,
which two circumstances created a singular feeling I could not understand. I thought of Balsam when met by the angel in the way. I
was taken sick and it seemed I should die in the road. I said I will
go back, and walked about four miles to Bridgeport. Told a good
sister my exercise, who was moved with sympathy, and got brandy
and bathed me. On Wednesday night I spoke to the people at Trenton Bridge, and notwithstanding the opposition I had met with
from brother Samuel R , then on the circuit, the Lord sup
ported the "woman preacher" and my soul was cheered. On
Thursday I walked fourteen miles, when the friends applied to
the elder to let me talk for them, but his prejudices also, against we.»men preaching were very strong, and tried hard to disalfect the minds

3

34

of the people. The dear man has since gone to stand before-that
God who knows the secrets of all hearts-and where, I earnestly pray,
be me tind some who have' been saved by grace through the instruments ity of female preaching. A

"Then here, 0 God, thy work fultil;
And from thy mercyls throne

0 grant me strength to do thy will,
And to resist my own." A

Norristown, Bucks county, January 6, 1824. Brother Morris conveyed me here at his own expense, and made application for places
for me to speak. Addressed a large congregation on the fourth day
after my introduction into the place, in the court-house, from Isaiah
liiii. 1,-" Who hath believed our report '9 and to whom is thelarm of
the Lord revealed 'P' I felt embarrassed in the commencement, but
the,Spirit came, and "helped our infirmities"-—-good attention, and
some ,weeping. On the 18th I spoke in the academy—it was a solemn trme, and the people came out in numbers to, hear. I then
walked four miles to brother Morrisits--spoke twice in the schoolhouse, and once in a thwelling house.

/ On the 14th April, I went with Bishop Allen and several elders to
Baltimore, on their way to attend Conference ; at the end of which
the Bishop gave me permission to express a few thoughts for my Lord.
On leaving the city of ,B., I travelled about 100 miles to Eastern
Shore, Maryland. Brother Bailey was then laboring on that circuit,
who received and treated me very kindly. We had several good
meetings, and twice I spoke in Bethel Church, when the outpouring
of the Spirit was truly great. In company with a good sister, who
took a gig and horse, I travelled about three hundred miles, and labored in different places. Went to Denton African Church, and on
the first Sabbath gave two sermons. The Church was in a thriving,
prosperous condition, and the Lord blessed the word to our comfort.
During the week I labored in the court-housed before a large concourse
of hearers. The Lord was unspeakably good, and one fell to the

floor under _the power. , _ .

By request, I also spoke in the _Old Methodist Church in Denton,
which was full to overflowing. It was a happy meeting; My
tongue was loosened, and my heart warm with the love of God and
souls--a season yet sweet to my memory. From there lwent to
Greensboroi—the elder gave a sermon, after which Iexhorted the
poor sinner to prepare to_meet the Lord in peace, before mercy was
clear gone forever. The Old Methodist connexion gave an invitation
for me to speak in their house, which I embraced, feeling thankful
that the middle wall of partition had, thus far. been broken down.
ii He that feareth God and worketh righteousness shall be accepted of
him"-—not he who bath" a different skin--not he who belongs to this

*1.

:35

denomination. or, to that--but "he that feareth God." My Master
is no»:-especter of persons. Maythe partition walls that divide His
sincere followers be broken down by the. spirit of love.

~ ~In Whitehall Chapel I spoke, to a respectable. congfegation, from
Isaiah liii. d.. Though ins. slave country, 1- found the Omaipresent
One was with us. Dr. Clarke took us home to dine with his family

_ --for which uncommon attention lfelt. highly gratified. ~ I believe

him a' Christiarrin heart, and one, no doubt, who has read the words
of the" Saviour: it Whosoevcr shall give to drink unto one of these
little ones a cup-of cold water only, shall in no wise lose his reward."
And, notwithstanding thedoctor was a Presbyterian, Mr. Buly had
the-privilege of baptizing two;of their colored children. * * g *

I stopped next at Concord, and in. the Old Methodist connexion tried
to encourage the Lordle people to persevere. God displayed His
power by a general outpouringof the Spirit-sinners cried for mercy,
while others shouted for joy. Spoke also to a- congregation of colored
and white at Stanton Mills; and arrived again at Eastern, Shore,

- where I spokerin Bethel Church during Quarterly Meeting. Attended

their loves-feast, wheresereral. vjoined- society, and many encouraging
testimonies word girenibyxyoung converts that " God hath power on
6It'th~~to;f0rgive sins?! -May they. be faithful stewards of the manifold gitls of God-r-and never : be ashamed ,to,eonfess~ what the Lord
had done .for them. . Many-lose the witness out of the. heart by withholding. their testimony from their friends and neighbors of the power .

of God.to save. Theyurun w:ell.for a-season, but the ternpter whispers i ii not: now"_--and by and. by the soul becomes barren and unfruitful.. - Mey.God help the young converts to iiwatch," and tell
around what a dear Saviour they. have found. . . r
i "'A'shamed of Jesus !--yes, I may,
when I've no guilt to waelrawayw

, . ' Nolérears to \vipe——no_good to crave, o fears to quell—no soul to save."

' June 10th, 1824. Left Eastern Shore for a journey to Bath, and
went around the circuit with brother-'J.. B-, the "elder. In the Old
Methodist Church, at Fbry*e'Neclro 1 had the privilege of speaking to
a large congregation, which was made the power of God unto salvation. vvisited Lewistown, and had a Messed meeting in the Methodiet.Church.. :The~tears of the penitent flowedsweetly, which always encotrragesvrne to persevere invproclairningthe glad -tidingsaof a
risen Saviour to my fellow beings. When»the heart is thus meltéd
into tenderdese, I feel assured the Lord sanctions the feeble effort of
His poor servant--it is a good omen to my mind that the mourner is
not forsaken of .God,tand that he yet stands knocking at the door for
admittance, Oh! that those wboirreep for anrahsent Jesus may be
comforted by hearing Hint say--it Tlrygsins, which were many, are
all forgiven thee: go in peace and sin no more."

'36

Elder J. B. preached in Greenshot'o', where I attended, and had a
qnickening time. Some enmity had existed among the brethren, «but
the spirit of love got the ascendancy, and the lion became as the
lamb. The gospel is the host: remedy to subdue the evil passions of
men that has ever been discovered. Dear Master; let Thy gospel

spread to eerthls remotest bounds.
I have travelled, in four years, sixteen hundred miles-and -of that

I walked two hundred and eleven miles, and preached the kingdom of
God to the falling sons and daughters of Adam, counting it all joy for
the sake of Jesus. Many times cast down but not forsaken; willing to
suffer as well as love. I spoke at Harris's Mills, in a dwelling house,
to a large concourse of people, from Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians,
xviii. 19-20. I felt much drawn out, in the Spirit of God, meanwhile
from my feelings. I observed there were some present that never
would meet me again. Mr. J. B., the elder, then requested me to
lead the class. Much mourning, weeping and rejoicing. Four days
afterwards, a man that sat under this sermon, (ta shoemaker by occur pation) fell dead from his bench without having any testimony of a
hope in Christ.* How dreadful to relate the wicked shall not live out
half their days. In Easton Iispolre from thesEvan..John, 1 chap. 45
ver., the Lordls time. Then proceeded to Degsberry, 25 miles,
preached in Bethel Church to a multitude of people, it being to them
a new thing, but only the old made more manifest. Bless God for
- what my heart feels, for a good conscience is better than a sacrifice.
Two sermons preached in said Church, I spoke from Acts 13 chap,
4! ver.,—-the power of God filled the place-—--some shouted, others
mourned, some testified God for Christls sake had forgiven sin, whilst
others were felled to the floor. From thence! we went to Sinapuxom,
spoke on Sabbath day to a large congregation from Nam. 24 chap.,
17 ver.-the Lord gave light, life and liberty on that portion of Scripf ture. Great time. The elder closed the meeting, the memory of
which will be sweet in eternity. I intended to take an appointment,
but being taken sick the elder filled the appointment, and while
preaching, there were 10 or 11 white men came and said they wanted
to see the preacher; he sent for tliem to. come into. the house, but they
seemed afraid or refused ; after he had finished, they some to the
door to know by what authority he was preaching--but it wasme
they were after, but! was ihrtihed, for their law), by my credentials;
having the United States seal upon. them,--they tried to get him out
of the house, they, said, on business. But. he told them he would
meet them at 9 olcleek in the morninghefore the magistrate, seven
miles distant. Brother 1. B. then took my credentials and also
showed his own, and, upon examination, the magistrate said, she is
highly recommended and I are bound to protenther. An under-oEcor, anxious to get hold of my papers, very much opposed to out being

 .

37

in the State, tried hard to frighten us out of it, and went to lay his
hands on it, but was rebuked by the magistrate; and two days after
the magistr_,ate-sent word to me to go on and preach, he did not care
if I preached till Idied. . ' I never met them but told the friends that

God would make an example of them i before one year. My mind

led me to Solabary and to Snow ,Hill—the brother, through persuasion,
did not go, for .feaa- of some difficulty, under which consideration I
declined going for tlmt time, I then returned to Easton, but my mind
still led me to pay that religious visit,-which was still accomplished
by a sister» and myself; I called onbrother Massey, a preacher, who
conducted as to Snow Hill and Solsbnry. In the afternoon, -the elder
andone of the Tmmees of the white.Methodiet Church, called on me
to know of my faith and doctrine, and, while conversing, the spirit of
the Lord breathed upon us-we had groans and shedding of tears—
that evening the Elder gave me an appointment in the colored church
to a large congregation, and we had a powerful time, sinners awakened and backsliders reclaimed- So great was the time that the
meeting lasted until three or four o'clock in the morning. It was
like a Camp meeting, they came seven miles distance from only three
or four hours notice. Next morning we left for Snow Hill, the Elder
sent down for the friends to take care of us all, and our hoard, with the
horses, should be paid for, consequently we were treated with great
hospitality. I preached in the Old Methodist Church to an immense
congregation of both the slaves and the holders, and felt great libertyf/'
in word and doctrine; the power of God seemed without intermission.
We left there and rode 16 miles, spoke to a small company of people. In the afternoon to a large congregation, chiefly Presbyterians,
and at many other places too tedious for me to mention, I preached
twenty-seven sermons. and then returned to Easton again, wherel
was informed that the constable who was so enraged against me before was then dying; the other white man who came and set at the
end of the table twice while I was laboring, thinking I would say
something to implicate myself and wanted me arrested so had, had
beensold and his family broke up; it is thus the Lord fights for Israel.
I then made an appointment at a* place called the ole in the Wall, ,
it was a little settlement of coloured people, but we ad no Church, V
but used a dwelling house, and had a large congregation. I had no
help but an old man, one hundred and odd years of age; he prayed,
and his prayers made us feel awful, he died in the year 1825, and
has gone to reap the reward of his labor; freed from the toils and
cares of life, no more to labor under a hard task master, but to rest
where the slave is freed from his master. I strove then to fill the ap-'
pointment at 11 olclock in the morning, from Daniel 5 chap. 27 ver.
the declaration was, there is no other way under heaven that men can
be saved only through Jesus Christ; the Lord gave me great light on

38

this subject. At 3 oiclock, in the afternoon; we stood in the open air
in the irvoods, and I spoke from 12 chap. 2-8-"var. I felt greater liberty on this subject than-the other; the Lordwas with me; of a
truth I felt the force of it now. Glory to God» Who can constrain
against the power of God? We had people of all descriptions, from
the true Christian to the Devil, and fromtslave-holder to-slane. We
visited Georgetown Jail, saw four men there sentenced to be hung,
twowhite men and two colored ; one of thelwhitc men, by the name
of Sharp had killed all his family, except his oldest daughter; she

was the most hardened wretch I ever saw; I read a-chapter «and 7

conversed with them. Sharp treated it with contempt, but the other
answered with adegree of humility; but they werehung according
to the laws of their state. ; * I * r I t

But 0, their end, _ ,
Theirgdrcadful end  '

I was invited by one of the Trustees of the.Old Methodist Church
to pay them a visit on the ensuing Sabbath morning. I made the appointment for said day. Ileft Georgetown on the morning early,
half past ten oiclock we arrived in Milford; Church hell was ringing.
We were conducted into the Church ; a local "preacher was in the pulpit and had prayed, but was asked to come down by another who invited me there. I spoke for, them and afterwards they gave out for
another appointment at night, but it caused a controversy, among themselves, and they threw it on him to come and see if I would fill it.

\Previous to this the coloured preachers told me there was controversy

I about woman preaching. But. he came and asked me how longl had
been preaching the Gospel. I answered, rising, 5 or 6 years. He said

it was something new. Iitold him it seemed to be supposed so; I
referred him to Mrs. Fletcher, of England, an able preacher and wife

of Mr. Fletcher, is. great and worthy minister of the Parish. 'He
asked why I did not go to the Quakers. I told him I was sent to the
Methodists. I asked if he had asister in the Church, and she witnessed a Christian life, and was called and qualified to preach, do you
think you would be justiiied before God, to stop her? He has not
answered me yet. I found it was prejudice in his mind. He talked

as if he had not known whatlthe operation of the Spirit of God was.
We may say, with propriety, he had not tarried at Jerusalem long
enough. ' When about to part, he asked me if It would come, but I
could not then promise. At night, the people came in their car/. riages from the country, but were disappointed, for I spoke in a gol- qred Church. The doors and windows were opened ' on account 3?
the heat, but were crowded with people; pride and prejudice were
buried. We had a powerful timef I was quite taken out of myself
-the meeting held till day-break ; but I returned to my home.

.89

They told me that sinners were converted, backsliders reclaimed,
mourners comforted, and believers built up in the most holy faith.
Then they wished us to stay until next night to preach again ; but I
thought it best to leave them hungry. Previous to this. I _was sent
for by a- slave-holder. to come to his house _to preach three funeral
sermons, all at one time, two grown persons androne child ; they had
been dead about a year, but their graves were only filled up even
with the earth. Ispoke standing in the door of his dwelling to a
great congregation, -from the 2 Book of Samuel, 12 chap.~23 ver.—
dwelling much on the certainty of .the child?s happiness, through the
redemption of. Christ--shewing how men might be saved living in acoerdance with the truth. When finished we fellin procession and
moved to the graves of the departed. Brother Massey rehearsed the
funeralr ceremony, then the graves were raised and made ova1,»-as
usual, a most-affecting scene, one of the deceased being the mother
of n two little girls there present. . They were so effected, it seemed
they would go in fits; several *persons.tried to pacify them, but
in vain. It was at solemn time; many weredeeply affected that day
at the graves, and mourning of the whites in the house, but they
treated us kindly, and we left them, visiting. many places too tedious to mention. I met a Camp meeting of the African Methodist »

Episcopal Church at Denton. The Elder was much encouraged in
commencing the Camp. -. Although in a slaye State, we had every
thing in order, good preaching, aeelemn time, and long to be remembered. Someof --the poor slaves came happy in the Lord ; walked
from 20 to 30, and from:that to seventy miles, to worship God. . Although through hardships they counted it all joy for the excellency
of Christ; and, before da , they; or a number of them, had to be at
home, ready for work ; but some said they came as sinners before
God, but went away as new creatures in Christ; and they could not
be disputed. My heart glows with joy while I write; truly God is
inscrutable. The Elder, J. B. then appointed a. Camp meeting within tive miles of Easton, too near the town, but . it was done to glorify
God. Yet it seemed there was not that general good done like the
previous time. He gave me an appointment on Sunday afternoon; to
myself I appeared lost ; thought I was doing nothing, but the south
wind from the hill of the Lord began to blow upon the spices of his
garden. The power of God arrested a person who started to run, but
fell in the flight, and begged God for mercy and obtained it. After
the sermon, which was-the first of my being apprizedtof -it, but no
merit to me, but all glory to God, for the good done at Camp meetings,
though much persecuted, but they are a glorious meeting to me. I
pray God to'protect the camp-meetings while I thank him for the invention. ' Various are the operations of the Spirit of God on the-human family. We must believe in the truth of God, and then we can

40

behold the mysteries and enjoy the truth of them with joy and thanks.giving.' I went to speak about 10 miles fiom Centreville at early
candle light-—warm weather--in a dwelling house, the largest congregation being out-of-doors. Ivfelt an open mind, the power of God
fell upon the assembly in open air, and I heard an awful, cry. A
woman had started, jumped over the fence and run, but fell and. rose
again; that woman contended until she found redemption in Jesus
Christ. I _went to a place called Beaver Dams and spoke there ; left
there for Hillsborough, and? spoke there to a large congregation; from
there to Greensborough, and preached in white Methodist Church.
The visit not so prosperous; from there to Boomsborough. We were
much favoured and approbated by the people, andblessed with the
presence of the. Lord in power. I then preached at Cecil Cross
roads in an old meeting house, almost down, to a" large congregation;
and it was warm. {was informed a gentleman rode fourteen miles
to attend that meeting. " - Previous to this the Methodists had almost
died away, a very few excepted at that place, but from that time they
took a rise as I was informed by two young ladies from there. In
about 5 years after I left they built a large Church on that same spot
where the old one stood, and had a fine congregation; from there
brother J. B. appointed a Quarterly Meeting on Mr. John Peakerls
Island, for a society of 60 members, which was composed altogether

of the said /gentlemanls slaves. We were entertained in the bept of

style, had a powerful meeting, and a great manifestation of the power
of God. From there we returned to Easton a second time, and were
entertained by the overseer very highly at Mr. John Pealreyls Island.
Went to Baltimore,_from there I visited Halesi Mills, and preached
three sermons, much favored of the Lord by his presence, after which
I returned to Baltimore. The elder gave me an appointment and
collection, and I returned to Philadelphia. And on Sunday morning
Bishop Allen gave me an appointment in Bethel Church, and we had
a shout in the Camp of Israel.

I had spent six months in Maryland and I only remained in this
city three or four weeks, during which time the Lord was with me,
and opened my way through opposition, butl felt willing to suffer
cheerfully.

Through tribulations deep I
The way to glory is.

I also preached in the Union Church, the Lord verified his promise
according to what he told Mary, to go, he would meet her, w,homsoever I will put forth I will go before, so there was a shaking among
the dry bones. My mind soon became oppressed and craved to travel.
In 1825 I left Philadelphia for a journey through Pennsylvania. I
spoke first at Weston; we had an elder on West Chester Circuit,

:9

1:1

named Jacob Richardson. We had buried a young Christian before
preaching the sermon, and gave me the sacrament sermon in the afternoon. I spoke from rMatt. 26 chap. 26-21 vet. I felt as solemn
as death; much weeping in the Church, tears stole down the faces of
the people. ' '

Jacob Richardson was 1/ spiritual preacherlpi God attended the word
with power, and blessed his labors much on his circuit. "From there
a friend carried me to Downingtown, where I took stage and went on
to Lancaster; but prospect not so good there; they had a new Church
but not paid for; thqproprietor took the key in possession and deprived them of worshipping God in it._. But I spoke in a dwelling house,
and I felt a great zeal for the cause of God to soften that manls heart,
or kill him out of the way; one had better die than many. Brother
Israel Williams, a few days, called to converse with him on the subject, and hegave him the key; he was then on his death-bed, and
died in a short time afterwards, and _we must leave him in the hands
of God, for he can open and no man can shut. I went on to Columbia and spoke in the Church, and my tongue fails to describe the encouragement I met with. The Lord converted poor mourners, convicted sinners, and strengthened believers in the most holy faith.
Godls name be glorified for the display of his saving power- I led
class, held prayer meetings, and left with a good conscience for little
York. The first sermon I preached was in the Church,at 10 olclock
in the morning, from Mat. xxvi, 26, 27, to a large congregation. My
iaith it seemed almost failed me, for when I got in the stand, so hard
vas the task that I trembled, and my heart beat heavy, but in giving
out the hymn I felt strength of mind, and before I got through, I felt
so much of life and liberty in the word, I could but wonder, and in
thr doctrine of Christ it was a sacramental sermon indeed to my soul.
I spent some weeks there, and we enjoyed good meetings and powerftl outpourings of the Spirit. I truly met with both good and bad;
myscenes were many and my feelings various. Ibless the Lord
thatthe prayers of the righteous availeth much. After freeing my
mind I passed on to York Haven, and preached in a School-house to
a whte congregation; 1 was not left alone, but was treated very well
by a vhite Methodist lady. I took lodgings at her house all night ;
next aiernoon took stage for Harrisburg, and when I stopped at the
Hotel agentleman introduced me to the Steward, who took charge of
me andescorted me to Mr. Williams, where I took supper. It was

on a Nev Yearls evening; the colored congregation had expected me ;- I

and mad: a fire in our Church, but being late when I arrived, they
had gone to hear a sermon in a white Methodist Church, and I had
retired t0 tests while in the evening. When they returned they
came afterme, taking no excuse, and I had to come down stairs, go

\

$3 5 3. i.°"3.'a'5éiTt«

'4-2

to the Church, and preach a sermon for them, then 10 olcloclr at night.
The text from Acts xv, 36. Hymn 250th, as follows:

And now my soul another year
Of thy short life is past,

1 cannot long continue here,
And this may be the last.

The effects of the gospel of Christ was no less than at other great
seasons, but was wonderful—backsliders reclaimed and sinners con-verted-there was mourning, weeping, shouting and praising of God
for what he had done. Ipreached_ several sermons, and was well
treated by all circlestof people. We had large congregations of wellbehaved people; and feeling my work done in this part, I proceeded
to Carlisle, Pa. There was a small body of members; I spoke and
led class for them during the time I was there, which was ten days;
felt my discharge of God, and took. stage to Shippensburg. There
was great success at this place; fifteen joined the Church; some of
,the most hardened sinners became serious and reformed. I* was astonished at the wonderful operations of the Spirit, and the immense
congregations. At the tirst sermon the house was crowded, and I

had the good attention of the people. ' A man came into the house ,

intoxicated, and offered to interrupt by speaking, but a gentleman put
him out so quietly that it had no effect upon theineeting. iWhen I
contemplate the goodness of God to the human family, in putting them
in a proper capacity of choosing the way of salvation, I feel sometimes almost lost, to think that God has called such a warm as I to
spread the common Saviourls name. But said the Lord, ill will send
by whom I will"-—praise the Lord who willeth not the death of sirners—-"as I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that they turn 3l'ldr1lV8." , '

I then proceeded on to Chambersburg by stage, and met with one
Rev. Winton, who displayed much of a christian dis'position,'and mnversed freely with me on the most particular points of the God-Hrad,
for my instruction, showing his benevolence. -He knew I wis a
stranger--_he had friends to go to at that place, but he offered tr pay
my bill for a room at the Inn. I never have forgot the goodness of
that gentleman,'who', I believe, to be a great gospel minister. jstopt
at brother Snowdenls, who were very kind to me. ~ThenLord multinued to pour out His Spirit and clearlthe way for me, and also continued to convict, convert, and reclaim the backsliders in heart. There
were very large congregations, both in and out of doors, and great
revivals throughout the circuit. The elders generally treated me
well, for which may the Lord bless them and their labors it his vineyard, and add to the Church such as shall be forever aved from
the power of sin—-may 1 take heed lest I fall, while I tetch others.
Saith the Apostle: "Paul may plant and Apollos water, but God must

4:3

give the irrcreasefi for which I feel thankful. I remained in this
place for some weeks, but being debilitated in body, I left for Philadelphia about the middle of April. On my return, I met with such a
severe trial of opposition, that I thought I never would preach again,
but the Apostle says, iiye are not your own but are bought with a
price? I feel glad that God is able to keep all that put their trust
in him, though the mis-steps of others often interrupt our own way—I always found friends on different parts of Globe. I preached and
led classes on my return. Praise God for his delivering grace—l{Oh
the depth. of the rit:hes*7 of the glory of God, how unsearchable are
his ways; they are past finding out~—-a sea without bottom or shore.
One thing is encouraging, Iii-Vhen he who is my life shall appear, I
shall be like himfi III know my Redeemer liveth, and shall stand
on the latter day upon the earth, and thougl1 worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God.°* Lord help me to keep this confidence. Rev. iichardlvilliams, a gentle and christian-minded man,
treated me well. led would not sufIer me to be destroyed. It is not by
might or by power, but by the Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts. Dear
reader, give ear to the truth, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

It' such a worm as I can spread
\ The common Saviouris name, '
Let him who raised thee from the deed,
Quicken my mortal frame.»

On my return I stopped at~Lancaster; the Church was opened, and I
preached to large congregations, and with powerful success; the dead a
were brought to life by the preaching of the cross of Christ. From
therelI left for Philadelphia;

In July, 1824, Ifelt an exercise of mind to take a journey to Reading, Pa., to speak to the fallen sons and daughters of Adam. cl left .
the city and stopped at Norristown on my way to Reading. I spoke A
in the Academy to a respectable congregation, the same evening I
arrived there. I I felt a degreelof liberty in speaking, though it was 1
a quiet meeting, and I also felt thankful that the Lord would manifest
himself through such a worm as me. Next morning I walked four
miles and stopped at Littleton Morrisis, and preached two sermons on
the Sabbath day, and God struck a woman, and she had liked to have
fallen to the floor; Ispoke in the Dunkardts meeting house. This
ended my visit with them at this time. on Tuesday I walked three
miles to Schuylkill, to take the Canal boat on Wednesday morning.
I met in company with a Presbyterian minister and lady on the boat ;
they treated me very kindly indeed. We arrived in Reading about
7 oiclook in the evening, I was recommended to a family in that
place, the man of which had once confessed religion, but had fallen
from grace, and they were very kind to me. The next morning I onquired for other respectable families of color, and an elderly lady of :

mi

l

"'3A7£{"j:.,_'_*._ at D, g\_ ';§_1u \{ P,,[[i '1 1,'.'\_1'i,1,{ '\ 7. *. *l.$"\5w. 2 %'t.1'._'-.3.§l'c :13

* 44

color that belonged to the white connexion, and the only colored Methodist in the place at that time, conveyed me to Mrs. Murrayls, where
I remainded a while ; then the elderly lady, just mentioned, feeling
interested for me,—went to the proprietors of the Court-house with me,
to see if we could get it to preach in, and like Esther the Queen, who
fasted and prayed, and commanded the men of Jerusalem and the
women of Zion to pray; as she approached the King the sceptre was
bowed to her, and her request was answered to the saving of .Mordica, and all the Jewishlnation. When we approached this gentleman, who was the head Trustee of the Protestant Church,»I showed
him my recommendation, and he answered me, liMadam, you can
have it," and I felt humble to God for the answer. I felt it my duty
to preach to the citizens, and accordingly made an appointment for
Sunday afternoon at 4 ioiclockt i Rev. James Ward, a colored Presbyterian, assembled with us, although he was so prejudiced he ' would
not let me in his pulpit to speak; but the Lord made a way where

there was no way to be seen; there was no person'to'intercede until I

this sister tried to open the way; the men of color, with no spirit of
christianity, remained idle in the enterprize, but we got possession and
we had a large .concourse of people- 1 spoke with the ability God
gave me. 'I met with a family of color, but very respectable, that
formerly had belongedto our Church in Baltimore; they invited me
to their house, and it was a home to me, praise God. I held a meeting in their house previous to holding meetings * in the Court-house ;
the white brethren and sisters assembled with us. We called on a
ministerls lady, and she treated me very kindly, while he, like a
Christian, unitdd and helped to go through with the meetings. I visited the Quaker friends. (amounting to four only) then in the place, and
verypleasant visits they were. A great number of christian friends
called on me, among the rest this ministerls lady, who left a donation
in my hand, consequently the way was made where there was no

K way, but I left in friendship. Praise God I feel the approbation now It is to be lamented, that James Ward, colored, with his over-ruling

prejudice, which he manifested by, saying no woman should stand in

f his pulpit, and with all the advantages of a liberal education, was in

a fewweeks after I left there, turned out of the Church.

On returning to Philadelphia, Istopped at Potts rove and found a Society of colored persons, christians I believe. Vée had solemn meetings there; I felt strength of mind. I met kind friends there, and
visited a Church about six miles off; preached in the morning; the
Lord was with us; of this truth my soul is a witness ; in the afternoon
I preached to a large congregation. Next morning I left for Philadelphia. I continued to preach, paid some short visits about, and was
welcomed home again..

Ileft Philadelphia again for Lewistown, Del., to attend a camp

£5

meeting of the African Methodist 1 Episcopal connexion, of which I
was amember, to be held in GOVE. Paynterts Woods. There was immense -large congregations, and at greater display of Godis powerl
never saw. The people came from all parts, without distinction of
sex, size, or color. and the display of God-is power commenced from
singing; I recollect a brother Camell standing. under a tree singing,
and the people drew nigh to hear hi.m,.and a large number were
struck to the ground before preaching began, and signs and wonders
followed. There appeared to be a great union with the white friends. /
James Towson was the Elder holding the camp; he was in the bloom
of' the gospel-of Christ. But poor brother, may the Lord give him a
Peteris look by the way of mercy. Right Rev. Bidrop Allen was present. The ministry were all for me, and the Elder gave me an ap. pointrnent, and the Governor with a great concourse came to hear the

weak female. My heart beat. my limbs trembled, and my voice was
faint, but I spoke from Eccles- xi, 9, 10. After I took my text, it appeared to me as if I had nothing to do but open my mouth, and the
Lord filled it, consequently I was much encouraged: it was an immense assembly of peopleo '

Content with beholding his face,
I all to his pleasure resigned.

After the camp-meeting was over, the Elder visited another campmeeting, and left me in liberty to preach around the circuit, which I
did, and afterwards returned to Lewistown. and spoke in the old
Methodist meeting-house; I had a great time among my colored brethree. I feel thankful to my friends for than kindness to me, especially. to brother Peter Lewis, whose house was a home to me. I had
much happiness in leading class and prayer meetings; preaching the
gospel seemed to be the great task. , Brother Lewis conveyed me to

lGeorgstown; I spoke in our _c_ol.ore.d_peopleis Church, and we enjoyed
{ourselves very much; the Lord drew people from all quarters; a
wonderful outpouring of the Spirit indeed ; weeping in all directions.
It is a good sign to sea tears of contrition stealing down the cheeks of
the hearers; it makes me believe the wordis. sanctioned. The last
place Was at the head of the river; Ithen returned to Lewistown,
and in a few days I left for Philadelphia. I had a very uncomforta.
ble passage; very sea-sick indeed--the vessel could not come out of
the month of t the creek for a couple of days, in consequence of a severe storm; after which we arrived in the city on Tuesday morning.
After a-short stay in thercity, I took a visit» to Trenton, Dec. 25. I
spoke as usual, for there we had lively meetings, after which I had
no home, but the Lord provides, for sister Roberts and family. were
my friends and took me in, and we often had sweet counsel together.
From there I -went to Princeton. The Elder, Joseph Harper, of our

S

4-6

connexion, was a friend to me, but I had to withstand a beast at Princeton, in opposition, like the one I had'to front on Bucks county circuit;
the former named Thomas Voris, a local preacher, and using the language of the Psalmist prophesy-ing in reference to the Saviour, llmine
equal, my guide hath lifted up his heel againstme." Wehad preached--he invited me to come to his house to hold meetings the next
week, but I was taken sick for a few days, but in the interval, S. R.,
 of Attleborough Circuit, had .a Quarterly meeting.-t They consulted
Q together to stop me from preaching in Princeton ; so his door was shut,
Lie but bless the Lord, another was opened, Brother Thomas Vinsant,
.5 his sisterls husband, a Christian man, opened his house. We had a
"r powerful time. I came in the town on Saturday, the next day I
walked two milesand spoke twice Ittwas Thomasl appointment on
Sabbath morning, and he had but two persons to meet him in class.
An invitation came to me to make an appointment» for Wednesday
j'. /night in the Coloured Presbyterian Church, upon the grant of Rev.
*' I Mr. Woodhull, elder of that order in Princeton? Thos; Vorris, thong h
a Methodist, was like a roaring-lion--went to Elder Woodhall for
him to stop it, as I was informed. But the meeting went on, it was
a respectable, and comfortable congregation. I preached and led
class and prayer meetings, and read, and explained the Scriptures.
We had mourning and rejoicing, and I saw the kingdom of Satan fall.
When Brother J. H. came round again, from some cause,'he removed
Thomas from that class,-as they would not meet him, and placed him
over one of live or to six personsyalso impeached him, taking his license from him, and left him only verbally licenced. Glory to God
for his Divine power. I do not rejoice for his downfall,tbut for Godts
grace which enables me to stand against the enemies of the Cross.
Glory to God, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for-"it is the
power of God unto salvation. I I spokeifrom Ephe; 2d chap.'8th ver.
felt life and liberty in word and doctrine. Thank God for the victory, Brother Oalrham, one of the Elders of the Coloured Presbyterian Church, invited me to their house, and hintselfand wife treated
~ me like Christians, which, I believe, they were; my heart glows toward them. I held a' meeting in a dwelling house.

Jan., 1827. Contemplating on the great responsibility I owe to my
God for my stewardship, I feiin would go round the Cross or shrinkbeneath the load, but I rest upon the promises of God, whichare as
firm of the pillars of . heaven. My labors here cease a littie. =

April, 1827- My health having been bad, Ihavle not travelled so
largely, and in this, as in some -other momentis of reflection, Ifelt
somewhat oppressed, and I- resorted to the'Hymri Book for something
to suit my feelings; the poetry as follows:

I ?ii'¢ 3

Hit:

iir.:.V=  i "

.-1. Soon as I heard an Father say,
Ye children see my grace,

p, , '. I u

I

:47 _

My heart replies, without delay,
Pll seek my fathers face.

2. Let not thy face he hid from me,
Nor frown my soul away,
i * God of my life I ny to thee
. - In a distressing day.

Sn Should friends and kindred, near and dear, t
. Leave me to want and die.
_ K My God will make my life his care,
B And all my wants supply.

4. M fainting flesh had died with grief,
ad not my soul believed
Tosee thy grace prove a relief,
Nor was my hope. deceived.

3 5. Wait on the Lord, ye trembling Saints,
~ And lteep your conre e up,, ,
He'll raise,your s irit w en it faints,
And far excee your hope. ' t

However I went-to Baltimore in the same month with the Bishop
and Elders, and enjoyed myself under great preaching, and preached
several sermons. Praise God, and the» slain of the»Lprd appeared to
be many. After. Conference, my-mind led me over to_. Eastern. Share
the second time; spent a few» days with the Church, (Peter D.
Schuman, Elder of thecharge) and then returned to Baltimore, from
there to the city of Philadelphia, and then made some short visits from
40 to 60, and from that to«100 milearound about; than down to Lewistown Camp-meeting, the second time ; then to a Camp-meeting at
Mount Ephraim, N. J . The last of August I left -for New York Camp,
on arriving there I spoke once or twice. The, satneas at otherfplaces,
our camp-meeting was not as great as Ihave seen before. _ I spoke
in both the Churches. We had a good time together, rejoicing in the
Lord. I left thensfort Albany; had a pleasant passage up the North
river, one hundred, and sixty miles; thermountains and their stupendous looks preached to me in my journey through. Oh, the wisdom of
God, and how marvellous in our eyes; enough to convince the infidel,
yea, the Atheist, thatthere is some first cause. From the effects produced, look at the ingenuity of- mankind, which actually comes from
God, and. is displayed in building steatnboats, and other great novelties
in mechanism. -We accomplished the route the same; day we started,
and I found myself entirely among strangers. But I made inquiry for
Methodist friends,» and found btzother Streeter,«a coloured family, very ,.
respectable» They treated me very kind ; they were under the white -l
Bishop, andl under the coloured. But the same faith, same doctrine, '
same Baptismgeame spirit. Glory to God. Among the coloured people, the-Bipfiils had the ascendancy. There was a large ball prepared for me. and. we had a large congregation of different denominations. 1. spokefrorn ,these words and this Gospel of the kingdom

'V. =u>=.= *

//i

,.
kl
t,

r
i
\

48

shall be preached unto all the world as for a witness, and then shall
the end come. God owned the word, sinners screamed; some fell
to the floor, others wept, while Christians re'oiced. 'A lady of color
was present, though she was a member o the Dutch Presbyterian
Church ; her husband belonged -to no Church. but was under an exercise of mind. The Lord reached his heart, he mourned more than
three days. They sent for me to come to their house. I paid them
a visit, and held prayer meeting at their house. That Sabbath two
weeks he joined the Methodist Church. I spoke three times the first
Sabbath afternoon 3 we had-alarge congregation, at night still larger.
Text, Never man spake like this man. a Godls spirit was poured out in
a miraculous manner. On the ensuing third day evening I spoke
again, from these words. And came seeking fruit on the tree and
found none. To all appearance there was nothing done, but God directed the word to the heart of a little girl, agentlemanis daughter,
between eleven and twelve years of age. She joined the Church before I left there. A good old Missionary, by the name of Mitchell,
came to the city before I left, and preached three sermons, in which
there was a great revival. i The Elder appointed prayer meetings,
north and south of the city of Albany. I preached two or three
sermons in a school house, the last I spoke was in Brother Streeterls
house, from St. Matt. Chap, 21 yer. 12th. 1
fortable visit I had there in the discharge of my duty. This Methodist preacher, Mitchell, had at book with him called the Essence of
John Steward, a coloured man, with his miraculous call to the ministry, the first one who succeeded in Christianizing the Methodist Indians in Sandusky and that province, and he sold them in Albany, I

and it seemed to have itsdesired efeet also with the revival, in
encouraging us to hold a fast. .

How good to contemplate or to think the heathen has caught the
sound of salvation through the name of Jesus, our Lord. I saw a
goodly number added to the Church on Sabbath-day. I sti.ll*continued engaged in my mind with the Lord, in theirhehalf, when I was
informed that they had three and four of an evening at their prayer
meetings,then "my mind felt at liberty to leave for Schenectady.
Sister Streeter rode with the fourteen miles; I stopped eleven days,
at which place there was a large upper room that was appropriated. for
a preaching place, where I spoke to a small number of" coloured persons several times. They were under the white elder, he was a
friend to me, and appointed a meeting for me in the white Brother's
house to speak for them. We had a favourable time. But the people, feeling an uninterested spirit in propagating the religion of Jesus
Christ, I left the dust with them. Got on board a Canal boat for Utiea,
there I met with my own connexion, African Methodist Episcopal

Church, we had a prosperous time. i I spoke site had prayer meetings

I thank God for the com~ .

49

on board of the Canal boat. There was a pasture there notwithstanding the difliculties of this life and the people being hunted like
partridges on the mountain. It deprives a manls usefulnhss among
the people, but the work of the Lord went on, and there is no weapon formed by the enemy that can stop the work of God. Therefore
we have nothing to fear. We have large and re.°pectablecongregations, and I felt strengthened in warning man to flee from the wrath
to come. If signs and wonders did not follow sometimes, I must.certainly die, but glory to God for refreshing showers. I led class, had
prayer meetings, and took my passage on another canal boat for R0chester; had a pleasant passage. I soon found some Methodists, and
our local Elder was then a smart preacher. I was there three or four
weeks, and he treated me very kindly and opened my way. They
erected a new brick church, basement for schools; the corner-stone
was laid while I was there. The elder was a man of good repute ;
eople of color of different denominations, but much united together.
he elder held the charge from there to Buffalo, he had then a .
Quarterly Meeting on hand. I left Rochester with him and rode
about seventy miles. Next morning I left Lewistown and rode seven
miles, crossed the Lakes, on the British side. When we left Rochester the snow was ankle deep, when ten mile from Lewjstown,
it became dry and hard, and when we crossed the Lakes it was clear
and cold, and the air very pure. I told the elder this was the first
timeI ever breathed pure air. I walked about a mile and the first
houseI stopped at was sister Holmes?. Ifelt strange and lonely.
I waited to see if the peace of God would abide on the house. Previous to my being introduced, I arose from my chair and the power
of God fell upon the people. and, it seemed to me, that God answered
me. I was fully convinced that God would make bare his arm, in
this part of his moral vineyard. We had a Church in Niagara ; the
elder made an appointment there, and forty or fifty miles round the
circuit, being new about six hundred miles from Philadelphia. I felt
theloss of my former companions and friends, the elder and deacon,
in two days time left for Buffalo, to hold a quarterly meeting in York
state about eevenly miles. I commenced to speak for the people, and
God owned the word, and I saw many displays of his power-I-the
people in Niagara seemed to me to be a kind and Christian like peo- /.«
ple. The white inhabitants united with us, and ladies of great re- I
nown. The slaves that came there felt their freedom, began to see I
the necessity of education, and hired a white man to teach them to
read and write among themselves, and have Sabbath schools. I am E
astonished to see so many there that came from a free state, and not I
take more interest in instilling the science of education among their
fellow beings. The winter was co1d—I never had experienced such

—but very healthy. I went to a town called Niagara. I spoke
450

in a dwelling house. The next night I spoke in the Old Methodist
Church to_a large congregation of respectable people. There were
three ladies, one the widow of a great Judge, and one daughter and
sister of first education; they sympathized with me in this important
work of the Gospel of Christ. They assembled with us in our meeting. A little girl about 8 or 9 years of age experienced religion apd
prayed in public and attended to their private devotlon so much or
early piety; when the child the way he should go and when he
gets old he will not depart from it. But, it is to be lamented, that
so few of our children experience this early piety' the cause we
must try to find out and avoid the 8:1 effects, and nbt bring up our
children in so much pride and heat enisml. We _ as a people, are
generally poor and cannot support so many change; of .fashion; they
grow up and crave it, and oftimes substitute evil practices to support
thl selves either girls or boys and often bring a stigma upon their
paerzhts anh family connexionrl, though very respectable. . Let us
bring up our children in industry, for work is honorable, and- it 18 the
way to get riches and to keep them. I travelled back and forward
again from Niagara to Buffalo, and had regular appointments in our
Churches. . We had a great opposition among the coloured people,

I one trying to excel the other in point of eminence. One of our

preachers left us 0 the promise of forty dollars per year. Poor
man, he was like Simon Magus who perished with his money. Our
Circuit rider was absent on the Sunday of the split, but the Lord was
with us. I spoke three times to the remaining part of the congrega-»
tion, which was increasedmuch by a largebody of bystanders, and
great good followed; and we continued to, sow and gather for two or
three months, and the Lord blessed our labors abundantly. Feeling
I had discharged my duty, I left and crossed the Lake from Buffaloe
to Fort George, and spoke about eight miles from there, it was cold
and snowed very fast—it was four olclock In the afternoon--the congregation had been there and gone. We were in a sleigh, and the

i driver got lost 3 we all brought up in a swamp, among the fallen tree

tops, but we turned about and found a_ house and lodged all night ;
and spoke next morning at eleven olclock to a quiet congregation,
and the Lord was with us, though composed of all denominations.
I appointed another meeting and rode about eight miles on horseback
—it snowed and was very sleety—after I spoke to the people I left
them for good and made an appointment for the Indians; two of the
chiefs called atwhere lstopped to see me. I asked them to pray
for us; they complied, but done it in their own tongue. Ifelt the power
of God in my own heart. Then they held a council about it, and

granted my visit at Buffalo village, about three miles from Buffalo ,

city. We rode and got there before their worshipping hour, their
school had not dismissed, after a while they dismissed school--of 50

51

children--andias they gathered to worship I 'saw an old chief come,
he stood and prayed very devoutly. tears running down his check. I
told them I had not come to worship with them, and wanted to preach
for them after their worship ended. They held a council and they
agreed I should preach for them, but I could not help admiring the
ways as well as gestures of the children. The teachers bring them
up in the English language and dress some of themin the English
style, t the greatest number are clad in the Indian style; those of
the old dians in their blankets. Some of them met me from seven
or eight miles round—they filled the house. It was in the month of
March---it rained and snowed--yet they walked in their moccasins,
and some bare-headed-they made a large congregation. Their Elder or missionary had gone to teach another tribe that day, and he
only taught them very plainly, and read out of pamphlets the experiences of -others. I commenced by giving out the hymn in our language, and the interpreter spoke in their tongue. Hymn thus, 0 for

a thousand tongues to sing, &c. They sung it beautiful,--two long
beaches of them sung by note (their books printed in their own language) a very familiar note tune, such as we use in congregations. I
spoke plain and deliberate and very pointed, the interpreter spoke it
afterme in the Indian tongue, and one of the women cried out Amen.

cMuoh weeping among them, dear reader, take notice, notwithstanding they are a nation revolted from Israel,'and would not bé governed.
Yet they can be civilized and christianized. We might call them
heathens, but they are endowed with a Christian spirit. I felt happy
in mylvisit ; the missionary wished me to speak for them that even-.
ing, but I had an appointment that night at Buffalo, after which my
mind was calm and serene. I left on Tuesday, 1st of April, on my
return for Philadelphia, and arrived home May 18th.

That year I travelled two thousand three hundred and twenty-five
miles, and preached one hundred and seventy-eightsermons. Praise
God for health and strength, 0 my soul, and magnify his name for
protection through various scenes of life. .

God of my life whose gracious ower
Through various deaths my son has led,

Or turned aside the fated hour,
Or lifted up my sinking head.

' While I was in Buffalo, a journey to the West was hewed to me
so plain that I could not stop in the city of Philadelphia but five weak;
only, then left for the westerntcountry. I started in a mail stage, and
stopped first at Westtown and spoke in our own connexion Church,
and then at West Chester in the old Methodist Episcopal white connex.
ion. We had a large congregation of quiet hearers. I felt liberty
but no great displaysyof Godls power. I had several meetings in dif52

ferent places, visiting the sick. Having discharged my duty [left
tears and proceeded on to Old Lancaster and spent some days. We
have a good Church there, and great meetings--the word of the Lord
grew and was multiplied. God poured out his spirit upon us, and
we had a shout in the camp. I then started for Columbia, Pa. The
people are much divided. and it looked very gloomy, but God directed
me and he commanded his disciple to be a sheep among wolves, and
harmless as doves, notwithstanding the darkness, God aided me in
speaking to the people, and aided them in hearing, and his name was
praised. The people united, temptations and clouds were vanished
away. Then we sung, prayed, spake. and shouted in the spirit, this is
true Methodism. I led class, visited the sicli and was much favoured
with the presence of the Lord. Our faith was increased, our hopes
confirmed. The preachers were kind and treated me well, and by
their help I travelled on my journey to Harrisburg. Feeling thankful
for the visit I had paid it seemed gloomy here, but I spoke there next
day. I took stage and rode to Chambersburg, and spent some days
there, and proceeeed on to Fredericktown, Maryland, and spoke there
from there to Hagerstown, Macallansburg, and, I must confess, It do
not remember of ever seeing such a people, for, it seemed strong
drink had been their ruin. The circuit minister was there, and we
had some signs and wonders to follow after the preaching of the cross
of Christ, and I trust to meet some of them on the banks of deliverance, and help to swell the notes of redeeming love. After the
preacher left me l took stage for Pittsburgh, at eight in the evening,
rode all night until eight in the morning. I was kindly treated, there
were other persons in the stage, fouriof them gentlemen, a_sI thought
there was one who talked a great deal, wise in his own conceit, about
religion, and from that be displayed a quantity of degraded principle,
with disgusting language, at which I made several sharp replies, and
in my way, reprimanded him and the other gentlemen looked on him
with silent contempt, .at which ~ he got ashamed, and afterwards
treated me with great politeness, and I was comfortable and arrived
in Pittsburgh at 5 olclock in the afternoon. I went to Church that
night and heard a sermon from one of my brothers. I met with six
or seven ministers, very friendly, and treated me like Christians. I
remained in Pittsburgh six weeks, there had been one or two revivals
previous to my visit, especially the winter before I arrived, last day
of August, 1820. My labors commenced--the field was large-but
the Lord was with us——this gave me much encouragement, Iwas
not ashamed of the Gospel—it is the power of God unto salvation,
to every one that believes, both Jew or Gentile. We had very good
meetings, the Elder and preachers, all received me with one accord-—
thanks to God for his divine goodness—l felt moved by the Lord to
pay Wheeling a visit although we had no society there, I arrived and

53

found huta small class of coloured people with the whites, an old
gentleman of color with the elder in charge granted me the Church /
—the elder being a great preacher of college order. We had a large
congregation; I spoke for them once, and gave an exhortation at
another time, and felt no difficulty on that head", and after that they
could not treat me well enough. And, on the ensuing Sabbath, I
helped to lead class; and we all enjoyed ourselves, and on Tuesday
I left for Washington, *according as I had promised our elder before I
left him. On my arrival there I met kind friends, and a large congregation of coloured people. On Lordsl day Imet the class; the

A people spoke with humility—it was a melting down time-I--in the Spirit of God} preached several sermons, visited the sick, and, in this
spirit strove to uphold the aged. Feeling a discharge of my duty I
left for Steubensville, Ohio, and met a small society——some true Christians there; no Church there ; the Baptists granted their Church; we \/
had meetings there, and the Lord was with us—quiet congregationsand the word had effect in the hearts of sinners--and believers were
established. I stopped a few days and left in the name of the Lord.
I proceeded on to Mt. Pleasant, and arrived on seventh day evening,

and the trustee gave me an appointment on Sabbath morning. At

11 olclockl was feeble in both body and mind, but the Lord was
with us according to promise, think not what ye shall say, but open
thy mouth and I will fill it saith the Lord, be caused ashaking among
the dry bones, that morning. I think if any creature has a right to
praise God I have, and that in thankfulness, and I love him because
he first loved me. Bless his name. I preached several sermons to
large gatherings, but revivals not so manifest as at other places. I had
some difficulty in that journey, but only what iscommon among us ;
for many times deceitful persons will set the Church on fire but can't
burn it up. I I '
Moses saw it as a bush in a flame, yet not consumed. We have to
be tried as gold in the fire. After my visit was out a brother (leader
in the Church) conveyed me ten miles on my way, I stopped at" Sinclairsville; there was an appointment published on the next evening.
At 7 olclock I spoke in the Court house to a large concourse of well
behaved and respectable citizens. I felt at liberty and left in peace
of mind which makes the work sweet. I was aided on to Cap-teen,
a settlement of coloured people; some from the lower counties; but
they are industrious, and have a Church of their own, and were about
to send their children to school, I held several meetings and there was
some very respectable people of colour-and the Lord was with us
—I stopped with an aged family, very res ectable, they treated me
very kind, and between 2 and 3 weeks, I left in peace with God
and man, and went to Barnsborough and spoke in the white.Methodist Episcopal Church, fromthenoe to Zanesville, at which place I

54

felt much discouraged from the appearance of things. I did not
think of tarrying there, but at the first appointment I chose the words
" I am not ashamed of the Gospelil--"Paul. The room was very small

. for the number of people, after which an old man well scented with

ardent spirits, tried to give an exhortation. I was astonished at the
scene, the people laughed, I got up and went out. I tried to labor
again at night and exhort the young ladies to the evil consequences of
ill-behavior in the Church of God; after which we had better order,

and the old gentleman was discovered to be intoxicated with spiritous

liquor, and was disowned from the Church, after which there was a
great revival took place among the white Methodists, both rich and
poor. .

Mrs. Dillin, who once was a Friend, and now a member of the
Church, spoke to the Trustees and Ministers, and they opened the
Church and I spoke twice in that Church, and after that I spoke in
West Zanesville, back of that place, and I still remained among my
colored friends, and they seemed much revived; after which they
formed a Resolution to build themselves a Meeting House. A Quaker
Friend, so called, presented them with a piece of ground to build one
on, which they did. Glory to God, for his glory stood over the doors
of the Tabernacle. Many were convicted, and converted, and many
added to the old Methodist Church. and Ileft there on New-Years
day for for New-Lancaster, where we had a Church, standing on a
frame of a house for three or four years, and had not been used to
preach in ; but the Lord opened the way, and a great revival took
place among the people, and their eyes being opened, they with willing minds commenced and built a new Church, and God blessed their
labors. I preached several Sermons and led Class, &o. My common
way is to visit the sick and afllicted in whatsoever city I may stop in,
that I may get my spiritual strength renewed in the Lord. Although
I preached the Gospel through the Commission of my Lord, yet, I have
nothing to boast of. g '

I opened a Love-Feast in the said Church in New Lancaster. We
held Prayer Meetings. I spoke in the Whitels Church also. The
people were very'friendly. I met them in Class, and after the lapse
of eleven days, I left for Columbus, -The Preachers generally were
very kind to me. Both white and colored. A worthy brother conducted me on further. It snowld, and I was very cold, but the Lord
was with us, and my mind was freeld. But notwithstanding, I met
an antagonist, who was ready to destroy my cgracter, and the prinoiples of the Work that God ' saw good to m e me instrumental of
doing in his name, which caused me to open the case to the Trustees
and Preaches, who were much astonished at him to be preaching four
or five years with malice in his heart. I was favored to see him in
the morning before he went away, that was the first time he had spoke

55

zu me anything like a Christian in that time. He knew from the dust
period I went to him to satisfy his mind. But his heart was bitter.
felt his spirit like a viper. But the word of the Lord was verified at
that time also. " When the Tempter raises a flood against you, I will set
up a standard against'him." He told me he had senta letter to ;Pitts..
burg to stopine, although I had my Licence from the Bishop, with his
own signature. I told him he was a worse enemy to me than I was
aware of, and I was ashamed-of him, ' professing to be a Preacher in
charge, and setting such an exam is ina strange land, and begged him
/ " to throw away his prejudices, or lire would never obtain the Kingdom
of Heaven. He left me in a. flash, and I saw him no more until Conference. I wrote a letter to Bishop Allen to let,him_know of my
grievances, as I was innocent of any crime. I felt under no obligation
to bear_ the reproaches of progressing Preachers; and I svanted it settled at Conference. But it was looked upon with little, effect by the
Preachers and Leaders. ' I laid it before the Conference, and it was
settled. But I tarried all winter. Preached, led Class, visited the
sick, &c., with great success- I bless God for the witness of a good
conscience. Old Sinners were awakened, and constrained to come
trembling, and enquiring the way to Zion. ,

L. W., a respectable brother from Chillicothe, had never heard a
woman preach, and was much opposed to it. A,u appointment was
given me, and when I went into -thedesk and commenced reading the
hymn to commence the worship, he looked at me la while, then got
up and went out and stood until I had nearly got through the hymn,
and then he came in, when I asked him to pray for us but he refused.
I prayed myself, after which I took my text, and felt much liberty in
speaking in the spirit indeed. And after meeting he came_and shook
hands with me in the spirit of a christian, and next day he came and
confessed to me his prejudices hadtbeen so great, so much like his

I father, that he could not unite with me,.but now he believed that

./ God was no respecter of persons, and that a woman as well as a man,

when called of God, had a right to preach. He afterwards became a
licensed preacher, and we parted in peace. I took the stage and left
for Chilicothe, but there was but one house that would open for me
in the city, although I had my recommendation with me. As soon as
that friend heard of me she met me in christian bonds, and her house
was my home, her husband being a man of christian qualifications,
and I went on my mission doing my Fatheris will. I spoke once in
the week and on Sabbath afternoon, to crowded houses; it was like
a camp-meeting, and twenty-one lay under the power of God at one
time; after preaching we called them up to he prayed for; some got
religion that day and some on the next Sabbath, and the father L. W.
became one of my best friends, and a deer of the work. There was
large fields of labor open to my view, and I visited both colored and

56

white, andrnany were concerned about sanctitication. I was with

/ them about six weeks, during which time I had an interview with a

lady, who informed me she had a call to preach the everlasting gospel
of Christ. She was a Presbyterian by profession, and she told me she
feared the church government. But the greatest objection was, her
husband was a Deist by profession; she also told me of her experience she passed through; it was a broken heart and a contrite spirit.
God answers the prayers of such a supplicant, but she could not enjoy
that sweet fulness of religion in that situation of life, although very
rich as regards this wcrldts goods; also knowing that gold and silver
should vanish away, but the word of God should endure forever. And
some feeltheir labors a long time before it comes to perfection. Our
Methodist sisters established 3. prayer meeting, and the people worked
in the unity of the spirit. and much good was done in the name of the
Holy child. Glory to God for What my heart feels while I use my
pen in hand. I felt peace of conscience and left Chilicothe for)H_illsborough to meet a quarterly meeting of W. C., be being Elder at that
place; the Governor and his family residing there, six in number, were
all Methodists, and one son a preacher; they had the spirit of christians. The trustees of the Methodist church opened their doors and
gave us liberty to hold our quarterly meeting and lovefeast in their
church, and we had a good, time. The friends mostly gave me a
small donation, which was very thankful; after which I left there for
Cincinnati, where I spoke to a large congregation. I stop't at Williamsport and spoke in the white Methodist church to a respectable
congregation; I felt liberty in the spirit of God, and we left there
about daybreak inpthe morning. All nature seemed in silence (except
the chirping notes of a little bird.) A few rods from us a Panther
screamed very loud and sudden, but we could not see him, it being
a dense thicket on either side of the road, but the unseen arm of God
sheltered us from harm; one of the gentlemen seemed quite used to
hearing them. We arrived safe in Cincinnati about 11 olclock ; the
Elder W. C. wasvery liberal in giving me appointments, and the

_ friends were very affectionate to me, and large congregations attended.

I remained there some time, feeling to be blessed in my weak endeavors to a great extent. The next day after I arrived there, one-of our
sisters fell sick and I had the pleasure of visiting her on her death-bed,
and in her last hour she told me in presence of others, her peace was
made, and raised her hands toward heaven and told us she was going.
This is the end of sister Crosby; who can doubt this faithful saying,
by grace ye are saved. A month or more previous, she had buried
a daughter, who was a member of our church; before she left the
world. she called her young companions and caused them to promise
to meet her in heaven, and then closed her eyes triumphing in death.
Brother Crosby laid the heavy task on me to preach their funeral ser5'7

mons, which I did, as feeble a worm as I am, on Sabbath morning.
Words of my choice were found in 2d Ephe. 8th v:-—llFor by grace
ye are saved through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of
God," whichof itself is a sermon to all that believe—glory to God,
Christ has overcome' the world. And while laboring many tears were
shed both in joy and sorrow. But it's better to be one day in the house
of the Lord than a thousand in the tents of thewiclted. ~

Another circumstance worthy of notice, was a young man whose
heart was in the world and in worldly affairs, or the pursuits of nature, and diverted much of his time on Sabbath days on the Mississippi River, fighting against all impressions of the Spirit of grace, until God stopped him by the heavy hand of his power, in a death-bed

afiliction. After some time he began to inquire the way to Zion. His" .

mother was also a stranger to the blood of Jesus, but wished me to
come and see her son ; being conducted to the house, I found him
looking like an anatomy: I asked him if he believed in Christ and
his all sufficiency to save; his answer was in the aflirmative. We
had prayers with him; and there was a display of Godis power; a
white woman screamed and nearly fell to the floor, but strove hard to
keep from it. And on that day he acknowledged his Saviour to be
reconciled to histpoor soul. Praise God!dmy soul replied. Afterwards
he wished me to hold a meeting with as many persons as the room
would contain with him, which I accepted; one day and night after,
he departed this life, and requested me to preach his funeral sermon
at the house before the procession moved to the ground. [spoke
from the 14th chap. 13 v., and we had a solemn time; ).u may anticipate the weight of that important task, but we had joy in the
midst of sorrow, and this was the last of James Thompson. I also
left his sister in the last stage of consumption, and she confessed to be
in favor with the Lold. Having finished my visit, I left in steamboat
for Dayton. I spoke three times, and tried to preach the whole salvation, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. The
members of the New-light church deny the divinity of Christ. Once
I spoke in a large dwelling of Dr. Esley, after which himself and-wife
went on a journey to Indiana and wished me to go with them, but I
was deprived by a previous engagement, having to attend a campmeeting at Cap-teen. After my return to Urbanna, Ohio, I took stage
for Springfield, and from there to Columbus, and spoke several times.
The Elderls class consisted of about twenty; a young man and myself
led the class in 1829. The Elder W. C. ordered a camp-meeting for
the Cincinnati people, and~<the brother at Cap-teen and Rev. Bishop
Brown, held a conference, and we had a very large camp-meeting,
and manifestations of great good, and at the close of the Love-feast,
there were thirty-two or three testified that they experienced the love
of God. The people of color came out forcibly, and the preachers

.58

/ preached in power. My health was much destroyed by speaking so
often and laboring so very hard, having a heavy fever preying upon
my system. I was called upon to speak at a camp-meeting, I could
scarcely accomplish the task, and I was obliged to take my bed (having also lost my appetite) as soon as my sermon was over. After a
while my particular friends conveyed me to Mount Pleasant in a carriage; the day was pleasant, but in the woods at night we were evertaken by a dreadful storm of thunder, wind and rain, but through the
will of Providence I escaped the inclemency of the weather and stopped at brother and sister Hanceis; after being medically renovated, Ifulfilled an appointment, and commenced to visit the sick in that place.
but was arrested by a heavy fever. A physician was called, and by
daybreak my senses left me, so severe was the disease, which caused
the physician to visit me two and three times a day, which proved to
be the bilious fever. After my mind returned _and became calm, I
was convinced that it would not terminate in death at that time. I
had faith in the Lord. «Eleven days I lived on rice water and chicken
tea without salt, at the end of which time I felt an appetite to eat. I
had been under a deep sallavation which proved a blessing in effecting a cure. After a lapse of four weeks I was enabled to get out of
that house, but very weak; my money was short; I left seven dollars
with them hoping the Lord may bless them; then I returned to brether Hance, and was well treated. Icommenced preaching, though
very weak, and I. accepted an appointment on Sabbath in the white
Methodist Episcopal church, to a well-behaved congregation, about
ten miles fstancc. I had to be carried to the -carriage in a blanket
and returned the same way, and was well taken care of by brother
and sister Moor and family, for which may the Lord bless them in
basket and store. Elder Jones gave me an invitation to go ,to Pittsburg and try to gather a little strength, whichl accepted, and was
kindly taken care of by brother Lewis and wife, which I very much
profitted by the assistance of hisfamily doctor, which he called in
amid the blessings of Providence; this was in May, 1830. I then
commenced to labor amid the souls of the people, which are precious.

f After gaining strength in body and mind in my recovery, I spoke to a

. }good number of colored friends on the Hill, and they were about to

[V3 build a church for worshipas they owned the property. When I was
able to travel, one of the preacheris wives and a kind brother conducted me on to Washington, from which I took stage for Mount Pleasant; labored for them, enjoyed a love-feast with them, and in a few
days left for St. Clairsville and the next successive place; then took
stage for Zanesville, continuing to labor around the circuit, and then
went to Columbus. I was invited to attend a quarterly meeting at
Urhana; we had quite a profitable waiting upon the Lord; it makes
me glad when they say let us go up to the house of the Lord. After

59.

trying to rest myself four or live weeks. a brother preacher, in company with brother Stewardls widow and myself, visited the Indians,
she having lived nine years in Sandusky. We heard them preach in
their own language, butl could only understand when he said Jesus
Christ or God, and the interpreter had gone to conference. I spoke

i to them in English, was entertained in an Indian family, and that very

kindly, after whichl shook theidust off my feet and left them in
peace. Thank the Lord for Urbaaa. The Elder appointed a campmeeting at Hillsborough; it was nothing to boast off; after whichl
turned towards Philadelphia. Brother Rains paid my stage fare on to
Springfield ; there I endeavored to speak to a small and very quiet
congregation 3 from thence to Columbus and paid seven dollars and a
half, and left for Wheeling; stopped at a camp-meeting at the request
of the Wheeling friends, but it seemed that both the golden wedge
and Babalonish. garment was there, as the wheel could not turn, for
Christ said I could not do many mighty works on account of your un' belief; the Devil was at work, but the Lord was above.

I spoke alt Wilkesbarre to both white and colored, Baptists and
Methodists, and had an invitation to preach in the afternoon, had good
congregations, and tears of contrition were visible in many places.
I had life and liberty. I next visited Wheeling, stopped a few days
and labored several times, which was much blessed, and the Eld
organized a new class of twenty-one young men, brother and [myself led them the first time, and they seemed very zealous. But in a
few months the severity of the Laws stopped their religious privileges,
which is an honor to any people ; while sin is a. repi-oadi to any Nation. I then paid $10 and took passage to Hagerstown. My health
was poor. Passengers consisted of three white ladies, members of the
Episcopal Church, and one old gentleman, (a Deist) 73 years of age,
who would reproach Religion, until I told him that Solomon spoke of
a man 70 years of age, and called him a tfool,—and exhorted him to
get religion; for Godls name is worthy to be praised by all intelligent

eings. I have found Him to be a strong hold in the day of trouble.
We arrived at Hagerstown in eight or ten days. lWe had a Meeting
House there. I met the Elder, Joseph Harper, Deacon John Cornish.

  
 

« Had good Metings ; a visit of the Holy Ghost. The house was crowded,

and many hundred sinners struek to the heart,—back-sliders were reclaimed—-and believers built up in the most Holy Faith. Praise God
for so much. I spoke to a very respectable congregation of white
people about eleven miles distant.

" Go, preach my Gospel saith the Lord,
Bid the whole world my grace receive;
He shall be sav'd that trusts in word,
He shall be damnld that wonlt elieve."

I then took my passage for Fredericktown. The Society was small,
but willing to encourage the Gospel of Christ. We had meeting. in a

- so
large upper room of a building; the congregation was of both white
,. and colored persons. I felt life and liberty, and an increase of my

"1 labors. In about ten days sinners were awalrened—backs|iders reclaimed-and believers built up in the most Holy Faith. The white
Preachers threatened to turn them out of their Church for going to the
% African Methodist Episcopal Church. I thought when war commencedit was time to run. Oh! what prejudice and stupidity : for love is
the fulfilment of the Law. i
We had a remnant of our Connexiontfrom Virginia, years before, but
through some contention among themselves, the owner of the Church
took it from them, run up a chimney in the centre of the house, and
rented it out to different families to live in. He also went into the
yard, kickld over the head and foot boards of the graves, and levelled
them down, and made a garden of the grave-yard. But the Lord afflicted him even unto death, and he was buried a day or two before I
arrived at Frederick-town.) '
But God has a people everywhere; a remnant that never has bowed
their knee to Baal. A Lutherian brother, (minister,) interceded in
their behalf, (the Church being offered for sale, ) and receiving One
Hundred Dollars from the Trusteesl hands, bought it in for them, and
a firm Deed being made for the Trustees, the Elder taking charge of
it. So much, for Delivering Grace.

it God moves in a mysterious way
His wonders to perform;
He lants His foot-steps in the sea
An rides upon the storm."

I next started for Washington City; took passage in the stage about
1 olclock in the afternoon, and arrived about 1 olclock in the morning,
and the clerk of the odioe conveyed me to a very respectable colored
family, (Mr. Adamlsl) who kindly received me, and continued so to
do, but I met my antagonist in that place, who strove to stop my Ministerial Mission; but Right is more than Might. Bishop Allen beinga
man of renown, and having Grace abounding in his heart, he sent a
letter to his son-in-Law who resided in that place, to intercede for me
during my stay, which he did- Truly, the way seemed somewhat
dark at first. I saw revivals among the members, though the congregation was small, the Lord raised me up plenty of friends among them,
for God is all in all. The Elder in charge was not to be seen until
the last Sabbath I was there. He preached in the morning, but'I was
ashamed of his conduct towards me, through prejudice, while he wasa
leading man for the people. Reader, judge for thyself. But my God
gave me ,a part and lot in this matter, saying, it Behold, I send you as
Sheep among Wolves, be not afraid :--Lol I am with you always ;--even unto the end of the world." Praise God for his endurable promises. In a few days Ileft for Baltimore in stage. Some part of the
rout was by Rail Road. Pleasant journey; arrived safe in Baltimore,

61

engaged a colored manls hack, which conveyed me to Mrs. A. H!s.,
to',whom I ever shall feel indebted; for herself and family were some
of my warmest-hearted friends. Truly, I, must say ft the Lord remem.
bered me in my lowest state. The Elder and Preachers of Baltimore
with one accord, gave me appointments, and we had prosperous Meetings. We had a female speaker there, who seemed very zealous I
asked permission to take her into the pulpit. which was granted, and
she spoke much in the spirit of God—which was attended with power.
she being a woman of God; deportment graceful, and her ideas in
Scripture very correct, and they were all very much pleased with her.
She was a Teacher in the Sabbath School, at which place she often
took occasion to extend her usefulness in speaking for the cause of
God, fo which she suffered much opposition, even from her husband ;
although he was a Preacher of the Gospel, sbe encountered severe
trials. Next I left Bnltimore for Philadelphia, my home, and found
my friends all well; and my only son also, was well. and remained
with Rev. Bishop Allen, where I left him before I went away. After
being absent for two years and six months,I found Bishop Allen in
very ill health, but he ever had continued with unwearied interest in
my sonls welfare, by sending to school, and otherwise improving him
in education ; by which he has made considerable improvements
therefrom; which give me great reconciliation of mind; one thing
lacking, which was a trade. _ But finally, Rev. Bishop grew nearer
and nearer his time of departure,—prior to which he was much interested for the good of my son in gettinga trade, but it being the winter
of 1830, he concluded to keep him until spring; but the Rev. Bishop
coming to the steep of time, departed this life March 26th, 1831, after
seeing 72 years in a world of aflliction. Immediately afterwards I
placed my son with a French gentleman, with whom he stayed and
learned the Cabinet-making business in this city. This is the way I
have got along after getting my son to a trade. I felt myself to be
like a poor pilgrim indeed; wandering through this world so wide;
having to travel among strangers, and being poor and destitute; I was
sorely tempted. My money was gone, my health was gone, and I
measurably without a home. But I rested on the promises of God.
" They that put their trust in me shall never be confounded? Without
having a dollar to help myself, I saw the Lord would verify his promise, bless his name for it. '

Istopped a few weeks with my sister and Dr. Burton; boarded with
her, and he seeing my debilitation of body, rendered medical assistance, which helped me much; but I was unable to labor and preach
for some months. After my business of 1831 had been accomplished,
I felt it my duty to visit my aged Parent, whom I had not seen for
eleven years. At length I_ started on my journey for Cape May, West
Jersey, in the following way: By Steam Boat to Salem, N. J., and

_62

/ preached in the African M. E. Church to a good congreoration and we
had a comfortable waiting upon the Lord. some 3i.,,,:'{ono,,,,,ed me
preaching of the Cross of Christ; the people were vzrytkind. From
thence by Stages to Greenwich, and spoke with the Elder to a, v
humble people; a great display of Godis power, six joined the Churfzhy
seven were be tized a  - i
thank God for pt. ,, I nd others fell to the fioor and cried for mercy;

On Monda mornin I deft for Brid e ' ' - O. .
there, I preahhed in the Court House ti alolrdigdv :ss]¢1aIrIbrl]b oIf]r°d§§§'e.(y
denominations. I felt a degree of liberty in speaking anzl Iitheg, ism
ped a few days with them, and was kindly received ,and entertained.
I then proceeded on to Fair-field, and endeavored to labor for the .
at 11 oiciock. sabbath ,m0mins. and at 3 most, p. M. to maéi
houses of respectable and quiet congregations, and the Lord poured
his spirit upon us and we had a solemn waiting in' his presence (int
which my soul-rejoices even now. ' i t i or

I next went on to Port Elizabeth, which was very thinly inhabited
some two or three very respectable families there with only three er,
sons belonging to Church; among them a Sqr., Brick a man of abilit I
Through him the Church was opened for me, and I preached two sail.
mons to large congregations of respectable inhabitants of the place iri
which I placed myself as in my Saviouris hand, and staying there, a
clay in thbthands of the Potter. I_ had liberty, whilst I could hear 11,:

- humble groans of the people, which caused my breast to swell as with
pure Serephic joy. I bless the Lord, that the Gospel has never been
left without a witness. Wisdom is justified of her children saith our
Lord; if it was not so, thousands of Christians would have sunk in
despair; but now and then I come across a. great many whose sins
were cancelled, and in whom pride was destroyed, and respecters of
persons were not known. Among such, God will prosper the labora
of his servants. ti God knows the proud afar off, but his Saints are

beloved in his sight." I next proceeded to Goshen ; therel found rn
aged mother, who I had not seen for eleven years, well in health and
very active. But above all the rest, enjoying Religion the love of
God in the soul; which is more than the Gold of Opher 3 thoucrh 00,
making many rich. Truly, she dropped many aged tedrs on Ircdhunt
of my exposures in travelling, but I strove to compose her by the word
of God, which tellsus it in this world we shall have tribulation but in
him we shall have peace." ?Tis there, the Ch;-istianas Warfarg 8, ds
' 9

and sorrow cannot come. We dropped a few tears of gratitude with I

uplifted hearts to Almighty God for bringing us together once more in

the flesh. ,
But my work soon again commenced, I preached ° d '
house the next; in Goshen School-house, to both white gin; cdI§i]e'<Ig3

and was assisted by the prayers of some humble souls, and felt both

63

life and liberty. My colored brethren held a protracted meetingo //

Some were Baptists and some Methodists, But all one in Christ. I
think I never saw a greater display of Godls eternal power; it was
somewhat inexpressible : Glory to God for it. 'Four miles from there
I preached in the Court House to a congregation of different denominations, and the house was crowded. Text-28th Chap. of St. Matt. 18th
and 19th verses. On the followingsabbath I spoke in a School-house
to a white Methodist congregation. We had a weeping time in the
afternoon of the same day. Spoke to my own people, and the Lord
blessed several souls. It was a time long to be remembered. Truly
a sword that is so often whetted, must keep Sharp, but in the midst of
difficulties it appeared the word had its more perfect effect. After
feeling Iihad discharged my duty towards God in that part of his
vineyard, I returned home and spent the winter in Philadelphia, but
very much atliieted, But in the midst of _it'rny peace was like a river.

. Some time in February 1832, the Lord sent two friends to take me
out of town to visit a part of his vineyard, and they thought it would
improve my health. I rode about twenty-two miles,-—grew worse
again-'-but medicine was applied which proved edectual. I spent a .
few weeks, preached in the Free Church in Norristown, three or four
times, built by 91 lady of the Church of England, for all, or any that
preach Christ and Him crucitied.

Having gained my health, I returned in peace to Philadelphia, where
I labored under some difliculties until the middle of May : After which
I took a journey with a sister preacher for about two or three weeks,
and truly the Lord blessed her labors abundantly, and my heart rejoiced to witness the out-pouring of the Spirit of that Gospel visit
with a Hand-Maiden of the Lord. The Scriptures are fulfilled as
spoken of by the Prophet Joel, Chap. 27th, 2nd verse. "Ye shall
know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord, your
God, and none else, and my people shall never be ashamed. A And it
shall come to pass afterwards, that I will pour out my spirit upon all
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall Prophecy. ii Your old
men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions." In
1831, a young man who professed to be righteous, says he saw in the
sky men, marching like armies, whetherit was with the naked eye, or
a Vision by the eye of Faith, I cannot tell. But the wickedness of the
people certainlyvcalls for the lowering Judgments of God to be let
loose upon the ation and Slavery, that wretched system that eminated from the bottomless pit, is one of the greatest curses to any Nation.

June 1832, my mind was led to travel towards the east part of New
Jersey, through Trenton. N. J., &c., and I preached three or four
times, and found considerable consolation; The Elder made me ap-P
pointmeuts about two or three miles in the country, where there were

64a class of Methodists. There was a white came next morning to invite me to speak for them the next Sabbath afternoon, and himself
proposed to make me a collection. I thus, truly, saw a way made for
meI knew not, for I had but three or four centsin my pocket. Yet
I had not mentioned it 5 but according to promise, after I had spoken,
their contribution for me amounted to four or five Dollars; which aided me on my journey. So much for trustingiu God. Ithen went to
Princeton. Not much success there, the Society being small. Preached three or four times there. Left for New-Brunswick, and had very
good meetings; more praying people, and had more life and power
among them, and the Word of God hadlits effect. And the Judgments of God was in the land, the Cholera was taking away the people
by scores. An awful day to them that had no God with them in death.
It carried a sword with two edges, it out right and left, took Saint and
sinner, noble and ignoble, white and colored. It -showed equality in
my Godis Decree; where he speaksof ifall men." I uext left for
Rahway,-—still_ coming among strangers, but was kindly received by
friends, both colored and white, of different orders, without distinction.
I saw a large field open before me, anda plenty of labourers wanted

I in that part of Godis moral Vineyard. I commenced to obey the Spirit

of God, and had great liberty, both in Word and Doctrine.. I stopped

i six weeks, and the Elder only once preached. The people dying fast:

News came into town from New ork that great mortality was prevailing,---the people dying at the rate of 120 to 160_ a day. It was
truly alarming, but we were highly favored in Bggmay, there being
only about four or five cases; and among thorn it clearly shown that
God had no respect for persons. One poor colored man, who had
used too much ardent spirits, was boasting about 8 oiclock that Cholera
could do nothing with him; but while harnessing the horse for the
family to go to church only two hours after, being 10 olclock, A. M., he
was seized with cramps, carried into the barn, and,several Doctors
sent for who remained with him, be having n_o friends. But at last,
there being no hope for him by 8 oiclock P. M., the Doctors requested

» some colored Methodist familytto let him die in their house, which

was cheerfully acceded to, and he died about 12 oicloclr, and was buried before day-light the same morning. . A very rich man also died
who was buried in splendor in day light, but the poor beggar was bur-_
ried away at night; yet they both died wicked. A. short notice indeed. But Ohl, their end, their dreadful end.

I still continued to labor, and witnessed good revivals. When the
Presidentis Proclamation went out for a General Fasting throughout the United States on account of the Judgment of God, it was
obeyed by all denominations, and of course came under our notice,and we having no Elder in that place, hold it ourselves,-—and it fell
to my lot to give a Sermon on that occasion, which Idid through

r f; _- .. . ,
* V? t*"°'*"*"""*'**'Kj ——- .

65

some embarrassment, from St. Matt. chap. 24th,'2tst and 22d.vrs. And «the Spirit of the Lord was upon me, and the Scriptures opened to my

prnindp. The starnrnering tongue was loosed, and the feast truly glorious. At night we held Prayer-meetings, and so continued until I felt
at liberty to leave them. I then proceeded on to New Kerk. On my
arrival I called on the Elder, S. T , and was ,-kindly received by
him, and after a few days he gave me an appointment in Brooklyn
Church, it having been near .six years since I had spoken to that ,people. But while filling several successive appointments I saw signs of
much good being done in the name of the Holy Child Jesus, which
was owned with one accord. When entering the pulpit, the Bible being torn, I was deprived of tinding the Text. A young gentleman ofthe Episcopal Methodist Church being present, took occasion on my
next appointment to present the Church with a large new Bible. So
much for theprinciples of Christianity. The Elder also gave me three
appointments in the Bethel Church, New York, at Asberry, in Allen st.
upper part of the city,--several times in Flushing Church, .and attended a Love-Feast, where the people spoke in the Spirit. Praise God
for it. ~ ' .

I then returned to New Yank again, feeling rnystrength much renewed in the inward man Christ Jesus. I saw a large want of_ labor
there, as the Prophet Ezekiel said: ill saw the river rise to the loins
of a many ,

After laboring about six weeks and seeing it was not in vein; with
the approbation of the Brethren and in answer to a good conscience.
Oh! thatl bad language to express my mind while I hold my pen in
hand. But had I the tongue of an Hannah, whilst she spoke to Eli !
I could not express the rerrelatiqntof Jesus; but the bodily strength
seemed to fail fast. I then returned to Philadelphia, rested four days
and was called to Salem, N. 1., and after preaching two or three times
crossed the Bay for St. Georges, a town in the State of Delaware, and

' preached twice by invitation of the citizens, and also by requestrl

spolre in Delaware City. Here a .horse,gig and driverbsing provided
for me, I rode four or -tiverniles in the evening and preached to a large
congregation of white and colored persons. Good behaviour, but .no
particular display of Godis power. I returned thesame night to.St.

Georges, and spent arfew days with my sister, whom .I had :not seen

for eleven years rprevionss I leftthere a few days -before Christmas
for, Philadelphia, where I remained until January 1, 1833. After
which I started, in company with another sister for New Hope, Pa.
We held meetings in .-Frankford, then I proceeded to Ben-Salem;
from thence to Attleborcl. The Elder, P. S., was on that circuit, he
cordially gave me appointments, and we were caused to rejoice. The
Devil was also at work, setting up sdifliculties like mountains high,

but having a skilful Pilot! steered between the rocks. The Church,

5

/

66

having been in a seven years law suit, was gained by the African
M. E. Connexion. A brother, L. I , conveyed us seven miles,
and I attended an appointment which was visited by the Spirit of the
Holy Ghost. Sister C O followed in exhortation and the meeting
was closed by a brother—-a crowded house-,—-and were requested to
hold another. But we appointed the next in Holmesburgh, which
was alike prosperous} After which I returned to Philadelphia, and
there remained until July 2, at which time I left for Canada, being
a second visit to my scattered nation, for which I felt a painful impression. For more than six years the first stop was in New—Yorlr,
from there to Albany, where I remained three or four weeks, but the
Church was wading through deep waters. I had, long before, felt a
great anxiety to publish my religious experience and exercise to a
dying world, but, laboring under the disadvantages of education, I

 

/thought it a favourite pay $5 to have a portion of it taken from the

original of my own registering, and corrected for press. By special
request I visited Troy and found a christian spirited minister, Rev.
Wm. Bishop, with a lively society, and I? spoke for them--the Lord
was with us, and gave seed to the sewer and bread to the eater, at
different times; and, the next Sabbath I* preached my Farewell sermon, and on Sunday night I held prayer meeting in the Church, and
on the next Saturday I left for Schenectady, preached in the Presbyterian Church twice on Sunday, and was kindly entertained; after
which I left on Monday for Utica, and" arrived there next morning
about sunrise. I spoke for them on Thursday evening, also on Sunday afternoon to crowded houses of lively Christians, and they administered to my necessities to assist me in travelling. I felt a great
liberty in the gospel. From there I proceeded to Rochester, where I
arrived, after being two days and a night on the Canal, and found
Elder Graham with a prosperous Church, which seemed as though
his labors were much blessed. But, alas! the Devil crept in--he
left them--they became scattered, the old trustees died, and the
other connexion caught them.' But during my stay they added several to the Church. I then left for Little York in Canada, which was
one dayis sail across the Lakes; the passage was very rough that day.
I was directedrto Brother Brownie, the preacher,~and was kindly received by himself and wife. I preached on Sabbath morning and
afternoon, and that day we had a shout in the Camp of Israel. Praise
God, the mission was both owned and received. After speaking several tifries and holding prayer meetings,I left them for Niagara, spoke
three times. I From there to St. David, and preached to a respectable
congregation of whites and colored persons. Six years before this I
visited Niagara and there was a large society of the A. M. E. Connexion, hnt at this time the very Chapel was gone, the minister dead,
the people scattered and backslid. I, finding only two or three mem67

hers at this time and no school, and children corping up in sin, then
left for St. Catharine ; spoke three times, but no particular revival,
there were some who wished to be lords among Godls heritage, and
the work seemed stagnated. but.» they used me well, and I left them
with peace of mind, in discharging my duty, fort George, and spoke
on Sabbath morning to a white and colored congregation in a schoolhouse.-i-wcnderful time indeed--some shouted, some mourned, others
sought for mercy, and I felt the Holy Ghost upon me, glory, glory,
glory to God. After I helped to lead.th=e class, I was insisted upon

especially totpreach a childis funeral sermon, before the corps left the
* house, a curious circumstance, which was caused by the following

incident: Seven years before I had preached in the neighborhood,
to a greatimixed multitude, after whichl was invited to dine by
this person, on which visit this child was born, or on that day ; after
some little hesitation on my part,I accepted the invitation and preached from the 2d Book of Samuel, ffl shall go to him, but he shall not
return to me." It was every solemn time--the corps was then taken
to the Church of England, and laid before the altar, the clergy spake
over it, and- very much to the purpose, without partiality, and then
committed it to the breathless grave. On Thursdaynight I tilled an
appointment at a brotherls house, the Lord was there. On the next

l Sabbath I rode seven miles,» preachedtand helped to lead class, and

the next week I left in stage -for Little York, but stopped in Niagara,
preached several times and paid a visit to anew society of Wesleyan
Methodists, also then returned .to York again, and preached for a society of Baptists, a very quiet andattentive congregation, with one
exception. Text, by grace ye are saved through faith, thatls not of
yourselves, itlsr the gift of God. The Devil is always busy in his
agency as in the following: a school-teacher was present in the con-gregation who, after I concluded my subject, arose to contradict my

argument, he became very much excited and red in his face, but
while he was on hisfeet I expressed a desire of the congregatiorrnot
to notice his reply, and they accordingly treated it with contempt,
which caused him to desist with all his prejudices against women.

1 The people were very -kind. From thence by steamboat, I pro
ceeded to Hambleton, which was 50 miles ; I found no colored society

in that place, but the children went to school ; about two miles from

there I found a class, and, by permission of the trustees, on Wednesday evening, I spoke in the Methodist Chapel, to a small congrega.tion, from at very short notice, but the Lord owned His Word. After

the close of the meeting, an English gentleman and his lady invited

° me to go home and lodge one night at their house, which 1 did, and

they exhibited a great degree of .benevolence,tcwards me; may God
reward them for it. t On Sabbath morning I spoke to my own people,
and afterwards led class and found the same one God owned them

 

-in worship also. .1 saw that seed must he sown accordingly. I
spoke in the afternoon, and the Lord made himself manifest by His
Spirit in great display; the people, though very poor, were exceedingly
kind ; one of the brother preachers, conveyed me to Dundas and
Flamburg, west. I preached to a large congregation in the white
Methodistchapel. We had an humble waiting upon the Lord. From
there I went to Ancestor, there the Lord prepared a friend to take
care of me through the winter. I preached several times and met
many friends whom I had seen in Cincinnati ;usome gifted preachers
 there, but no older to preside. There were many of our society
)3-t there, called from place to place, which had been scattered like sheep
without a shepherd--it truly was heart-reading to hear them lamenting the loss of their shepherd who was deceased. The brethren
kept 3a watch meeting on Christmas eve. We enjoyed the meeting
and spent the night like St. Paul; the next day. it fell to my lot to Bll
an appointment whichl did with both life and liberty, (praise God
for it) from the 2nd chap. of St. Luke, verses 10, 11. I felt my
mind lead me to a village called Arnrnonsburg, on Lake Ontario, on
what was called the Bush side, butl kept it with myself and the
Lord, and kept travelling and preaching as the Lord gave ability.
Brother 8. Lewis was much interested at my anxiety for that peoplels
welfare, and also Brother Wm. Edwards, a gospel preacher, who had
been instrumental in civilizing and christianizing many of the natives
whom I saw in Brentford, an Indian town on the Mohawk river, where
1; a number of the natives lived along the river side, in the woods formed
" churches of societies of different denominations, ours excepted, and'hav;_i-.1, , 2 ~.-_:ii E1 ing no Methodist Church, a gentleman, seeing the necessity of'a place
of worship for us, gave us the privilege of a large house to worship in
;t several times; truly it was cold, but we had many comfortable meetings, and very many solemn impressions made on a number of the
minds of those present; afterwards I left for Buffalo. The road was
scrough that it caused me to be quite sick. I could not stand it to
ride 200 miles that cold weather, and I continued to preach in and
out of town to different denominations through frost and snow. A
gentleman came to me after the sermon was over, and wished me
God's speed in a very friendly manner, then quietly withdrew with
his ladies in company with him, withpoliteness. My mind was an
*Bull'alo, Brother Edwards had not yet formed any society. .1 particularly desired him to take my appointment, which he did, and also
readythe discipline with proper explanations, wishing to know who
would be subject tothe government of the same, and there were ten
-persons came forward and consented to be subject as members of
our Discipline. lwent-to Aucaster, stopped at brother Lewis* and
wife, and although she was a young married woman. she was very
much like a mother to me. My mlud was exercised to go to Anmonsburg, through a gloomy winter; that night, after serious meditation, I fell asleep, and suddenly awoke and received the witness
that I must go. Next morning I informed brother Lewis that I must.
go, and, be, feeling interested for me, had me conveyed. in a private
carriage, that I might travel comfortably. In the middle of February
I left for Chatham, and arrivedthere on the 26th of the same month,
wherel found a society scattered, without a shepherd; some living
in the faith of Christ. while others had gone back to the beggarly

» elements of the world. I Mr. Lightfoot received me very kindly; his

house was open for worship, where I had large gatherings some five
or six times, for a new place. The house being quite commodious,
and Mr. Lightfoot used every endeavor to send me on with the gospel to others. In April I left for Arumonsburg, there the believers
seemed much strengthened; baclrsliders reclaimed, and ;sinners con«
verted to God. Among which was a. woman that had belonged to
the Methodists by profession, having the form of godliness but was
destitute of the power, until the Spirit of God arrested her at this
time. After which she ceased" her carnal amusements; quit danciag and went to praying, at which time she arose on her feet and said
that she never saw that dancing was wrong before 'now—but she had
resolved to serve God in spirit and truth-praise God for the victory.
For three days in Ammonsburg we could scarcely get any rest,
from the e&'ects of the outpouring of the spirit of God, on both white
and colored. I was still more confirmed in mind that my visit was
accepted o_f my God, who gave me this mission in Christ Jesus. I
stopped with "a brother, Jas. McKenney, and his affectionate wife,
who had suffered much in the fear of Jesus. Brother made an ap
pointment for the next evening .for me, which I tried to fill. Text as
follows: 16th chap. of St. Matthews Gospel, 26th verse. I was in
a strange part of Godls vineyard, but his power was manifest even
there ; after which another appointment was made for Sunday morning, which was alike prosperous, and I helped to lead class; then
spoke in the afternoon and at night with equal success. My mind
was much exercised, seeing the need of schools. I counted 25 children and some young people whom I loved. I lamented their ob- '

seurity, and advised them to get a white man to teach them, and
endeavored to shew them, that, without, the advantages of education
they never would be a moral people, and, in the course of time, their
own children could. by proper advancement, become teachers for
themselves. So I continued in all the towns, finally they caught the
spirit and commenced in the following places; in Ancaster they chose
their trustees to build a house for school, and likewise to preach in,
at Brantford, at Chatham, and St. Catharine. Some went to St. David's
and Toronto, to Sabbath Schools, and in the week also; colored
and white, all went together. After the course of two or three

70

weeks, a colored teacher came to the last .named place and established a school of between 30 or 40 scholars (after being examined
and found competent) which improved the manners of the people very
much, and they worshipped in their own Chapels. Their own preachers, exhorters, and class-leaders (colored) There was a young
sister that wished to travel with me a little way, and brother Mc' Kenney furnished us with a driver and conveyance, and the friends

received us very kindly, and, to my astonishment, we were given appointments by the trustees of the ':Church.. I spoke from the following text, By grace ye are saved through faith, that is not of yourselves, but it is the gift of God. A Friend, W , was there, who
was ever ready to oppose the Methodists; he was a Baptist preacher,
and would invite the Methodists to preach for them, and then get up
and contradict them ;he wished me to come and preach for them,
butl felt no spirit of contention in religion and._I declined. Our
own people were talking of forming a union with the Canadian
Methodists who were a branch of the Old'Episcopal Methodists, that
was raised by the missionaries from America; this being the time of
the split, but some would leave to the Wesleyan Methodists. I
preached five or six different times in this village for several.Sabbaths two sermons a day, in which the Lord gave ability. We continued our meetings as usual, and invited the old ministers to visit us,
which they did ; and one of them gave an exhortation after me, and
Godls power filled the house and the guilty were alarmed, while helievers rejoiced in hope of a better resurrection. I left that morning, rode five miles with a friend, and on Wednesday afternoon
preached again-—-signs and wonders followed--after which I continued to visit the sick the remainder of the week, and on Sabbath day I
/rode five miles again to the Chapel, and filled an appointment in the
afternoon for the last time asI thought, but the Lord seen best, and I
was retained another week ; the next Sabbath I filled an appointment
from the following text: Finally, brethren, pray for us that the word of
the Lord have free course and be glorified even as it is with you ;
which was my Farewell Sermon. After which I returnedto Ammousburg in the fear of God; where Ipreached several times and
saw many manifestations of the operations of the Spirit of grace,
and, on the following Sabbath, Brother A made an appointment
for me six miles distant, and one also for 6 olclock in the evening;
we had a very hard ride through the swamp, and met a large gathering both in and out of doors, and sinners were cut to the_ heart, and
cried aloud for mercy, which was ajoyful sound to believers in Christ
Jesus. The next evening I spoke again from Isaiah, chap. 59 ver. 1;
and several of the nobility taking into consideration my necessities,
contributed to me the sum of 35. We had a quiet waiting upon the
Lord; after which land a sister that was with me, called on Mr.
Gardiner and he collected some subscriptions and added to the for

 

I!!! iilliiiill

71

rner sum, for which, I trust, God will reward all the cheerful givers,
as they were very" generous. I held prayer-meetings, visited the sick,
and passed many_ joyful moments of sweet communion especially in
one sisterls company, who was a member, of the National Church in
Ammonsburg. . _

But in affliction she enjoyed the Spiritls grace, and, in May, 1834, we
parted as for eternity, and I trust to meet her where parting will be

no more, neither will any of us shake the parting hand, for we have i

had sweet communion together, in spiritual exercises. Dear reader,
think not that I am going to heaven, as in golden slippers, for I have
various trials to encounter while travelling over this world so wide,
but I feel willing to suffer for the cause of God, after which _I shall (if
faithful) meet many of my friends that have commuued with me in
the Spirit, where we never, never shall shake the parting hand—these

'are the consolations in amiction as described in Rev. chap. 12, 11th
. verse. And they overcame him by the Bloodof the Lamb, and by

the word of their testimony, and they lovednot their lives unto death;
and whilst I move my pen my soul rejoices in God my Redeemer.
Having filled my mission I parted with my friends in joy. I sailed
for Detroit city, 18 miles, then bid adieu to, British shores, not knowing that I should ever step on them again. I was kindly received on
American possessions by a respectable family from Cincinnati, a Mr.
D, I felt there was a work for me to do in that part of Godls
vmeyard. I arrived on Tuesday. and on Thursday evening we had a
comfortable meeting" at the usual place. . I met with much encouragement in laboring for the Lord, and many impressions were made
on the minds of the hearers. The evening previous to my landing
Isaw some of the American affliction towards thespeople of color,
such as mobbing, theft and destruction. We unto the inhabitants of the
earth and the sea, for the Devil is come down unto you. On the fol 

lowing Sabbath morning, 10 olclock, I preached again, then lead class

-a soul reviving time, indeed-at 7 olclock, P. M. I preached again,
and the house was crowded to overflowing, it not being sufficient to
hold the people. Text as followszi And the gospel of the kingdom
shall be preached unto all the world for a witness, and then shall the
end come. After which we visited a prayer meeting held by the stationed minister in the white Church, which was truly comfortable.
On the next Sabbathl had an appointment made for. me on the British side in a dwelling house, but, it not being sufficient to hold the
people, the Episcopal Methodists opened their session-room which
was larger and well crowded with various denominations. Text, lst
chap. St. John; ver. 45- The Lord touched my tongue as with a live
coal from his altar, and we had a good time as from the hand of the
Lord, and the Amens of the preachers, elders, and leaders, helped
to swell the theme of rejoicing. Glory to God, we had all things
common. But now feeling my mission ended I waited for the firs

72

opportunity and took passage for Buffalo. Th'ree hundred and sixty
miles on Lake Ontaria, and, I must say, the most uncomfortable pas- i
sage I ever experienced, although the boat was comrnodious, yet they
treated the people of color very indiiferently indeed, as regards their
accommodation, and yet charged them a high price, I having paid
34.50., After two uncomfortable days and nights' sail, me arrived
at Buffalo wharf about six olclock, A. M. Six years had elapsed
since I had been in Bufalo, which was the lirst time, but during my
absence many changes had taken place, the loss of some of, my particular friendsvby death and other moveable causes. But I found a
Mrs. Davis, who was a great friend indeed to the people of God. I
felt my mission truly in this part of His vineyard—there were a few
of the Episcopal Methodists, but no established society. The Baptist denomination had the majority of the people, they opened their _

places of worship and I preached and held prayer meetings three or
or four times among them, which was attended with considerable ,
success. I also had the pleasure of meeting an anti-slavery society
where I heard some very able discussions on the rights of the oppressed, and also clear demonstrations of the cruelty of the slaveholder, which was exposed with all its horror by a young man by the
name of L , but was greatly opposed by the Judge of the city,
after which the young manarose to his feet the second time in which
it seemed" nothing escaped his exposure. I, about this time had written from Buffalo to Philadelphia (as it was shown me by the Spirit
that my son had embraced religion) to know the fact of the matter,
as I was some hundred miles from home and received the satisfactory
answer by letter from his own hand, which explained his conviction
--the length of the distress of his mind—the severity of which had
caused him to seek opportunity to put an end to his own existence,
but in the act he was told to tr to pray, once more, by the voice of
the Spirit, which he consents! to do, but concealed his intention
from the people, which had been suggested by the Devil, to take
his own life. audit would be all over. In this extremity it was Godls
opportunity by his act of obedience to convert his soul, after bringing
him to the ground like a Saul of Tarsus, and now stands as a living
witness that God has power on earth to forgive sin.

0 Reader, you may only imagine the joy of my heart at such language as this from my only son, whom, it seemed, God had left as
a comfort to me in my old age, more especially after not having had
any communication from him for eight months, and then he was very
ill which made my cross seem very heavy, but I trusted in God, although I expected to hear of his death when I did hear any thing,
but, on my knees at a brother and sister L is at family prayer
was shown these things by revelation of Spirit, which caused me to
get up off my knees and I exclaimed aloud, the Lord has converted

.i2§:e!-*-'-"II--"—""""

 

73

the soul of my son, for which we had a shout around the room, and
then comes the letter as a witness of the same from his own written
composition. I scarcely knew how to praise the Lord enough, and
for another reason when I thought that God granted what I had
prayed for, from the days of his childhood,'while I travelled the
barren wilds, of lonesome hills, and gloomy vales. But so much for
trusting in'G'ud who will not let the prayers of his people pass unnoticed, but is bound to hear and answer when they pray aright. Praise
the Lord, 0 my soul, magnify his name.

Witgjoy let Judah stand

On ton s chosen hill,

Proclaim the wonders of thy hand,
And councils of that will.

Inow began to feel my mission somewhat" complete as regards
distance, and therefore concluded to return towardshome. A brother and his wife crossed the Lakes with me for company, I then took
the cars, and bid them adieu. I remained in Rochester a while after
my arrival, but, to my sorrow and surprise, a society that, twelve
months previous, , was large and seemed every way prosperous, had
nearly dwindled away-'-—the preacher goneand the people scattered
except a resolute few, who were bound to go through, and that at
the risk of their all 3 and to them I endeavored to fulfil my mission.
I also spoke for the Wesleyan 'Methodists—they treated me with
christian fellowship.- Our Lord said, they that are for us are {not
against us, forbid them not-—it truly was comfortable. There was
seed to the sewer and bread to the eater. I also stopped at
Palmyra, visited the sick and otherwise endeavored to fill my mission. A little dilhculty existed, relative to a slave girl being
concealed and taken away, but while we were at worship the Justice of the Peace was in the house and every thing seemed quiet.
After service, the congregation quietly withdrew—this was on the
6th of August. On the next day a lady of color paid for a seat for
herself and me, and we took passage on to Canondagua, 16 miles;
there I found a Church and people prosperous. They received me

_kindly—my first appointment; ll olclock, Sabbath morning; the

word had some impressions, in the afternoon still better, at night God
was his own interpreter, the hallowed fire began to run to sinls confusion. I had several appointments through the week, which were
alike prosperous. Although I felt my inabilty, yet the answer to a
good conscience strengthened me, even in a strange land, and, with
Paul, I can say I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is
the power of God to every one that believes. I then took stage for
Geneva, having recommendations to these little towns or villages, I.
found a few members of the Episcopal Methodists, and also of the
Presbyterian denomination; they were very friendly and opened
their house to entertain me—the colored gentlemen _of the vicinity

13H

31:3
nl

74:

around were building a house for the Travelling Missionaries to preach
in; it was opened for me, and» I felt great liberty in endeavoring to
labour for the Lord; tears of contrition dropped freely; a sister there
showed great hospitality towards me. After filling three appointments,
I left on the third day of the week. I took stage for Ithaca, having
had an invitation from the Rev. H. J who had the charge. I
arrived about 4 olcloek in the afternoon and was taken to 'Elder H.
J. . Before I entered the town I felt, according to the movings
of the Spirit, that the Lord would pour out his Spirit upon the people, for which I yet rejoice in hope of a better resurrection. We
met in the unity of the Spirit and continued so with humility—the
friends were kind indeed to me, in and from the noble edifices of the
large conveniences, to the humble cottage of Christian inmates. But
an humble heart is better than a sacrifice. The society was young

but was composed of some very respectable people, and useful eiti-,

zens. Congregations large, class lively, and the Spirit of God visited
us in abundant measure, which made the people speak with great
confidence in the Lord. Though hard toiling, yet duty makes labor
light; some backsliders reclaimed, sinners converted. and believers
strengthened ; while many joined the Church, which was a sign of.
some good in the name of the holy child Jesus. After which my
visit closed in peace with God, peace with all men, and the answer

of a good conscience. I was next conveyed by carriage to the steam-.

boat, and took passage for Albany. Crossing the Seneca river or
lake, where passengers meet the canal boat for Albany, which was
my next stopping place. I was recommended by a gentleman to the
captain ; took passage; and after a pleasant voyage of two days and
nights, we arrived at Schenectady, and the next morning we arrived
at Albany. The Rev. Mr. Williams was stationed there; I payed
him a visit; the preachers generally professed a Christian Spirit. The
task seemed as though laid on a Jonah; I preached twice on Sabbath day ; and through the aid of Bro. S. S , I was able to get
to New York. Rev. R. W was one of the oldest Elders in the
African Methodist Episcopal Church, who has since that fell in the
battlefield, declaring war against the power of Darkness, and his
bones were buried with all the honors of war. Let me live the life
of the righteous and let my last end be like his. On my arrival at
New York,I found the Rev. 3. S—-—, Elder, stationed there; I
spent three weeks in that city; I preached in Bethel; in Allen
Church several times; good congregations for that part of the town,
but_ the other was crowded. I only mention a few texts, lst Sam.
2d chap. 6th ver.; 3d chap. Hebrews, 3 first verses. Brother Jacob
Matthews gave me an appointment in Zion Church, and I felt the
Lord, as before mentioned, to be very close to me.
E—— gave me an appointmentrin Asbury Church on Sabbath night,

The Rev. T.

 

75'

text, 3d chap. of St. Matthew, 12th verse, which was a night long to
be remembered by all present; the Lord made bare his arm; some
were arrested under the power of God, and fell to the floor crying
for mercy, While believers were strengthened in the faith of Christ.
I also had appointments in Brooklyn, L. I.; there we were much favored with good meetings; a number of Old Methodists, with faithful preachers who kept the flock of Christ alive 5 and our labors were
crowned with success, and additions to the Church. In the midst of
life we are in death. Since I had been last at this place, previous to
my tour in British America, the young gentleman that manifested such
friendship for the Church by presenting it with a Bible for my appointment, had bid adieu to time and had gone to the mansions of
bliss. The day previous to my arrival,il stopped at Bro. T--—°'s,
one of the oldest standard families that celebrated the Church of God;
his wife, a mother and sister upwards of seventy years of age; whose
character was unblemished. faith firm, although atllicted, yet
cheerful, with a short illness, in September, 1835, left the world in
triumph. I commenced my journey for Canada, in 1832. From the
second day of July to the fifteenth day of October, years following,
1833, I had preached 138 sermons, and travelled between 27 and 28
hundred miles. Returned from Brooklyn, and attended a. quarterly
meeting at Flushing; Bro. J. S—-—, elder in charge. Saturday evening I gave an exhortation, and preached Sunday afternoon at 3 oicloclr,
the Lord accompanied the word, and. be it remembered, it will be_
either a savor of life unto life or of death unto death. Having finished
my visit I felt anxious to go to Philadelphia; feeling my labors to
come to a close for the present. Iarrived safe at home, found my son
and friends all well, and then heard the truth of his conversion, for
which I yet give glory to God. I was three days in the city and left
for Salem, N. J., on business; finding the doors opened to me I preached in the Church ; we had a comfortable waiting upon the Lord, but
no particular display of his power. After which Icrossed the bay
to New Castle, Del. and then proceeded to see my long lost sister '
this being the second time in forty—two or forty-three years——there I
found a. large field of labor. Preached in a school-house by permission of Mr. S—---, he being a man of authority, and chief owner of
a large part of the town. I was also sent for to speak in Delaware
--a horse and gig and dinner prepared—I was taken five or six miles,
blessed with a full house and I felt the power from the upper world,
and the Lord was with me. After two days visit my mind being
easy, I rested, and on the third day I left for Philadelphia; finding
all well, I remained for a few days, and then left for the Rev. R.
R—--is circuit, and found him a Christian and a gentleman. I first
hailed Burlington, and met the ministerial order of Brethren, who received me with joy.

Digitized by CIOOSIQ

W
The Vineyard of the Lord before the laborer lies.

We had several very good meetings ; I then crossed over to Bristol
and spoke once or twice in a dwelling-house, at which time the Lord
verified his promises, which are, I will hearken unto. I proceeded
on my journey to Trenton, which was Elder Robinson's Circuit. Two
or three days after this he arrived in the city. On Sabbath morning
he preached and was much favored by the Spirit of the Lord. At
night I preached and felt joy in my soul; from there he gave me
other appointments. My mind was cleared and the Scriptures opened themselves to my mind and I felt strengthened; some shouted,
others wept. I feel the holy influence of that fire now, while my
pen makes record of the same to a dying world. Let the inhabitants of the rocks sing, and let them shout as from the top of the
mountains I preached another sermon from the 59th chap. of Isaiah,

12th verse. The fire kindled some where, and the hearty amens that I _

ascended the hill of the Lord seemed to strike guilt to the hearts of
sinners. I helped to lead class. 0, the worth and value of precious
souls which cause me oft to mourn. I preached again from the 22d
chap. of Rev. lst ver. The prayers of Godls people helped me,
and the power of God, like the dew of heaven, was let down upon
us, and the sower and reaper rejoiced together, independent of various
opposition. I also spoke from Romans, 1st chap. 16th ver., and spoke
three times on Sabbath day ; and I felt more strength at the last appointment than I did at the first, which proves the assertion of Scripture, freely give and freely receive. Ialsovisited the sick, after
which they gave me some appointments at Princeton, a hard part of
the vineyard. I had my talent and to use it I was not ashamed,
although the substance seemed to be lost--full houses. The Presbyterian friends were very kind to me and received me with Christian
friendship. The weather cold, and travelling hard, through wintry
storms to pass. The first text, Let the dead bury the dead. It seemed
a little astonishing, especially to the brethren. I continued, and on
different times filling appointments. From thence to-Brunswick ; and
one of thecoldest days, rode sixteen miles; the Lord was with me,
and I-had great liberty of speech; a church and a large congregation ; and the power of God was more fully manifest than at Princeton ; and the Lord added such to the Church as, I trust, will be eternally saved. Iremained there to labor for the Lord two or three
weeks, and there was a general revival throughout in prayer meetings,
both of male and female, and in class meetings; not my labors,
reader, but the merit belongs to God alone.

Praise the Lord, ye heavens adore him;
Praise him all ye stars of light; .

Sun and moon rejoice before him,
Praise him, angels in your heights.

77

After my return to Philadelphia in December, 1886, Isaw a large
held open to my view, it being a strong place, and many different
spirits to contend with, I endeavored to commend this portion of
sacred Writ: Job, 22d chap. 10th ver., But he knoweth the way I
take; when he hath tried me I shall come forth as gold.; -again, Rev.
3d chap., 8th ver., and I seemed much troubled, as being measurably
debarred from my own Church as regards this privilege I had been
somuch used to ; I could scat ly tell where to go or stay in my own
house. I said, Lord, where s all I go? and was directed to -brother
Murray, Elder then of Little Wesley Church, and when coming to his
house he expressed his astonishment at my coming .out through the
inclernency of such weather, I paused, then told him I was sent "to
him and knew not for what; he said I know-then -he gave *me an
appointment on Sunday night, and on the following Wednesday evening; from there I received an appointment at Zoar Church, by the elder, and the Lord converted one soul, which caused me still more to
rejoice in God my Saviour; from that the elder of Wesley Church
gave me an appointment and I preached to a large congregation, and
felt strong in the causeof my God. My call seemed chiefly in Philadelphia. In the year 1835 I travelled 721 miles, and preached
692 sermons. I also spoke in Bethe] Church; some false brethren. \
They that are not for us are against us, and if they-are against God's
ministry, whether male or female, they are against God, who says
I send by whom Iwill, for all are one in Christ Jesus. May the
Lord pardon their errors, and make them be careful how they handle
edged tools. In 1836 I travelled 556 miles, and preached ill sermons; and felt under much exercise to print a book, and I had some  

friends to encourage me, such as the Rev. B. R
with -others ; and every circumstance was so favorable that I finally
succeeded, and when they were brought home, I sat down in the house
and wondered how I should dispose of them; to sell them appears
too much like merchandise. While in this situation it was suggested
to my mind, you must pay for them, or it will do more harm to the
Gospel than if. you had not printed them. But to myself, (if not

' printed) would be the scourge of a guilty conscience before the Lord.

At 4 olclock, P. M., my mind was directed to a Presbyterian sister,
and on my way I met Bishop Allen is widow who bought one, and
that afternoon I sold one dollar and fifty centsl worth. The Lord so
blessed the odering of that work to the world, that in less than four
months I paid sixty dollars through God*s assistance, for the expenses
which gave me great tranquility of mind, and caused me to feel still
more like wearing out in the service of God. Various-are the ways
through the interposition of Providence that Isucceeded in disposing of
that little work, via: camp-meetings, quarterly meetings, in the pub ,lio streets, &c. Praise God for his mercies as well as his graces.

,and the Bishop, .3

'78

After this I started for a Camp-meeting, near Baltimore; On my arrival I received two appointments, and after the Bishop came, still
more was given to me, and at one time the power of God arrested an
individual and he cried aloud, fell out of the door and was reclaimed.
I preached three sermons in the African M. E. Church, and God gave
us souls at every meeting, and -my heart rejoiced to see sinners com-ing to God. Notwithstanding I had my opposers I out-live, theta
through the strength of Him, that -ygt loves His faithful followers.
After seeing so many displays of the miraculous power of God, I returned to the city of Baltimore, with peace of conscience- After
which my mind was exercised to go to Elicottls Mills to preach in the

/African M. E. Church, and was accompanied by a dear. sister, previously having had conversation with Bishop Walters heisent a letter
to the preacher in charge,- who received mewith christian spirit. i In
the morning I led class and in the afternoon I had an appointment,

and preached from the 5th Chapterof St. Luke, 18th & 19th verses. '

A full house, -with attentive hearers,—praise God for a visitation of His
Spirit. An humblegroan is better than a sacrifice. At night I spoke
from the 7th Chapter of Hebrews, 12th 8: 13th verses, and wonderful
to relate, if language could, the power of feeling. And* well may it
be said that feeling has noifellow. On Thursday night I spoke from
the 61st Chapter of Isaiah, 1st verse: And truly Iwas annointed.
And one visible sign of the manifestation of the Spirit of God was, an
aged lady was caused to cry aloud, under the distress of mind, and
many more, too tedious to mention. During the whole week, I continued to visit the sick, 81:). One case I here mention as a caution to
those who procrastinate the day of Salvation, which isfas follows. By
request, I called to see a Slave-holder of a tyranical turn, said to be
very wicked. But he had received a summons. served by the ofiicer
/ Death, andl saw it pictured in his face {previous to which I had
heard of his selling two men from their wives, recently. I asked him
what he thought of dying; if he was prepared to meet the change.
He told me he was not. Heiwas very ill, couldnot recover, but wanted religion and could not get it ; but wished me to have prayers with

him. This 1 did, but it was of no avail, although it was truly solemn. '

I then exhorted him to have faith in the merits of the blood of Christ,
and then left him, a repining subject for eternity. »

" Donlt you see how unexpected in my chariot I do ride,

Convulsion fits, Plagues and Fevers, are the weapons by my side."
. Death.

After this, I returned. to Baltimore, and from thence I was 
ducted to Springtown. and spoke in the morning, Sunday, 11 oicloclr.
Text, in Psalms. No extra display in the afternoon. Brother.H. U.,
held forth to a very large congregation. At night I preached» again.

'79

in By this time 'there was inroads made upon the minds of the people,they caught the Hallowed Flame, and some shouted, while others
were convicted and reclaimed, and I was lifted up in Word and
Doctrines of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. On Monday night I
held a Prayer-meeting,-—next morning I started for Baltimore, quite
indisposed, but being once more restored to health, I preached on the
following Sabbath night -in Bethel Church, Baltimore, appointment by
Bishop Walters. Text. Acts 18th Chapter, 9th & 10th verses, with
special references, from Chapter 20 ; 319th, 20th, 21st 3: 22d verses.
On the ensuing Wednesdaynightl preached again from Prophet Joel,
Chapter 1st., &. let vers. -The slain of the Lord truly was many.
Again I spoke from Hebrews, " Chapter 7th; 12th 8: 13th verses, at 3
olclock, P. M.. and "Godisname was glorified. I had great liberty of
speech—bless the Lord. It is a good cause to live in, but better to
die in. It is sweeter than life and stronger than death.

?The Bishop gave mean appointment on the following Sabbath
night. Text, from one of 'Peters' Epistles, 5th verse. The word
preached had its effect. Three persons were arrested under the power
of God«and felled to the floor at once. The grand-mother and her
daughter and grand-daughter cried aloud for mercy. Intthe meanwhile a gentleman fell on his face and cried for Sanctiflcation; and
there was a general rumbling among the dry bones. Praise God, for
I feel the unction-from on high, while I hold my pen.

1 next started for Long Green, a distance of sixteen miles. A sister I who had been travelling with me; as also brother Dunn.
accompanied us. I spoke from Acts 17, verse 31. Three persons
found peace, several under serious impressions. The word still had a
lasting effect, and they sent for us again. We complied, accompanied by our Rev. brother; although the morniugwas very cold, we
were blast to get there in time for Church, and by the help of God, I
tried to speak to the people from these words. "Although you tread
upon scorpions and serpents, they shall not hurt you, having faith."
The word went out and did not return void; for two found peace that
day, and we left some on the floor mourning for redemption in Christ,
while others were deep symptoms of serious impressions for the welfare of their souls. We left at 4 olclock in the afternoon, but the
meeting continued until night.~ May God continue to water every
plant in Zion. I preached and sold my books, and paid my own way.
I returned to Philadelphia in December. After I arrived my health
was much impaired, and I had a severe spell of sicknes. So ended
1836. ' ' I A

I commenced travelling March 11th, 1837. Eight miles from Philadelphia, I preached three Sermons. - Two at Blaketown, N. J., after
which I took Steam-.boat for St. Georges, Del., to see my sister; at the

request of Doct. ,he being the main proprietor of the town, I

 

 
 

$0

accepted anappointment and nlled it. I then spent a' few days with
my sister, and left for Salem, N. J. Preaohed two Sermons on Sabbath day, two miles from Salem, and we had a good meeting,-for,
where the Lord is, there is liberty. On Wednesday I left for Greenwich, preached three times, and the Lord was there in power, and my
soul witnessed it. From thenoel proceeded to and there
truly was a revival among the people, which gave me encouragement
to trust in God. From there I proceeded on -to Port Elizabeth, and
spoke in the Ebenezer Church, to a very large and respeotableoongregation from seventh chapter, Hebrews, 12th & 13th verses. On
Sunday 3 olelock. P. M., I preached at the same Church, than I proceeded six miles further and preached one Sermon to the F orgemen,
and tried to give them the Gospel, but I did not feel that liberty of

 

Spiritual fellowship as I did at many places, to see professing Christians working hard on the Sabbath at the forge, and then walk into
Church, to keep the Sabbath Holy is, in my opinion, -altogether out
of the question. However I returned from that -place the same night,
and on Monday I left for Goshen, Cape May, to see my aged mother,
then 78 years of age. I found her happy in the Lord, and my sister
also. I preached three sermons on Cape May and left them as I found
them, in the hands of God. I arrived on my retura,at Port Elizabeth
on the -next Sabbath morning, £lled an appointment both morning and
night. Next morning I took stage -for Philadelphia, where I arrived
on June 5th, found all .well. Our Conference being held in Mary, I
concluded Iimust have some of the Feast. Three or four days after
this I proceeded to New York, from there on to Albany, Elder Wil~
liams -having charge of the Church. Ipresched nine sermons. Some
revivals, some joined the Church, and members strengthened in the
Faith of Christ. I also-visited Troy, preached three Sermons there,
one fora white congregation. We had a good meeting; and I was
well treated by the friends. On my return to Albany I preached two
sermons---and truly enjoyed myself in the Lord. I then returned to
New York with an appeal to the oonsdience of every man, as regards
my endeavors -to do good,--bless the Lord. Duty makes labor lightMy visit was to be aeeompiished in New York and Brooklyn. Rev.
Wm. C- _ , having charge at both plaoes,gave meappointmsnts.
Preached -fonr sermons in New York, live in Brooklyn and two in
Flushing and one in Williamsburg.

Knowing my religious visits were nearly closed for the present, I
availed myself of the opportunity of visiting the different Schools, the
most impressive was that of Mr. Louis Tappan, which I think exceeded
all I «had ever seen; the principles in different branches which had

 

-been, and in someinstanees, are yet hid from the people -of color, to

deprive them of their enjoymeats, were here taught them, which
greatly helped .to elevate than to a position that would command re81

spect through the short voyage of life. These are the proceeds of vital piety. ll Do unto all men, as ye would they should do unto you."
Love, truly, is the fulfilment of the Law. 0! _may the day speedily
come when the yoke of oppression shall be finally destroyed. Under
a striking impulse of gratitude, and at the request of Mr. Tappan, I
delivered a short address and then left the School with the answer to
a good conscience. Then leaving New York, Iiarrived at New Brunswick, where I.was kindly received. Preached three sermons; truly,
the Lord was there in power. Next I proceeded to Rahway, preached
four sermons, and some were added to the church. From that to
Princeton, and preached four sermons. No particular display of God's
power; yet my soul rejoices in hope of the promise. lflf Israel is not
gathered, Jacob shall not lose his reward." I then left for Trenton,
met 9. Quarterly Meeting, and the Elder gave me two appointments.
-His labors had been very successful on his circuit. I then left for
Philadelphia, and found my friends well. This being the month of
November, I remained a-while in the city. I preached in Bethel
Church and the Union also. Dec. 2nd I left for New-Hope, with a
sister speaker. She and myself attended two churches by the permission of the Elder, R. R. I preached five sermons before
Christmas, 1st at brother- Sis house, 2nd at the Mountain, and 3rd in
the new church; praise God for it. if Long expected, seen at last,"
The 1st text as follows: "Wisdom is justified of her. children," &c.
it was a time long to be remembered. I preached the Watch-Night
sermon Christmas Eve, from Matt. 2nd chap. and 10th verse, and durI ing my stay until New-Years Eve, -there was great good done in
the name of the Holy Child Jesus. In travelling towards Frankford I
stopped at Holmesburg for the purpose of warning some persons of
approaching danger, but finding an intimate friend of mine very ill,
I paid her a. religious visit, which gave me much satisfaction to see her
resignation unto death. 1 purposed leaving next morning for Frankford at 9 olclock, but she died, and the Elder and preacher being at
a far distance from there, by special request I attended the funeral,
and after a short sermon at the house I had to commit the body to the
earth, as no other person was present to do it. I then left for F rankford, preached four sermons which was profitable through Godls grace.
Feblry. 16th, [started for Attleboro. I spoke from the following
passages: Romans 6th chap. 21st 22d 23d verses. Also from the 8th
Chapter, 36th & 37th verses. At first it seemed like seed sown in
stony ground, but the deadness began to remove, and life, light and
immortality was come to pass through the preaching of the Cross of
Christ. I preached one sermon in Ben-Salem, and held a prayer meeting, and the Lord smiled upon us, and truly some had in a measure
lost their first love, and others who had not defiled their garments, but
contended for the fulfilment of the promise. Now, coming towards

6

 

- -- -- - II":

 

82

. Philadelphia, I found my son and my friends all well. After preaching one hundred and forty-six sermons and travelling nine hundred
and ninety-nine miles. '

In April, I felt impressed to visit Reading, Pa., which Idid, and
met some t-hatl had met with years before, testifying that God is God,
and changes not. I preached live sermons, and trulyl must say that
the Gospel is prevailing. Some few years previous there was not one
member of church, now there is a good "church and a large society. I
now went to Norristown, spoke dve times and led class. ' A man
formerly lived there that played on the violin, but leaving his place of
residence went to Philadelphia and embraced religion, and was called

I to go to the people of that town to preach the gospel to them, and the

Lord blessed his labors, and they new live in hope of a better resurrection. A A

July 15th, 1838, I left for Westohester, preached two sermons. From
there I went to Chichester, from that to the Valley, laboring as I, passed along to lively congregations. . On the 23d 1 left for Columbia,
calling on Rev. 8. S. ' , he gave me three appointments. God
revived his work in the hearts of his people, and while my pen moves
my heart "burns with love to God. Next I left for West-town and visited some aged friends, such as could not get to the church, and two
remarkable ones in particular, which were regarded as pillars of the
church. I was conducted on board the canal boat for Lewistown. I
had a pleasant passage, arrived at 1 or 2 o'clock, A.tM. and was
kindly treated by them. Preached four sermons to a hard people. I
wassick during my stay, my system was much debilitated before I
reached Pittsburg; however, I pressed on to -Huntingdon, found a
small society suffering for want of hedp} Iwas received by all the
brethren, preached five sermons, rode 11 miles and spoke to the Forgemen, but through bad management the congregation was small, but the
word had its effeet; the souls of the redeemed arepreeious. I next
proceeded to I-Iol-Iidaysburg. Took passage by stage at night, arrived
at 8 olcloelr A. M. II was kindly received by a gentleman belonging
to Wesley church, and entertained in a friendly manner. Preached
two sermons to a comfortable congregatian, and then left for Johns 

ttown. After I igotout of the ear I thought it -almost the last end of

the world as regards accommodations. I had to stand nearone hour
before I could get a person to carry my trunk. The Captain was
ltind and offered to send me a person, but I got a man at last to take
my trunk there. His wife was kind, although I introduced myself to
her, knowing her to be the Barberls wife. She sent for him to come
in, and then introduced me to her husband. When he sat down he
said, " you preach do you 3" I try, said I. l* Do you understand the
Scriptures?" Some parts of it, was my answer. [He appointed a meeting, and the time arrived, oongrgation gathered. When I commencB8

edl felt a little confusion in the house, but in a few minutes every
thing was still, and we had a solemn waiting upon the Lord ; after
which the Barber closed the service. So I left them. A brother informed me that the chief Magistrate of the town said we must hold
another meeting and he would attend it, but the preacher did not
seem to feel interested for the welfare of souls; for this cause I -toolt
passage on steam boat; for Pittsburg, which was pleasant although
crowded. The last day being Sabbath, I sat in serious -meditation on
the beauties of Creation and the plan of Redemption. There were
some lady passengers from Charleston that enjoyed religion would
come and sit by me to read. When about to leave, one of them requested me to pray for her husband and daughter. . I hope that Elijahls God will prosper her desire for their welfare. We arrived at
ittsburg about 8 olcloclr, P. M. I was conducted to the house of a warZhy Father in Israel, where I remained awhile, preached four or five
sermons in Pittsburg. My mind still urging me on to Brownsville;
and the Lord opened the way. The Elder of the circuit coming into
Pittsburg, made a way for me, and provided me with a sister to accompany me. _ The Lord blessed the labors of his servants. In three
months time there were one hundred and ten added to his circuit.
Some converts, some mourners. Five out of one family fell in love
with this Heaven-born plan. I commenced my winter journey» the 10th
of December. I left Pittsburg for a Quarterly Meeting at Williamsport; it was a tedious journey. We had to walk seven miles, and on
entering the town we met a brother coming to meet us with aconveyanoe. That night the meeting commenced, and truly the battle was
the Lordle. Six were slain by his mighty power, and the faith of believers strengthened. I spoke at 11 olclock from the 12th Chapter of
Isaiah, 5th 8: 6th verses, and at night again, to a crowded house of
well-behaved people. Elder Clemens, a successful laborer for the Lord
was on this circuit. After preaching, the mournerls bench was erected,
and the slain of the Lord were many. This meeting continued two days
and nights, after which our Love-feast took place. The Lord was in
the midst, and the people were crying for mercy in every direction.
The Wesleyan Methodists opened their church and gave me an appointment on Monday at 3 olcloclr, P. M., after which the Elder gave
. us privilege to hold prayer meetings, whiehicontinned all night, was
very successful, and a revival took place with both white and colored
people, and one of the members informed me there were thirty,persons added to the church that. time. Praise God for the victory.

-The world cannot withstand -l
Its ancient conqueror;

' It sure must fall beneath the hand
That arms. us for the war : I A

We than rested a few days and started for Untomown, Q 
travelling with me; and we were received very kindly by Bro. Jacl84sonand wife. and the friends generally. I preached out at the forge
to an attentive people and felt both life and liberty. The Elder returning from his circuit, preached again, and five united with us in

the Church, afterwhich the Elder formed a new Society, fourteen:

miles distant. I then preached in the white M. E. Church to a very
attentive congregation, whose groans ascended the hill of the Lord, and
I felt his presence in a powerful manner—text, Isaiah lix. 1 v. On
24th of December the Elder held a watch-night, and on the 25th we
started for Ridge Port again. I received the morning appointment and
the Elder preached at night, and the Lord continued to pour out his
Spirit upon the people, which causeda general revival. Ten joined
the Churchon trial. Some we left mourning for the redemption in
Christ, while others seemed to be in full stretch for the Kingdom of
God. I had a previous invitation to a church five miles distant on
the turnpike, and I spoke in the morning at lltolcloclgrand just closed
thesermon. when a gentleman came withca swift horse and vehicle
on express for me to come and fill an appointmentfor them at 3 oiclock
P. M., and accordingly went. We arrived between 2 and 3 olclock.
I meta large congregation of very respectable people, and preached
from these words: iiThe Spirit of the Lord God is upon me}? &c.

The next Wednesday I attendedan appointment in Greenfield in the .

old M. E. church; it was a very stormy night, and I thought from the
inclemeney of the weather there would be no person out; but through
the perseverance of the Brother and his wife that came for me, there
was-quite a large congregation gathered, after which he handed me
up in the pulpit, and I endeavored to preach from these words: "We
have found him of whom Moses and the Prophets did write," and I

i must say that the christian groans that were uttered, and the hearty
Amens that ascended the hill of Zion, were answered seemingly as
with coals of fire from Godls holy altar, which warmed every heart.
Pray God to carry on the work.

Thy banner unfurl,
Bid the nation surrender ;
And own Thee their God,
Their King, and Defender.

Some hundreds were added to that circuit that year, ending February, 1839. In a few days I left for Williamsport, where I remained
a few daysat Bro. 03., and attended several very good meetings at
Washington, Pa. I had an appointment given me by the Elder of
the white M. E. Church, which I accepted. By special request, I
visited a white young lady in the last stage of consumption, and after
conversing with her about the salvation of her soul, I received great
satisfaction, who I trust now rests in Abraharnis bosom. I attended a
quarterly meeting at Washington, and I heard some powerful exhortations-—Godt owned the word and by his infinite power arrested a woman who formerly kept a dance house.rand with her, -her family also,

85

(saving her husband who had lately disd,) and they, live in number,
cried aloud for mercy at the hand of God, and afterwards joined the

church; the old lady appeared very serious, and they all spoke well

in Love-feast. pt.

I had a special invitation, by letter, to go to Waynesburg, which I
received, and spoke in the old Methodist church, after being conveyed_..
there by a brother that was sent for me expressly. On Wednesday
evening I spoke in the Court house; it was in the month of February,
and the walking was very difficult; the friends were very kind; but
few colored persons, only two members of the church, and six joined.
I spoke for them five times—after discharging my duty I left in peace
with God and man. On my return to Washington, I spent a week or
ten days, and preached on Sabbath day, and at night three sermons.
The Mayor of the city declared his intention to impose a heavy punishment upon any person or persons disturbing any church, and it had
the effect to make some of the wildest of the rabble behave themselves
in the church with respect, while I endeavored to declare the oracles
of truth. After which I left for Meconnoburg, and preached eleven
sermons.. .

In March I left for Pittsburg, and we met in joy; and at my first
appointment I spoke from Isaiah c. 50, v. 31. I then rested three or
four weeks, during which time my mind become much exercised to
go to Cincinnati--it was difficult to travel, but God always makes a
way for his people. A friend both to God and me, got a passage for
me on board of a Steamboat, with a preacher and his family, and on
my arrival, I was recommended to friends there, Elder King and
wife, and I found them. I told them it was my business to preach.
An appointment was given me. I spoke several times, and the Lord
approbated the efforts of the feeble worm, and believers were built
up in the most holy faith. My visit was joyous. My pamphlets
went off as by a wind, the Elder recommending them very highly,
and also encouraged me to have the 2d edition printed, which I had
done—there being then one-thousand more for sale, in which I was
successful. Five joined the church after ths'last sermon.

I then left for Dayton, Ohio, and found a large church and building
The colored population there was very large--there I preached six\
sermons, and one in the other church. I was aided by both churches.

' Ithen took steamboat for Hambleton, a well situated place, and

preached two sermons; had a good visit, much favored of the Lord,
although the members were much scattered abroad. But aworthy
brother, a man of God, had settled there and formed a Society of some

twenty persons, which was still prosperous. After preaching two sermons, Itook passage in steamboat for Cincinnati; remained there
awhile until I had some new direction opened to my mind, where I
might call the people to the arms of Christ. The recent printing of

' ~36

my tracts, had caused me to be very scarce of money, (price of print
ring 1000 copies, 1538-) There were individuals who helped me in a
way for travelling. The Elder being absent that Sabbath morning,
there was some disorder prevailed among some who seemed doubleminded, yet they were officers. But God can make a way where
there appears to be no way. Mrs. E. J., her husband and children,
made meta present of seven dollars, and another friend interceded for
me in getting a good cabin passage in a comfortable boat, and no distinction--captain was a gentleman. I enjoyed sweet communion with
the spirit of the*Lord. But a painful circumstance took place near
our jonrneyls end, which seemed to me awful in the extreme. There
was a woman on board of the boat who was called insane. I thought
she was laboring under a despair of mind. She had seen herself a
dreadful sinner, and set in a melancholy position ; at times only she
would seemingly arouse and ask us not to let them hurt her. On one
occasion I asked her how she felt. She answered, ftl hear some persons talking; they will hurt me—I would drown myself, but it is such
a sin." A lady and myself strove to comfort her, after which the
lady read to her respecting the storms. She set very quiet, then she
suddenly arose to her feet, andsaid she must pray. I told her to
kneel down by my side, which she did very orderly; she first prayed
in Dutch; I could not underptand her only as she said God or Jesus,
and then she prayed in English very feeling, then clapped her hands
and said he has taken a load off me--this was about 10 or 11 olclock,
A. M. She arose, washed her face and hands, combed her hair. and

then put on a cap and looked like another person, and thus remained .

until candle-light, she and the young lady walking and talking. I was
reading and felt greatly relieved from the care of her. Suddenly
the chambermaid came in and asked me for her, and it seemed only
five minutes since I missed her. The captain made search, went down
on the deck and there found her, but she begged so hard to stay there
that he left her; The boat arrived at Portsmouth next morning at
sunrise, and that morning at 8 olclock, she was seen to jump overboard. They lowered 'a boat and tried to save her, but before they
reached her she sank to rise no more; and on the authority of Godls
word, I say, no self-murderer hath eternal life. Reader, "be careful,

exceedingly careful, how you trifle with the spirit of God, lest it should ,

take its tlight and leave thee to undergo eternal punishment.
Take the warning, turn and live,
And God will his Spirit give.

-After landing, Ifelt to be a stranger in a strange land, but the Lord
ever provides in time of need. Accordingly I was conducted by a
gentleman and introduced to a friend who received me and treated me
kindly, and in a few days intreduced me to one of the Trustees, who
welcomed me to the Church. New I began to feel the spirit of my

xx8.7

station. On Thursday night I filled an appointment. It was altogether a strange thing to hear a woman preach there, so it made quite
an excitement, which made my labor very heavy, as the people were
all eyes and prayed none. But on Sabbath day we had a crowded
house, and an old backslider fell to the floor like Dagon before the
Ark. Six joined the church on probation. On next Sabbath, Elder
Peters' quarterly meeting took place, which was greatly enjoyed by
all present. I met many of my friends from Pittsburg and other places, and we rejoiced together. One day in the house of the Lord is
more than a thousand, in the courts of the wicked. The first Sabbath
I spoke to the class, five fell to the floor under the influence of Godls
power. Two days afterward we left for Gallopeler quarterly meeting;
took passage on board of steamboat, which was very pleasant, without distinction. When we arrived, it being night, a gentleman conducted us to our lodgings and introduced us, where -we were kindly
received. I preached one sermon to a small society that seemed almost without a shepherd to look to their welfare. I was astonished at
the situation of the church-after which time the Elder came. A
Baptist society occupied the house in the morning, and in the afternoon the Elder preached—-it was a dull time indeed, none joined. At
night I tried to preach, but could not tell what the Lord had done for
then people, for they seemed both barren and unfruitful.

I felt an anxiety to go to Chilicothe, for which place I took passage
and arrived on Wednesday; found a large field of labor open. I
preached on the next night (Thursday) to a very large and well informed congregation. I then took passage via canal, and my mind
was much exercised, indeed, somewhat uncommon. Text lst, Thessalonians: "Because iniquity abounds the love of many waxed cold,
but they that endure to the end the same shall be saved." Text 2d:
"For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel lest the
cause of Christ should be made of non elfectll Text 3d. Prov. 5th
c. 6th v., I preached again from these words: "All flesh is as grass."
Fifth and last: ifl am the true Vine," &c. My visit being out, I left
for Williamsport in peace with God, likewise the brethren, as the
friends had used me very kind. After the quarterly meeting, we all
took passage with the Elder for Pittsburg, to meet the conference.

/1 there met the Rt. Rev. Bishop, and othersl was glad to see. I remained there two or three weeks, and preached four sermons. Both
preachers and people used me like christians. The conference was
largely attended with ministers from every direction. The Bishop
granted an open house for persons to visit and hear the arrangements
and appointments on the circuits. The preaching was very good, and
it seemed as if the word fell heavy upon the hearts of the Kings enemies; a general revival took place. The Bishop gave me an ap pointment during the conference. After my visit came to a close, I

was exercised to leave for Philadelphia. A lady, named Mrs. Dorsey,

being acquainted with one of the captains of the boats, succeeded
in procuring a comfortable passage for me for $15, and $3 for board,
making $18 in all, when it was $48 from Philadelphia to Pittsburg.
I felt grateful towards God for his mindfulness of me. The captain
was a gentleman, and the passengers of the first circle, and I enjoyed
their company. When we changed boats at Hollidaysburg, the captoin put me on the fast line that I might arrive at Philadelphia in the

day. i There was a white lady on the boat with me, bound to Phila- I

delphia, who had travelled from New Orleans. A gentleman who
was coming to the city, seeing hei' lonely situation and also mine, he
never left thecars until he saw each of our baggages in the omnibus
and starting for our doors—a gentleman indeed. Thus ended this
journey, Sept. 1839. _

After my arrival, my first inquiry was after the state of health of
my son and his family, and to my great disappointment I found that
my little grandson had died. This was startling news to me, you
may think, but the Lord removed him for some wise purposeiof his

providence, and in this I felt perfectly resigned to his will, with as

heart of gratitude for my protection and safe arrival at home. I remained in the city about three months, and received appointments
in our churches on Thursday nights, although in years past I always
had them at any time, Sunday afternoons not excepted. ln Philadelphia, N. York, Baltimore, and all the principal cities, from 100 to
1000 miles distant, as ltravelled under the reign of the first Bishop
Rt. Rev. Richard Allen, I have been instrumental in the hands of
God of gaining many hundreds of dollars for the connexion, by raising
societies where there never had been any, since which time they have
grown to such a mass as to build large churches. and that in different

places, and likewise have spent hundreds, but donlt regret it, asI was

about the work of Him that sent me, for which my reward is promised
if I but hold out faithful. I

Now, pray for me,
That while on earth I roam;
That with the ioyful Jubilee,

1 may arrive at ome.

I again was impressed upon to go into the western part of the State
of Pennsylvania and labor for the Lord, as the field appeared large
before me. About this time sister Elaw, a speaker belonging under
the jurisdiction of the E. Methodist connexion, coming to this place,
she received an appointment which had been given to me, and I closed
the meeting after her, and we enjoyed good seasons together. The
greatest display of Gods power seemed visible in a Protestant congregation; sister preached, and I gave an exhortation and closed, in
which there was a great shout for victory. I was informed by those
that were in the spirit, that they saw the glory of God like a sun over

l

 

89

the pulpit, and a face shone after it, thus the battle was the Lnrdls.

My sister leaving for England to visit the worldis convention, I
started alone. My first appointment was over Schuylkill--thenl was
conveyed nine miles farther, preached three sermons, and then returned to the city; on the following week I left again for Lancaster, Pa.,
but meeting friends going to Columbia I went with them. The meetings were attended by the spirit of God, and the speakers felt the
spirit of their station, and the feast was glorious; over thirty were
added to the church in less than a week, and many of them found
peace with God. From thence I went to Marietta, preached two sermons, and then left for Lancaster. The Lord owned the word spoken,
and after preaching, ten joined the church. "Praise the Lord, for He

only doeth great wonders."—Psalms. I then proceeded on to Carlisle;

Seemingly the wolf had got in among the fold and had scattered some
clear away. But Godls word will have its effect where it is promulgated in its purity. The consequence was, we had a great rejoicing.
I preached six sermons, including one for the Protestant Methodists.
I employed my time, as usual, endeavoring to explain the effects
of the everlasting gospel of the kingdom, even in common conversation. The happy seasons I have seen are ever memorable to me, and
my prayer is, that all Israel may be saved, not only from the trials of
life, but from the power of hell. I then proceeded to Harrisburg,
preached one sermon to a good congregation, and felt considerable
liberty in speaking. I left next morning for Marietta; it was a very
cold day"; sometimes I rode in a slay and sometimes in a carriage.
I preached one sermon on Sabbath, and next day took passage in a
slay for Columbia. I stopped a few days, preached one sermon, then
left for Penningtonville. I preached there on Sabbath day to a good
congregation of different denominations—it was a glorious day to my
soul. Upon the authority of Godis word, there need be no doubt about
religion, for they that have it carry the witness within themselves.
Thus, having finished my visit with a peace of conscience, I returned
to Philadelphia, March 1st, and found all my friends well. I waited
in the temple of the Lord and preached several times. I felt anxious
to go to Baltimore on a visit to the general conference, being the first
of that kind held there for many years. After mentioning it to the
Bishop, he said I should be paid for it if I wished to go, for which I felt
very grateful. After making the necessary preparations by arranging
my clothes, &c., the morning came for to start ; the boat was to leave
Philadelphia at 6 olclock, A. M. My mind had been somewhat divided about going to N. York, as I wanted to see the convention of the
American Anti-Slavery Society. But on my way to the Baltimore boat,
in company with a young sister, my mind was suddenly arrested by a
strange sensation, which proceeded from some supernatural cause.
followed by a voice which seemingly spake thus: ffa watery grave !

90

a watery gravel!" I told the sister what had been revealed to me,
yet not half aequare from the house. She believed as I did, and I
consequently turned back with an impression I should be drowned
if Iwent, as I seemingly saw the water. "How unsearchable are
Godls judgments, and his ways are past finding out-"

The same month, April, I was sept for in great haste to visit Cape
May, to see my aged mother, as it was thought for the last time, as
she was very ill, at the advanced age of. 82 years. I went and remained with her several weeks, when she nearly recovered. I then
filled several appointments unexpectedly. But my way was I know
not where. During my stay there I lost a nephew 12 years of age,
Whom I trust rests. But I should have mentioned, the day I returned from the Baltimore boat, I took passage at 2 olclock, P. M., for
Burlington, and preached for them on Sabbath day at a quarterly
meeting, and second day after I left for New York and arrived the
first day the convention sat, which I attended in company with Mrs.
H. Lane, who was ever zealous in the good cause of liberty and the
rights of all, and I heard some very eloquent speeches which pleased
me very much, and my heart responded with this instruction: ilDo
unto all men as you would they should do unto you ;" and as we are
all children of one parent. no one is justified in holding slaves. I felt
that the spirit of God was in the work, and also felt it my duty to unite
with this Society. Doubtless the cause is good, and Ipray God to
forward on the work of abolition until it fills the world, and then the
gospel will have free course to every nation, und in every clime.-After the convention was over I returned to Philadelphia, and prepared for a long journey. But previously I visited a part of Rev. Turnerls circuit--Jersey, viz. of Burlington, Trenton, &c. His charge
was extensive and laborers were much wanted. I endeavored to
preach two sermons in Burlington, and in other places nine more, and
then visited Allentown and preached three sermons. I visited a camp
meeting and never saw a greater display ,of Godls power, for truly
signs and wonders followed the preaching of the cross of Christ, while
the voice of prayer made sinners stare and filled them with awe and
wonder. I also preached to a small society five miles farther, called
Lawrenceville, after which I returned to Trenton, Princeton, &c., and
in a few days I left for Brunswick. I left for this journey in 1843,
in one of the brother's own conveyance, for which I felt very thankful.
Ifilled several appointments, and then left for New York, where I
remained several weeks, and proposed the holding of a protracted
meeting to the Elder Bags, in charge, and he thought well of it, and
appointed one, and it seemed that the people truly had a mind to
Work, and the Lord blessed our labors. I preached on two Sabbath
nights and once in the middle of the week. A revival broke out and
twenty-one were added to the church, and it concluded with a victo91

i rious Love-feast, -glory to God. During my absence my son was taken

very ill with a severe disease, and I felt very anxious to see him af.
ter an absence of several months; consequently in December Ileft N.
York on my return, andl found him much better than I expected,
which greatly relieved myimind. I preached once in the Bethel,
once in the Wesley church, which came in the connexion, Hurst St,
and other places, but soon finished my work in this city, and notwithstanding the severity of the winter, I returned to Rahway, and found
the friends very kind to me. I thank the Lord forgiving them hearts
to be so, as the winter was trying. I preached ten sermons during
my stay, in which time a great revival took place in the church, and
many were added, amongst whom was 9. Rev. father E—-v, who had
left our church but at this time returned, and truly we made use of
that very appropriate phrase: "The dead is alive and the lost is found,"
and the brother rejoiced much, seeing the Providence of God. Now
I began fo feel my labors nearly completed in that part. I returned
to N. York (as my visit was not accomplished in that city) on the lot
of March, 1841, and tarried some time, after which I took passage
on steamboat for New Haven and arrived there at 1 olclock, P;. M. I
was conducted by carriage to Mr. Bis. and h-is family was kind; on
next Wednesday I was taken to a brotheris house, near the meeting
house, which they commenced in January, and I preached in it in
March. Being a people there whose minds were much cultivated, I
felt at liberty to speak, believing God would own his word, which he
did, and we hadarevival. But Lucifer had prepared an engine to
play upon it and put it out. But we had some firm members that
turned neither to the right or left, as the scripture saith "the righteous
shall hold on their way? Ah! reader, many scenes I have passed
through, but I yet live by faith in the Son of God. I preached twentyone sermons, and made my home at brother Whitels, near the church;
this saved me from a great deal of exposure in going to and returning
from the church. i I perceived their slothfulness in coming out to Sahbath morning services. My first text was Rev. i, 10. God was with
us truly, for signs and wonders followed, and we commenced a protracted meeting, and on the fifth night there were fourteen mourning
souls at the anxious bench. After arstay of seven weeks, ~I felt at
liberty to leave them, which I did, and arrived in New York on the
24th of April. Elder B. gave me an appointment the ensuing Sabbath morning in Bethel church. After that I went over to Brooklyn
and spoke three or four times, but my heart mourned to see such a
great falling off that had taken place in a few months past. But the
conference sit there, and they had good preaching, and the congregation soon began to increase. The brothers were kind to me and gave
me appointments at different places. I continued to travel round
about, and spoke a number of times in Flushing. eight sermons in

92*

Jamaica, three in Flatbush, three in Huntingdon south, three in Glencove, and then returned to Brooklyn again, and remained awhile with
a sister who was ever kind to me, for which I hope God will reward
her, with others. There was a camp-meeting to commence that week
of my return, to be held by Rev. Boggs, near Harvest Straw, and
I through invitation went in company—it was a very rainy time, but
we had a great meeting, and I received two appointments. We
caught no cold, and the christians rejoicedlin the victories of the Cross,
for we believed the Lord would shelter us even in the midst of
storm.

Having a great desire to go to Massachusetts, I paid my way to
Harvest Straw to take the boat, but was disappointed, not being in
time, after which I had to pay a gentleman to convey me ten miles
and conduct me safe on board of the boat for Albany. I had a pleasant cabin passage for $1 50. On my arrival I employed a person to
convey me and my baggage to a friendls house, and when I got there,
they being absent, I did not stop even for breakfast, but returned to a
N. York boat that stopped at Hudson, and there to take passage by
Railroad. On my arrival, I found the cars did not start until 4 o'clock,
P. M. It then occurred to my mind that I was in Hudson unexpectedly, and truly the hand of the Lord must be in it, as I wanted to
visit that place some time before. I then went outlin search of some
of my own people of color, trying to find out if I could get a place
to preach in on my return, as I felt anxious to call the fallen sons and
daughters of Adam. When about to start in the cars for Stockbridge,
one of the brothers of the church went in company with me to the
camp. By 7 olclock we were safely landed and found the meeting
prosperous, and I felt warm for the battle, as though I must press
through fire or water. We had one mile to walk or pay 25 centsafter walking the distance, we found the tent that the Albany friends
were accommodated at; soon after which the Elder heard of it and
called upon me, which seemed to approbate my coming to his camp.
I felt a great degree of liberty, believing myself to be in the right
place. After several other strangers had labored in their turn, the
Elder gave me another appointment on Saturday night. I endeavored
to speak as God gave ability, and a brother closed meeting after me.
On Sabbath morning at 10 olclock, I tried to speak again to a large
congregation. It rained very heavy, but they gave the best attention and withstood the storm in all quietness; I felt free, the tongue
was loosed, the lip was touched. and the heart was warm, which
seemed to operate with the language of the text, in Rev.: "I was in
the spirit on the Lordls day-ll The Lord owned the word, and the
hearty Amens that went up, caused the woods to echo. A white
Methodist gentleman was present, who had become almost choked to
death with_the glutted cares of this world 3 while sitting, God through

93

his mercy, sent his awakening power to his heart, and he rejoiced
louder than others, telling me he was glad the Lord had sent me, that
his mind had been overcharged with the cares of this life truly, and
all of this while Irael shouted for the battle. The wicked were
somewhat rude on Sunday night, and the Elder gave a very appropriate address to the gentlemen of the State of Massachusetts, showing
how our rights were invaded, after which the gentlemen took it on
themselves to guard the camp ground, and we had good order. The
breaking up was a time long to be remembered, and on that day at
12 oiclock I left for Hudson. I there preached one or two sermons,
visited the sick, &c., and was then taken to Pittsfield, preached one
sermon, and then proceeded by stage to Hudson city, where Iremain.
ed a while with a kind sister and her daughter. I attended the church
on Sabbath morning and enjoyed a good sermon delivered by the Elder.

At 2 oiclock, P. M., I tried to preach in the same church to a full
congregation. Text from the general epistle of James, lst Chapter &
25th verse. At night I spoke in the old Methodist church for the first
time, from these words; S We have found him of whom Moses and
the Prophetls did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph." My
mind was much exercised on the subject; receiving light from Heaven.

Ipreached one sermon in the School-House at Catskill from these,

words; SI will give you power to tread on serpents and scorpions,
and they shall not harm you." The Lord was there of a truth. After
this, by request, I spoke in the white Methodist church from these
words: "Therefore, cast not away your confidence, which has great
recompense of reward." The Lord was there, and assisted the clay to
speak in his name. On Monday night I spoke from these words of
Paul to the Hebrews: ii If the words spoken by Angels, are steadfast,"
&c.. which had its desired effect. On Saturday I left for Albany,
taking with me a good report for the Elder of our connection ; after
which, we wrote for him to come and form a Society, which he
did sometime afterwards. The Elder was kind, and gave me appointments frequently. He held a Protracted Meeting, at which all of our
laborers were successful. I preached seven sermons in Albany and
one in Troy; after which I felt moved upon to visit Binghampton, and
sister Tilghman was on her way to the same place to visit her father
and mother, from whom she had been absent for some time, preaching the Everlasting Gospel of the Kingdom. But we were detained on
the canal some time; but the Captain was kind and treated us well.
After five days sail we arrived safe, and found our friends well; but
not well in the Lord.

As soon as I enter a city I can feel the spirit that I may have to
contend with; but by the permission of the Elder I filled appointments
for a week or 'two, and then left for Montrose Quarterly Meeting.
Preached five sermons, and passed through many things that were not

9%

agreeable, but duty makes labor light. I also spoke to a white congregation. After riding five or six miles and back the same night, and
preaching two sermons in the town, I returned again to Binghsmpo
ton, and held the Christmas Watch-Night meeting, as I found it was
about to be omitted, and feeling interested, made application to the
Trustees the Elder being absent, and thus gained permission. It was
a task for me, as sister Tilghman was sick ; but the Lord was with us,
while we rejoiced in the light that had come into the world. Glory
to God for the gift of his Son. In the morning three of us attended the
Episcopal church, and associated with them in receiving the Lordls
Supper. At night I preached again, and I felt zealous in the cause of
God, who was, and is ever faithful to his promise ; " Lo! I am with
you alway, even to the end of the world."

The Elder then returned and urged me to stay, but I saw my way
was onward. After preaching once more, I was aided on my way to
Owego, where I found the enemies were many, standing in opposition
to female preaching, or preachers of any kind ; but God always clears
the way for his people. While they were preparing to have a dance
rather than come to hear preaching, and boasting that they would invite the Elder to come to it, God laid his heavy hand. upon the man
that was to play the fiddle for them ; he fell sick on the floor; but he
was determined to carry it out, and sent for another man, and he refused, and at last this Goliah-like man was glad to send for the Elder
to come and pray for him. "0! sinner, thou canslr not .measure arms
with Jehovah ! He is a man of war, and the Lord is his name." In
this very place, God worked miracles among them. I preached on
Friday night, Sabbath morning, afternoon and night-and God worked
wonders; cnverting some of the most wicked among them.

After this, I left for Smithboro ; it seemed truly a hard place, and
my labors were attended with but little success. There were a few
scattering Methodists that assembled to worship, and seemed profited
thereby. After I delivered my message Ileft for Towanda ; and there
we had very comfortable meetings I then proceeded ten miles further and preached ; there were eight persons, there one being an exhorter. They met us in the spirit of the gospel. After doing my duty I returned to Towanda, and on Wednesday I left for Athens; re«
mained two days, preaching two sermons in the Academy. Next
morning Irode about two miles, but we had to wait until the next
Tuesday, in consequence of the flood being so great. I now was
among strangers, with very little money; but dnding the lady was a
christian, I ventured to open my mind to her, telling her the nature of
my mission. She toid her husband, who said he would charge me
only six shillings. I sewed three spreads together for her toquilt.
She then informed me of a lady preacher in the neighborhood, one
mile distant. I was kindly received by her, and met another person

9!)

,there also that seemed greatly "wrought upon. After a seasonable

word of exhortation, I took tea with them. In three days time I left
for Towanda again, and met with great success by preaching in private houses. There wasa gentlemen that seemed as if he never
thought of God in all his life, but was arrested by the conviction of
Gcdls spirit, and sent for me to come and pray for him and his family.
In this my soul greatly rejoiced, leaving him with a promise to call
again, which I did. After inquiring my manner of travelling, and
what I depended upon for support. I replied by giving him a statement of how I travelled, when he kindly aided me by a donation, and
wished me success, requesting me to pray for him and his family before I left them, and I believe I saw him then fast ripening for eternal blessedness. I was then sent for to return again to Owego, a distance of 38
miles, and they would pay my way on to Montrose, on my way to
Philadelphia. I obeyed the request and found things very prosperous
indeed. At night we had prayer meetings, and the Lord continued
to pour out his spirit upon the people, and we had a meeting every
night. Mr. J. H., formerly of Columbia, whose lot was cast as in a
strange land, where there were only a few people that were members
of the M. E. church; several husbands, strangers to God until now,
and their wives, servants of the most High God, and two daughters of
Mr. J. H., were justified through faith—three joined the church previously- I was selected to make a class book, and did so, as I wanted to see how many were for us. The Baptists had held an anxious
meeting, after which five joined them. I made the trial by special
invitation, and thirteen joined us. I had preached on Sabbath morning and night, and then held prayer meetings every night afterwards
that week, except Saturday night; a man and his wife fell to the floor
and cried for mercy, and both arose in the same hour soundly converted, giving God the glory. I preached on the next Sabbath morning
and then led class, and at night again-text, Judges iv. 25, 26. They
all marvelled at a woman taking such aldeep subject, but the Lord
assisted the organ of clay, and we had the victory, as there were
twenty-one-persons joined from that revival, and nearly all of them
evinced justifying grace. On 3d day night we wound up, as I was to
start on my journey on next day, which I did---brother paid my passage. I rods 28 miles in good company with a lady and gentleman
who were going to New York. She said she was sorry to part 3 we
had a heavy thunder storm with rain, and it was very dark, but we had
a very careful driver, and we arrived safe at Montrose and took supper--between 12 and 1 otclock at night I took stage for Willresbarrs
and arrived there at 8 next morning, and there I crossed the Susquehanna ; I was very hungry, and having a little time I went to the house
and aslredrthe lady for breakfast and I would pay her. She said she

-96

had nothing, but would try and get me a good breakfast and take no
pay, which she did. I truly feel thankful to God that he has proved
himself a table in the wilderness. About 4 o*clock in the afternoon
I arrived safe and was kindly received, and preached on Sabbath
morning and night. Between the two appointments I rode two miles
and preached in the afternoon. That day the Lord was in the house
in power. Tuesday evening we had a glorious prayer meeting. I
rode all night around the mountain, and some walked and appeared
to be a quarter of a mile off. But the Lord preserved me in the mail
stage alone. I adore his name now and I shall for evermore. The
preacher in charge arrived the next day after I did, and spent his labors of love among the people. On the Wednesday following he went
away and left me in charge of the class, (eight persons) to regulate
them, and by the permission of the elder I addressed them. After I
had relieved my mind and taken my seat the preacher formed them
into a class and appointed a leader, who but three months before, was
unconverted ; but being so interested for the prosperity of Zion, seemed worthy of the appointment. After this I endeavored to hold prayer
meetings through the week; preached twice on Sabbath day and
helped to lead class, as the brother was young,-—but they were all
willing people, and truly it seemed to be the day of Godis power
among them, and -ii Peace abided at our House."

At the expiration of three weeks and four days 1 left them fifteen
names_ on their class book. I then rode a distance of sixty miles over
a hard road, hills and mountains, (there being no turn-pike or rail-road
on that rout from W ilksbarre to Easton ;)—some part of the way there
was good sleighing. Through the help of Providence we arrived at
Easton about Slclock, P. M. I took supper and lodging in the Hotel,
where l was well accommodated; after which I found a small number of colored friends. We had a meeting, and ii it was good for us
to be there.il After thisl called at New Hope, thirty-two miles I
think from Philadelphia; visited the family I was brought up in, stopped and rested myself, as I felt much exhausted from travelling, so
much winter and summer. I preached two or three times. Brother
J- B. -- was holding a protractetl meeting. I gained strength,thank the Lord, and then left for home, and arrived in the city the last
day of March 1842, having been two years, wanting a few days, almost incessantly travelling. I found my son, together with the rest of
my family connections quite Well; yet I could hear of the ravages of
death, the relentless murderer, who never takes denials; my little
grand-daughter, a promising child indeed, was taken with the rest. 0 !
how soon delights may perish, and my heart responds--ii The Lordis
will be done." _ , I

My health being very much impaired, I knew not butthatl should
he the next one called away, but the Lord spared me for some other

97

purpose, and upon my recovery I commenced travelling again, feeling
itbetter to wear out than to rust out—and so expect to do until death
ends the struggle—knowing, if I lose my life for Christis sake, I shall

find it again. .

I-now conclude-by requesting the prayers of Godls people everywhere, who worship in His holy fear. to pray for me, that I ever may
endeavor to keep a conscience void of offence, either towards God or
man—for I feel as anxious to blow the Trumpet in Zion, and sound
thealarm in Godls Holy Mount, as ever ;—

Thou h N atureis strength decay,
An earth and hell withstandTo Canaanls land lil urge my way, .
At HIS Divine command. '

But here I feel constrained to give over, as from the smallness of

- this pamphlet I cannot go through with the whole of my journal, as it

would probably make a volume of two bundred pages; which, if the

Lord be willing, may at some future day be published. But for the

satisfaction of such as may follow after me, when I am no more, I
have recorded how the Lord called me to his work, and how he has
kept me from falling from grace, as I feared I should. In all things
he has proved himself a God of truth to me; and in his service I am
now as much determined to spend and be spent, as at the very first.
My ardour for the progress of his cause abates not a whit, so far asl
afm able to judge, though I am now something more than fifty years
0 age. i As to the nature of uncommon impressions, which the reader cannot but have noticed, and possibly sneered at in the course of these
pages, they may be accounted for in this way: It is known that the
blind have the sense of hearing in a manner much more acute than
those who can see: also their sense of feeling is exceedingly fine, and
is found to detect any roughness on the smoothest surface, where
those who can see find none. So it may be with such asl am, who
has never had more than three months schooling; and wishing to
know much of the way and law of God, have therefore watched the
more closely, the operations of the Spirit, and have in consequence
been led thereby. \ But let it be remarked that I have never found
that Spirit lead me contrary to the Scriptures of -truth, as I nndegstiand
them. " For as many as are led by tha Spirit of God are the sods of
God."—Rom. viii. 14. - I

I have now only to say, May the blessing of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, accompany the reading of this poor effort
to speak well of his name, wherever it,may,be read. AMEN.

P.'S- Please to pardon errors,-and excuse" all imperfections, as I
have been deprived of the advantages of education (which I hope all
will appreciate) as I am measurably a self-taught person. I hope the

9'1
_ contents of this work may be instrumental in leaving a lasting impression upon the minds of the impenitent; may it prove to'be encouragin
to the justified soul, and a comfort to the sanctified t

Though much opposed, it is certainly essential in life, as Mr. Wesley wisely observes. Thus ends the Narrative of Juunru Luz, the

first female preacher of the First Afkican Methodist Episcopal Church.
Brrnnz. AT Pmnannrnn. Penn.,'Um'rzn Suns or Ammues.

F1N1s

 

 /!!%'.!I!!I!!!!gg: 

  N i [F __:__~*_kj  H

- THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED '
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 2:
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON
up.  OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED
' BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES.

Harvard College Widener Library
" Cambridge, MAO2138 (617)495-2413

  

