THE

AUTOBIOGRAPHY

  PARLEY PARKER PRATT,

ONE 0? THE

TWELVE APOSTLES

OP T113

Ehumh nf Jesus Ehrist nf Lartter-flay, Saints,

XIBBACINO R13

LIFE. MINISTRY AND TRAVELS.

EDITED BY ms SON, PARLEY P. PB.A'1"l‘.

ILLUSTRATED.

SOLD ONLY BY SUBSCRIPTION.

" Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth ; Yea, saith the Spirit. that
they may rest from their labors : and their work: dofollow them."—Rev. xiv. 13.

-—:———-0-¢>o————-:NEW YORK:

PUBLISHED FOR THE EDITOR AND PROPREETOR

Br RUSSELL BROTHERS,
17, 19, 21, 28 R033 Srntnrr.

1874.

 

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1874,
By PARLEY P. Pun,

In the Offioe of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.

PREFACE.

IN publishing this volume I am discharging a duty solemnly
imposed upon me by my lamented father, just before his
departure on his last mission to the United States.

It affords me great pleasure to present the Autobiography
of the late Author to his relatives, his numerous friends, and to
the general reader.

The writer is well and favorably known through his "Voice
of Warning," his "Key to Theology," and other productions of
his pen, as well as through his personal labors. He was one of
the first Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints, having been called by revelation and ordained to that
office by the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. He
was intimately associated with the martyrs Joseph and Hyrum,
with Presidents B. Young and H. C. Kimball, and other leading
men, almost from the first rise of the Church: his history, therefore, was so interwoven with that of the Church, that many of
the most interesting sketches of Church history will be found
therein.

The following pages, which embrace his life, ministry and
travels, and some of his best miscellaneous writings in prose and
verse, are the productions of his own pen.

He spared no pains to make the work a reliable record, and
one that would be acceptable to all lovers of truth. It is written
in the author's happiest style. He was an early pioneer of the
Great West, and travelled extensively in different countries

 

4 ' PREFACE.

His life was one of indefatigable labor, varied and complicated, crowded with public labors and responsibilities, and
full of strange and extraordinary events——a life mingled with
the extremes of joy and sorrow—or, in the writer's own words,
" a truly eventful one."

With confidence and satisfaction I submit this work to the
reader, feeling assured that it will stand upon its own merits. I
also have an earnest and sincere desire that it may be the means,
through the blessing of God, of accomplishing much good.

In editing the work I have been kindly assisted by the
author's personal friend, Elder John Taylor, to whom I feel
deeply indebted.

The work embraces a period of history of fifty years-—from
the author's boyhood to the time of his betrayal, by apostates,
into the hands of his enemies, and martyrdom.

The writer, in his second preface to his "Voice of Warning,"

in 1846, gave expression to the following sentiment: " Should,

the author be called to sacrifice his life for the cause of truth,
he will have the consolation that it will be said of him, as it was

said of Abel, "He being dead yet spea/call."

El)I'I‘UR.

;'%.u.'r LAKE CITY, Dec., 1873.

To THE PUBLIC.

HE circumstances attending the death of our beloved and
much esteemed Apostle, Parley Parker Pratt, rendered it
impossible for him to complete and prepare for publication
the work in which he had for many years been engaged,
which is now presented to the public.

The general history and incidents were recorded in various
forms of manuscript, some in book form, some in loose leaves,
whilst others were extracts from the "Millennial Star " and
other publications, yet they needed collating and revising preparatory to their publication.

The deceased, as appears above, had laid upon his eldest son,
P. P. Pratt, the responsibility of publishing his history in case
anything should happen to prevent himself from doing it.

At the solicitation of Brother Pratt I undertook the task of
assisting to collate and revise the work preparatory to publication. I found, as I expected it to be, quite an undertaking.
But, as Bro. Parley brought the gospel to and baptized me, and
as I have always entertained for him the most profound regard,
I esteemed it a duty, due alike to gratitude and respect, to assist
in having him properly presented before the community.

In the revision the changes are very few and unimportant, the
meaning being rigidly adhered to, and the original, so far as possible, preserved intact. His doctrines and general views are
left unchanged, as he was always considered sound in doctrinal
points.

 

6 1'0 THE PUBLIC.

The multitudinous reminiscences manifested in his eventful
life exhibit a true and living faith in God and his religion—an
honesty of purpose, an inflexible will, and an unflagging, indefatigable industry and perseverance. He possessed a comprehensive mind, coupled with a sound judgment. He manifested
an indomitable fortitude under the most trying circumstances,
and in adversity and trials, as well as in prosperity, exhibited an
example worthy of praise and emulation. He was indeed a true
Latter-Day Saint, an honorable Apostle, a good and kind husband, an affectionate father, a true friend, and an honest man.

From various premonitions which he had during his last visit
with me in New York, I was satisfied that, when I took my last
sad leave of him in that city, I should never see his face
again in the flesh. These presentiments were but too speedily
and sadly fulfilled. He has gone——but has left a name and a
fame that will live throughout time and burst forth in eternity;
and in the morning of the first resurrection, when the opening
heavens shall reveal the Son of God, and he shall proclaim, "I
am the resurrection and the life," when Death shall deliver up
the dead, I expect to meet Bro. Parley in the resurrection of
the just.

J OHN TAYLOR.

 

CONTENTS.

Y CHAPTER I.—Parentsge :—Childhood :—Youth :—Education :—Early

Impressions :-Journey Westward :—Msking a New Farm in
the Wilderness of Oswego.... . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . ..

CHAPTER II.—Thoughts on Religion :-Join the Baptist Church:
—-Strange Perversion of a Scripture 

CHAPTER III.—Reverses:—Loss of our Farm :—Strange Resolve:
—Travels West :—Forest Life :—Another New 'Farm.. . . . . .

CHAPTER IV.—Revisit Canaan, N. Y. :—Interestmg Meeting :— t0   Homeooooooooooooooooso

CHAPTER V.—Our Home :—New Sect :—Progressive Religious
Views : —Unexpected Meeting: —Dialogue: - Forsake My
Home:-Journey to New York :—Public Ministry :—Strange
Book :—First Interview with a Latter-Day Saint . . . . . . . . . .

CHAPTER VI.—Interesting Meetings :—Seoond Interview with
Hyrum Smith :—-Visit to the Church in Seneca County:—
Baptism, Confirmation and Ordination :—Ministry Among my
Kindred :—Baptism of my Brother Orson :-—Wonderful Sign
in the Heavens :—Return to Western New York :—First
Interview with Joseph Smith:—Description of his Person and

' 

OOOOOOIIOOOIIIOOIO

CHAPTER VII.—Mission to the Western Sta.tes:—Visit to the
Indians :—Wonderful Success in Kirtland, Ohio :—Journey
Westward :—Great Excitement and Anxiety to Hear the
Fulness of the Gospel :—-Imprisonment :—Mock Trial :—
Escape :—-Preaching :—Success :—Visit the Wysndots :—
Journey Resumed :—Great Hardships :—Arrival on the Frontiers of Missouri . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

CHAPTER VIII.—Visit the Delawares of Kansas :—Interview with
the Chief and Council :—Speech and Rep1y:—Great ExcitePAOII.

17m 21

22to 25

26to 28

29to 30

31to 41

48

42to

49to 55

 

8 CONTENTS.

ment :—Oppositlon from Missionaries :—Compe1led to Leave
the Indian Country :—Ministry in Jackson County :—Council
in Independence :——Return Eastward :—Disguise :—Hospita1ity
of a Family of the Saints :—Dialogue :—Sickness :—Reunion
with President Joseph Smith :—Mission to the Shakers:——Ministry Among the Churches :—False Spirits :—Inquire of the
Lord:—Mode of Receiving Revelations..... . . . . . . . . . 

CHAPTER IX.—Reve1ation on False Spirits :—Ministry Among the
Churches :—Rcmarkable Miracle of Healing :—Arrival of
Emigrant Saints from New York :—Severe Disappointment. .

CHAPTER X.—Conference at Kirt1and:—Revelation of the High
Pricsthood:—O1-dinations to the Same:—Appointment of
Missions through the Western States:—Rcturn Westward,
Accompanied by my Brother Orson:—Our Success by the
Way :—Arrival at the Frontiers :—Sickness :—Rcrnarkable
Conversion of Newel Knight :—A Dream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

CHAPTER XI.—Attcnd Conference :—Instanta'neous Healing :—
Return Eastward :—Dcscription of the Inhabitants on the
South Side of the Missouri River :—Strange Manifestation :—
Arrive at St. Louis :—Preaching and Entertainment :—Arrive
at Vandalia :—Reccption :—Exposure in Crossing an Overflowed Bottom :—Dialogue :—Hospitality of a Preacher :Deaf Landlord :—Meet my Wife . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

CHAPTER XII.—Mission in Ohio :—Start to Western Missouri :—
Incidents by the Way :—Discourse on Board a Steamer on
the Fourth of July :—Its Effect :—Arrival on the Frontiers :—
Farming :—Extortion :—Mission in Missouri and Illinois :—
Trcatment by Infidels :—Grcat Success in Illinois :—Opposition from Baptist Ministers :—Outlines of Mr. Peck's Speech

and my Reply :—Resu1t :—Return Home :—A Voice from
the Dead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

CHAPTER XIII.—Prosperity of the Church :—School in Zion:—
Rcve1ation:—Mob:—Destruction of Printing Ofiice:—Dei'ence:
—Prisoncrs :—-Joumey to Lexington :—A Dream :—Its Fulfilment:—Battle:—Defeat of the Robbers:—A Miracle :—Dcfence Construed into Murder :——Gov. Boggs and Militia Join
the Mob:—Church Driven from the County:—Plundcrings

PAOI8.

56to 66

6'lto 71

72m 77

'l8to 84

85t0 98

 

CONTENTS. 9

PAGES.
and Burnings :—Insurrections :—-Signs in the Heavens :—

Action of the Governor :—Attorney-General Driven from
Court :—-Refugees Settle in the North :—A Bandit Chief
 GovernorloOOOIOOODOOOIIOOOOII COOOOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOO 

CHAPTER 'XIV.—Labors in Clay County :—Coni'erence :—Appointment to a Tedious Journey :—A Case of Healing :—Arrive
at Kirtland :—Revelation :—Travel Eastward, in Company
with President Joseph Smith :—Conference in Geneseo :-—Pleasing Reminiscence:—Pre_sident Smith and Others Return
Home :—Visit Sackett's Harbor :—Crowded Meeting :—Requested to Visit the Sick :—A Little Boy Healed:—Baptisms, etc. :—Miraculous Gifts :—Lying Priests and Rabble :—
Visit my Parents in Canaan,N. Y. :—Return to Kirtland.. 114to 121

CHAPTER XV.——An Army :—A long March :—Recruits :—A

Voice :—-Camp Arrives in Missouri :—Delegation to the Governor :—Interview :—Return to Camp :—Council :—Great
Storm and Flood :——A Battle Providentially Prevented :—Cholera :—Army Disbanded :—Sudden Destruction :—Labor
with my Hands:—-Journey to Ohio :—Labor and Ministry :—Accusations :—Repair to Kirtland :—Interview with the President :—-His Action on the Matter :——Calling and Ordination
of a Quorum of Twelve Apostles :—My Ordination, Blessing
and Charge:—Charge to the Quorum............. . . . . . . .. 122tol36

CHAPTER XVI.—Return to New Portage :—Fire :—Return to Kitt1and:—Mob:—Journey Eastward, as far as Maine :—Return
to Boston :—Removal to Kirtland :—A Templc:—School,
Endowments, Prophccyings, Visions, etc. :—Visit from Brother
H. C. Kimball and Others :—My Wife Healed and Blessed :A Remarkable Prophecy and its Fulfilment :—Mission to
Cana.da:—Fal1s of Niagara :—Reflections.. . . . . . . . . . . ...... . . 137 to 114

CHAPTER XVII.—Journey Resumed :—Ministry :—-Striking Answer

to Prayer :—Arrival at Toronto :—John Taylor :—Visit the
Religious Ministers, the Sheriff, and the Public Market,
Seeking for an Opening, but in Vain :—Secret Prayer :—About
to leave the City ——-God Sends a Widow to Receive Me :—
Great Faith :—Eyes of the Blind Opened :—Great Excitement and Gainsayings :—Pub‘ic Preaching :—Find a People
Prepared to Receive the Message..  145 to 154

 

10 ' CONTENTS.

PAGII.

CHAPTER XVIII.—Crowded Meeting :—Discourse :—Baptize the
People and Organize a Church :—-Spread of the Work :—
First Visit to the Country :—Opposition :—Remarkable Success:—Return to Kirtland:—Return with my Wife to
Toronto :—-Meetings at Mr. La.mphcre's :—A Woman Healed
and Evil Spirits Rebuked :—Mr. Lamareux :—A Meeting :—
A Challenge :—Discussion Held in the Open Air :—Great
Crowd :—Opening Propositions by Elder O. Hyde :—Result
ofthe Discussion . . . . .  . . . . . . . .  155tol7l

CHAPTER XIX.—A Vision :——Remarkable Signs in the Heavens:
—A False Prophet :—A Dream :—Impression :—Prayer :—
Interpretation Given in a Second Dream :—Attend Mr.
Cain-d's Meeting :—He Shows Himself to be a Railer and
a Liar :—We Challenge Him to an Investigation :—He Visits
Toronto :—We Return There :—Continues His Opposition :Refusing to Meet Us :—Great Meetings :—Excitement :Text :—Summary of the Discourse Proving Him a False
Teacher :—He Retires to Private Life :—Return to Kirtland:
—Birth of My First  . . . . . .  l72tol80

CHAPTER XX.—Two Items of Prophecy :—Death of my Wife :An Open Vision Forewarning Her of Her Death :—Burial :—Description of Her Person and Character :—Reflections :—Retum to Canada:—Selection fcr an English Mission :—

Jarrings in the Church :—Apostacy :—Temptation :——Deliverance :—Mission to New York City :—The Voice of Warn-.

ing :—-Its Success :—English Mission :—Remarkable Prophecy:—Several Instances of Healing:—-Spread of the

Work in the City and  181to188

CHAPTER XXI.—Remove to Missouri :—National Anniversary at
Far West :—Corner Stone of a Temple :—Insurrcctions :Defence :—Attack on De Witt, Carroll County :——Mob Chaplain :—Surrender and Flight of the Citizens of De Witt :Action of the Governor : — General Defence: — Battle of
Crooked River :—Death of Colonel Patten :—Defence Construed into Murder and Treason :—Muster of State Forces
Against the "Mormons," with Orders for Extermination :—General Lucas, with Four Thousand Men, Menaces Far
  . . . . .  189to202

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XXII.—Exterminating Order :—Betrayal and Imprison
ment of Joseph Smith and Others :—Camp of the Enemy :The Howlings of the Damned:—The Enemy Beast of the
Highest Crimes :—Secret Inquisitory Trial of the Prisoners :—Sentence of Death !——How Reversed :—A Judas :Surrender of Far West : — Attempt to Assassinate the
Prisoners :—Farewell Scenes :—Captives Removed to Jackson County :—General Clark Demands the Prisoners :—Refhsal to Surrender them :—Cross the Missouri River :Visitors :—Preaching in Camp by President Smith :-—Arrive
at Independence :—Public Exhibition of the Prisoners. . . .

CHAPTER XXIlI.—Treatment of the Prisoners:—Visit the Temple
Lot :—-Gain my Freedom :—Temptation :—Voluntary Return
to Bondage :—Leave Independence :—Conduct of the Guards:
—Fall into the Hands of Col. Price and Guards :—Arrive
at Richmond :—Chains :—Interview with Gen. C1ark:—Dialogue:—Inconceivable Absurdities.........................

CHAPTER XXIV.—Massacre at Haun's Mill....................

CHAPTER XXV.—Speech of Major-General Clark, Delivered at
Far West while its Citizens were held as Prisoners, N ovember, l838..............

CHAPTER XXVI.—The Prisoners :—Second Interview with General Clark :—Inquisition :—-Sickness of Elder Rigdon :—Colonel
Price and Guards :—Their Conduct :—Rebuke by Joseph
Smith :—Trial :—Similarity between King Herod and Governor Boggs :—Judge Austin A. King in Open Court
Threatens a Wholesale Extermination of the " Mormons :"—
Other Prisoners Obtained by Stratagem :—Advice of General
Doniphan, Attorney for the Prisoners :—Decision :-—Disposal
of the Prisoners :—Flight of the Church to Illinois :—Conduct of the Outlaws :-My Family Visits me in Prison. . . .

CHAPTER XXVII.—Legls1ative Action on the Subject. . . . . . . . . . .

CHAPTER XXVIII.—Joseph Smith and his Fellow Prisoners in
Clay County :—Mock Trial in the County of Davies :—Final
Escape:—Their Arrival in Illinois..........

11

PAOII.

203 to 212

213 to 218

219 to 224

225 to 226

227 to 134

235 to 23'!

00000000000000 

 

12 CONTENTS.
PAGIF.
CHAPTER XXIX.—Farewell Scenes :—Departure of the Inst Remnant of the Exiles :—Court :—Release of Two of the Prisoners:—Reflecfions in Prison......... . . . . . . . .  245 to 250

CHAPTER XXX.—Letter to Judge Austin A. King..." ... . . . . .. 251 to 254

CHAPTER XXXI.—-The Prison:—Fare :—Conduct of the Guards:
—A Strange Couple :—My Wife Visits the Prison :—Fasting
and Prayer :—An Important Question :—Vision :—A Ministering Spirit :—The Question Answered :—Visit from Judge
King :—Change of Venue :—Handcufls :—Departure from the
Prison:—Journey :—Arrival in Columbia, Boone County :Enter Another Prison :—Treatment :——Arrival of Friends :—
News from my Family :——Impressions of the Spirit :——Plan
and Preparations for Escape :—Fourth of July Celebration :—
Flag:—Public Dinner :—Now's the Day:—Our Friends take
Leave:—-Rendezvous....... . . . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . . . . .. 255to2'l0

CHAPTER XXXII.—Description of the Prison :—Ladies in the
Prison :—Evening of a Public Day :—Song:—Obstinate Coffee
Pot :—-Order of Attack:-—Escape:—Race:—Great Excitement:—Our Friends in the Thicket :—Prisoners Gain the
Thicket :—F1ight:—-Encounter :—C1imb a Tree :—Faint :Prayers :—Night Favors us at Last:--Loss of my Horse:—
Journey on Foot:—Reflections............................ 271 to280

CHAPTER XXXIII.—Dawn :—Bewi1dered in a Forest :—Beaufiful
Valley:—Escape of Phelps:——Dialogue:—His Final Escape
and Arrival in I1linois:—Fate of our Two Friends :—Interview between my Brother Orson and my Wife :—She Prepares for my Reception :—Disappointment :—Excitement:—
Search :—Suspense:—Scencs at the Prison:—Treatment of
Mrs. Phelps:—Mr. Follett Retaken:—His Return to Prison :—
Chains:—Escnpe of Mrs. Phelps:—Finale of Luman and
Phila . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . .  281to289

CHAPTER XXXIV.—Reminiscence :—Resume my Wanderings :—
Lost Again :—Storm :—Conversation :—-Suspicious Characters :
—Lost in a Swamp :—Strange River :—Retrace my Steps :—
Cross the River :—Wild Scenery :—Strange Bedfellow :—
Dawn :—-Reach the Mississippi :—Cross the River in a

 

 

CONTENTS. 13
runs.
Canoe :—Land on an Island :-—Entangled in the Thickets :Reémbark :—Land in Illinois :—An Old Acquaintance :—
  Quincycooooooocoo 0000 use o o o o o o u 0 00000000009090  150 

CHAPTER XXXV.--O1>nuoxs or run Pm-:ss:—Exn-acts from the
" Columbia. Patriot:"—-"Banner of Liberty:"—" Boone's Lick
Democrat:"—-" Saturday N ews:"—" Missouri Republican:"—
"New York Sun:"—" Quincy Argus:"—-Minutes of a Public
Meeting in Quincy:—"New York Commercial Advertiser-."—
Public Meeting in New York:—Closing Remarks. . . . . . . . . 311 to 322

CHAPTER XXXVI.—Congratulations :—Remove to N auvoo :—Meet
with President Smith and Other Fellow Suflerers :—President
Smith's Reproof. for the Elders :——Toils :—Start for England:
—Arrival in Detroit:—Visit my Brother Anson and Parents:
—Arrive in New York :-—-Visit Philadelphia. and Washington:—Meet President Smith :—-Great Meeting:—Pi-eaching by
S. Rigdon and President Smith :—Success in New York :—
Farewell Song:—Sail for England:—Reflections.......  323 to 334

CHAPTER XXXVII.—General Conference at Preston, England :—
Publishing Committee:—Editorial Appointment:—First Number of the "Millennial Star" Issued:—My own Ministry in
Manchester and Vicinity :—New Hymn Book:—Action‘ of
Congress on the Missouri Tragedies . . . . . . . . . .  335to340

CHAPTER XXXVIII.—Genera1 Conference at Manchester :—Ordinations and Appointments :—Return to New York :—Meet
with my Family :—Visit to the State of Maine :—A Dream
and its Fulfllment:—Embark Again for England :—Consequence of Looking Back :—Safe Arrival in England :—
Resume the Editorial Duties :—Reflections............... 3411:0345

CHAPTER XXXIX.—Visit and Ministry in Bolton :—Conduct of
two Methodist Priests :—Arrest and Trial :—Emigration:—
General Conference at Manchester :—Council of the Twelve:
—-Charter the ship " Tyrean:"—" Philosophy of the Resnrrection :"—Emigration on the Ship " Chaos :"—Visit to
the Isle of Man :—Visit to Norwich :—Mob.... . . . . . . . . .. 346to355

CHAPTER XL.—Notice for a General Conference :—Extract of a
Letter from Elder Orson Hyde in Jerusalem :——Extracts from
my  Ad O0.00IOIOO‘COOOOOOOOOOUIIOOOOO I O I O O0 

14 CONTENTS.

PAGII.

CHAPTER XLI.—'Vessels Chartered :—Emig1-ation :—Sail for New
Orleans on the " Emerald:"—Passage:—-Land in New
Orleans: —— Charter of a Steamer: — Historical Letter: —
Journey and Arrival at Nauvoo: 4- Mission with Joseph

 m:-jviaittoCheswritiIOUOOIIOUOIOOOOOOIIOOOIII 0000 

CHAPTER XLII.—Miseellaneous Writings :—Mission to the East:—
Impressions of the Spirit :—Martyrdom of Joseph and
Hyrum Smith :—Spirit of Exultation :—Return to N auvoo:

—Sidney Rigdon Disfellowshipped........................ 36'lto3'l3

CHAPTER XLIII.-— Eastern Mission :—Return :—Mobocracy :—Labor in the Temple :——Expulsion from Nauvoo :—Cross the
Mississippi :—Garden Grove :—Mount Pisga:—-Council Blufis:
—Mormon Battalion :—Winter Quarters :—Missiou to England
with Elders Orson Hyde and John Taylor :—Conference at
Manchester :—Tour through the Kingdom. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3'14 to 386

CHAPTER XLIV.—An Apostle of the Church of Jesus Christ,
of Latter-Day Saints, was in the Island of Great Britain
forthe Goepereealre; and beinginthesptriton the24th
of November, 1846, addressed the following words of comfort
to his dearly beloved Wife and Rzmily, dwelling in tents,
in the Camp of Israel, at Council Blufs, Missouri Territory,
North America; where they and twenty thousand others were
banished by the civilized Christians of the United States for
the Word of God and the Testimony of Jesus" . . . . . . . . . . .. 387 00393

CHAPTER XLV.—Return with Elder John Taylor to America:—
Arrival at Winter Quarters :—Camp Starts for the Rocky
Mountains: — Meet the Pioneers: — Arrival in Great Salt
Lake Valley :—Visit to Utah and Great Salt Lake........ 394 to403

CHAPTER XLVI.—Spring of 1848 :—Scarcity of Provisions :"Harvest Feast :"—Arrival of President Young and Company:—Gold Fever :—Explore Southern Utah . . . . . . . . . . . . . 404 to 413

CHAPTER XLVII.—Start on my Pacific Mission of the
Journey :—Attaeked by Indians:—Crossing the Desert:—
Arrival at Los Angelos. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 414 to 426

CHAPTER XLVIII.—Los Angelos :—Catholic Celebration of Corpus
Christi :— Arrival in San Francisco :— Lezter to President
Brigham Young :—-Family Letter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 427 to 439

CONTENTS. 15
non.

CHAPTER XLIX.—Vs.lpsraiso :— Quillots :— Letter to President
 Yo IIOOOOCCIIOIOIIOIIOOIOOOOOOIO O O I I O O C O O I IO 

CHAPTER L.—Arrival in San F1-ancisoo:—Return to Salt Lake
City :—Seoond Mission to the Paciflc:—A1-ticles from the
PMOOOIOOIOOOIOOOOOOIOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOI O O O O 0 I O O I O O O I O O0 

CHAPTER LI.—Reply to the Rev. Mr. Briggs on the Subject
of the Expediency of the Resppointment of His Excellency
Governor Young, of  46600473

CHAPTER LII.—Statements Pertaining to the History of Joseph
Smith:—Return to Uta.h:—Home Mission:—Attend the
Legislature at Fillmore :—The Standard of Zion :-Return
to Salt Lake City............ . . . . .  4741:0483

CHAPTER LIII.—-Journal of Eastern Mission. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . 484 to 494

CHAPTER LIV.—Family Letters:—"My Fiftieth Year:"—Respouse by John Taylor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .- . . . . . . . . . 495 to 502
APP IXOOOOICCC'IOIOOOO O O I O O O O IIOOOIIOOOO O O I I 0 C I O O I O O O O O I O 0 O O O OlC.i
GENEALOGY:ooooocooeooosooeoooosooooooooooo o c o o coo o o o c o o o o o . . . . . ..Vii

 

 

CHAPTER I‘.

Parentage : — Childhood : —Yon th : — Education : — Early Impressions :-Journey
Westwa'nd:—Making a New Farm in the Wilderness of Oswego.

ARLEY PARKER PRATT, the subject and author

of these sketches, and third son of Jared and Charity

Pratt, of Canaan, Columbia County, New York, was born
April 12, 1807, in Burlington, Otsego County, N. Y.‘

Of my early youth I shall say but little. My father was
a hard Working man, and generally occupied in agricultural
‘pursuits; and, although limited in education, he sometimes
taught school, and even vocal music.

He was a man of excellent morals; and he exerted ‘himself diligently, by stern example as well as precept, to instill
into the minds of his children every principle of integrity,
honesty, honor and virtue.

He taught us to venerate our Father in Heaven, Jesus
Christ, His prophets and Apostles, as Well as the Scriptures
written by them; while at the same time he belonged to
no religious sect, and was careful to preserve his children
free from all prejudice in favor of or against any particular
denomination, into which the ‘so-called Christian world was
then unhappily divided. '

We frequently attended public worship, with Presbyterians,
Baptists and Methodists in turn, or, as circumstances rendered convenient—having equal respect for these several
forms of worship and their adherents. Though my father
did sometimes manifest a decided disapprobation of a hire" For genealogy In full see Appendix.
2

18 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

ling clergy, who seemed, in his estimation, to prefer the
learning and wisdom of man to the gifts and power of the
Holy Ghost.

His means to educate his children were very limited;
but that excellent system of common school education
early established in the Eastern and Middle States afforded
to them, in common with others, an opportunity to learn,
and even to become familiar with the four great branches,
which are the foundation of literature and the sciences.

My opportunity, even in these institutions, was far more
limited than most of the youths of my country, on account
of my time being mostly required‘ in physical exertion .to
assist in sustaining the family of my father.

But I always loved a book. If I worked hard, a book
was in my hand in the morning while others were sitting
down to breakfast; the same at noon; if I had a few
moments, a book! a BOOK! A book at evening, while
others slept or sported; a book on Sundays; a book at
every leisure moment of my life.

At the age of seven years my mother gave me lessons
to read in the Scriptures; I read of Joseph in Egypt,his dreams, his servitude, his temptation and exaltation;
his kindness and affection for his father and brethren.
All this inspired me with love, and with the noblest
sentiments ever planted in the bosom of man.

I read of David and Goliah ;—of Saul and Samuel ;—of Samson and the Philistines :—all these inspired me
with hatred to the deeds of evil doers and love for good
men and their deeds. ‘

After this I read of Jesus and his Apostles; and 0,
how I loved them! How I longed to fall at the feet of
Jesus; to worship him, or to offer my life for his.

At about twelve years of age I read of the first resurrection, as described by John the Apostle, in the 20th
chap. of his Revelations; how they, martyrs of Jesus, and
those who kept his commandments would live and reign

AISTOBIOGRAPHX' or PARLEY r. PRATT. ' .19

with Christ a thousand years, while the rest of the dead
lived not again till the thousand years were ended. 0,
what an impression this made on my mind; I retired to
rest after an evening spent in this way; but I could not
sleep. I felt a longing desire and an inexpressible anxiety
to secure to myself a part in a resurrection so glorious. I
felt a weight of worlds,—-of eternal worlds resting upon
me; for fear I might still remain in uncertainty, and at
last fall short and still sleep on in the cold embrace of
death; while the great, the good, the blessed and the holy
of this world would awake from the gloom of the grave
and lip renovated, filled with life and joy, and enter upon
life with all its joys: While for a thousand years their busy,
happy tribes should trample on my sleeping dust, and still
my spirit wait in dread suspense, impatient of its doom. _I
tried to pray; but 0, how weak!

At the age of fifteen I was separated from my father's
house, and placed as an assistant on a farm, with a gentleman by the name of William S. Herrick.

This gentleman and his family were exemplary members
of the Presbyterian Church; and better, kinder, or more
agreeable people are seldom met with in this wicked world.
They treated me as if I had been an only son, instead of
a hired servant.

I was with them eight months, during which time
our mutual affection for each other increased; and I felt
grieved when my time expired and duty called me elsewhere.

During the winter following, being in the sixteenth year
of my age, I boarded with one of my aunts (my father's
sister), named Van Cott; she was an excellent and kindhearted woman, and acted as a mother to me. This winter
I spent mostly at school, and it was my last opportunity to
improve my education by any means, except my own unaided exertion—at least for many years.

In this school, by close application, "I made such extraordinary progress that the teacher often spoke of me to the

 

20 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

whole school, and exhorted them to learn as Parley Pratt
did ;—said he (to some of them who were more fond of
mischief than of study), if you would learn as he does,
you would become men of wisdom and talent in the world;
but if you continue the course you have done you will
remain in obscurity and unknown; while he will be known,
and fill important stations in society. I do not mention
these circumstances by way of boasting; but simply because
they are true. How little did I then realize, or even dream

I of the station I should be called to fill.

Again the spring returned ;—I was sixteen years of age.
I left the school of my boyhood forever, and commenced
again a life of toil. I assisted my cousin, William Pratt,
in the cultivation of the farm of my aunt (where I had
boarded the previous winter) until September, when I
started a journey to the West, in company with my
brother William, in search of some spot of ground in the
wilderness which we might prepare as our future home.

We travelled about two hundred miles on foot, and at
length selected a spot for a farm in the woods, about
two miles from Oswego, a small town situated on Lake
Ontario, in the State of New York. We purchased seventy
acres of land, which was covered with an immense growth
of timber, principally beech, maple and hemlock. For this
we bargained with one Mr. Morgan, and agreed to pay
four dollars per acre, in four annual payments with interest-—paying some seventy dollars in hand.

‘We then repaired again to the East, and, by dint of
hard labor, endeavored‘ to earn the money. VVages were
very low, and at length my brother William entirely failed
in raising his part of the money for our next installment.

The next spring found me in the employment of a wealthy
farmer,' by the name of Eliphet Bristol, in the neighborhood of my aunt Van Cott's. Here I experienced no kindness; no friendship from my employer or his family. I
always commenced work before sunrise, and continued till

AUTOBIUGRAPHY, or PARLEY P. PRATT. 21

dark; losing only three days in eight months. I was
then but a 1ad—being only seventeen years of age-—and
stood in need of fatherly and motherly care and comfort.
But they treated a laborer as a machine; not as a human
being, possessed of feelings and sympathies in common with
his species. Work! WORK! WORK! you are hired to
work. A man that is paid for his work should never be
weary, faint, or sick; or expect a kind look _or word. He
agrees to work; we agree to pay him; that is sufllcient. He
needs no kindness, no afl'ection, no smiles, no encouragement of any kind. Such was their spirit towards me dur 

ing this eight months of toil. I was glad when the time ‘

expired; I felt like one released from prison. I took my
wages, and was accompanied by my father to our place in
Oswego. Here I paid all my hard earnings to meet the
yearly installment due on the land—reserving merely
enough to purchase two axes. We then commenced to
chop and clear the heavy timber all the time that we
could command, extra of earning our board. It was a cold,
snowy winter, such as is usual in the northern part of
New York. But we earned our living, and chopped and
cleared ten acres during the winter and spring; this we
surrounded with a fence of rails, and planted with wheat
and Indian corn, being in hopes to meet the next payment with the avails of our harvest.

CHAPTER II.

Thoughts on Religion :—Join the Baptist Church :—Strauge Perversion or' in
Scripture Promise. ‘

T was during these toils in the wilderness that my'mind
was drawn out from time to time on the things of God
and eternity. I felt deeply anxious to be saved from my
sins, and to secure an interest in that world " where the
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest."
1 attended public worship with a society of Baptists who
had employed one W. A. Scranton for their minister; he
was a scholar from Hamilton Seminary (an institution where
young men are educated for the ministry). '

I said to my father one day while We were laboring to-‘
gether in the forest: "Father, how is it there is so manifest
a difference between the ancient and modern disciples of
Jesus Christ and their doctrines? If, for instance, I had
lived in the days of the Apostles, and believed in Jesus
Christ, and had manifested a wish to become his disciple,
Peter or his brethren would have said to me, ‘Repent and
be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for REMISSION OF
SIN S, and you SHALL receive the 927% of the Holy Ghost.' I
should then have known definitely and precisely what to do
to be saved. Whereas, new we go to the religious minister
for instruction, and he tells us we must experience a mysterious, indefinite and undefinable something called religion
before we can repent and be baptized acceptably. But, if
we inquire how, or by what means we are to come at this
experience, he cannot tell us definitely; but will tell us that
it is the work of God in the soul; which he will accomplish

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 23

in his own due time, for his own elect; and that we can
do nothing acceptably till this is done. That even our
prayers and repentance, and all our good works are sin; so
long as this work of God is not done within us.

" Now, father," said I, "how is this? I believe in Jesus; I
wish to serve him and keep his commandments; I love him:
He has commanded all men to repent and be baptized, and
has promised ‘to remit the sins of all those who obey the
gospel ordinances, and to pour out the Holy Spirit upon
them. Yet, if I apply to the Presbyterians they will
sprinkle some water in my face instead of baptizing me. If
I go to the Methodists it is the same. And if I go to the
Baptists they will not baptize me for remission of sins, that
I may receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; but they will require of me to relate cm esperierwe, and to tell of some time
and place where I had already experienced that which I am
only seeking for, and have not found. This, of course, I
cannot do; and, therefore, they will not receive me unto
baptism. How, then, can I observe the ordinances of God
and keep his commandments 1"

To these inquiries my father could give no satisfactory
answer; but observed that times and circumstances had

‘ changed. With this I was not satisfied, of course; for

who had a right to change the ordinances, transgress the
law, or break the covenant of the everlasting gospel!
Such were my thoughts.

I still continued to ponder upon these things, and to
search the Scriptures to learn how to be saved. I found
the same principles and practice throughout the history of
the Apostles, the Jews, Samaritans, Gentiles, Ephesians,
Corinthians, Romans, the Ethiopian eunuch, Saul of Tarsus,
the jailor and his household, all were baptised when they
believed in Jesus Christ and repented of their sins; and
this as an ordinance connected with remission of their
sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost. What, then, should
I do? Where find one who was commissioned from heaven,

 

"24 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

and would administer salvation to me‘! I could only go
to the Baptists; but I lacked that "experience of religion " which they always required. However, I resolved
to try.

I accordingly appeared before them at their monthly
meeting, or council, and requested to be baptized; they
inquired into my experience; I related to them my firm
belief in Christ, and my wish to serve God, without being
able to tell them of any particular experience of religion.
They finally consulted together; and came to the conclusion
that I had been converted, whether I knew it myself or
not, and a time was appointed for my baptism—a month or
two thence. Here I again realized the diiference. In ancient times persons were baptized immediately on profession
of their ,faith; now they were subjected to a delay of
weeks or months. ‘

At length the time arrived, and I was baptized by Mr.
Scranton, and duly initiated into the Baptist society; being
about eighteen years of age. I felt some satisfaction in
obeying this one ‘ordinance; but still I was aware that all
was not right,—that much was wanting to constitute a
Christian, or a Church of Christ.

I endeavored to « pray much, and to attend meetings
strictly; I also endeavored to keep the commandments of
Jesus as well as I could.

Mr. Scranton came to the house where I boarded to
preach at a certain time, and I inquired of him what
Jesus meant when he said, " these signs shall follow them
that believe." He replied, that it meant these signs should
follow the Apostles only. _

This did not satisfy me; for it was a plain and manifest
perversion of common sense and language easy to be understood. It was as much as to say: Go ye into all the
world and preach the gospel to the Apostles; and the
Apostles that believe and are baptised shall be saved; and
(la Apostles that believe not shall be damned; and these

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT. 25

signs shall follow the Apostles that believe. Thus, by logical consistency, confining the whole commission and gospel
to the Apostles, with all its benefits, by the same rule
that we would confine the promise of the signs following to
them.

 

CHAPTER III.

Reverses :—Loss of our Fax-m:—-Strange Reso1vo:—Travels West :—Foresl
Life:—Another New Farm.

V IME passed; harvest came; a fine crop, but no ‘market;
and consequently the payment came due on our land
and there was no means of payment.

The winter rolled round; spring came again; and with it
a prosecution on the part of Mr. Morgan for money due on
land.

The consequence was that all our hard earnings, and all
our improvements in the wilderness, were wrested from us
in a moment. Mr. Morgan retained the land, the improvements and the money paid.

Weary and disconsolate, I left the country and my father, I

who took charge of our crops and all unsettled business.

I spent a few months with my uncles, Ira and Allen
Pratt, in Wayne county, N. Y., and in the autumn of 1826
I resolved to bid farewell to the civilized world—where I
had met with little else but disappointment, sorrow and
unrewarded toil; and where sectarian ' divisions disgusted
and ignorance perplexed me-—and to spend the remainder
of my days in the solitudes of the great west, among the
natives of the forest. .

There, at least, thought I, there will be no buying and
selling of lands,—no law to sweep all the hard earnings of
years to pay a small debt,—no wranglings about sects, and
creeds, and doctrines. I will win the confidence of the red
man; I will learn his language; I will tell him of Jesus; I
will read to him the Scriptures; I will teach him the arts

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. rmrr. - 27

of peace; to hate war, to love his neighbor, to fear and
love God,and tocultivate theearth. Sufliwere myresolutions.

In October, 1826, I took leave of my friends and started
westward. I paid most of my money in Rochester for a
small pocket Bible, and continued my journey as far as
Buffalo. At this place I engaged a passage for Detroit,
on board a steamer; as I had no money, I agreed to
work for the same.

After a rough passage and many delays, I was at length
driven by stress of weather to land at Erie, in Pennsylvania; from whence I travelled by land till I came to a
small settlement about thirty miles west of Cleveland, in
the State of Ohio. The rainy season of November had
now set in; the country was covered with a dense forest,
with here and there a small opening made by the settlers,
and the surface of the earth one vast scene of mud and
mire; so that travelling was now very difficult, if not impracticable.

Alone in a land of strangers, without home or money,
and not yet twenty years of age, I became discouraged, and concluded to stop for the winter; I procured a gun from one of the neighbors; worked and
earned an axe, some breadstufi‘ and other little extras,
and retired two miles into a dense forest and prepared a
small hut, or cabin, for the winter. Some leaves and straw
in my cabin served for my lodging, and a good fire kept
me warm. A stream near my door quenched my thirst;
and fat venison, with a little bread from the settlements,
sustained me for food. The storms of winter raged around
me; the wind shook the forest, the wolf howled in the
distance, and the owl chimed in harshly to complete the
doleful music which seemed to sooth me, or bid me welcome
to this holy retreat. But in my little cabin the fire blazed
pleasantly, and the Holy Scriptures and a few other books
occupied my hours of solitude. Among the few books in

 

28 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

my cabin, were McKenzie's travels in the Northwest, and
Lewis and ClaH;'s tour up the Missouri and down the
Columbia rivers. 7

Spring came on again; the woods were pleasant, the
flowers bloomed in their richest variety, the birds sung
pleasantly in the groves; and, strange to say, my mind
had become attached to my new abode. I again bargained
for a piece of forest land; again promised to pay in a
few years, and again commenced to clear a farm and build
a house.

I was now twenty years of age. A

I resolved to make some improvements and preparations,
and then return to my native country, from which I had
been absent several years. There was one there whom my
heart had long loved, and from whom I would not have
been so long separated, except by misfortune.

 

CHAPTER IV.

Revisit Canaan, N. Y. :—Iuterest1ng Meeting :—Marriage :—Retum to my
Forest Home.

T was the Fourth of July, 1827. The morning was
beautiful and gay, the sun rose without a cloud over
the pine-clad hills of my native land, where in boyhood I
had often toiled and sported, just as I came within a mile
of the farm of my good old aunt Van Cott, of Canaan,
Columbia County, after an absence of three years. I had,
during this time, exchanged the features of the bashful
boy for those of the man; and, instead of a laughing
careless countenance, a forehead of marble and a check
of rose, stern care had marked me as her child, and the
sun had given a shade of brown to my features; these,
added to a heavy growth of beard and whiskers, disguised
me so far that I could pass through the neighborhood
of people, known and familiar to me, unnoticed and unknown.

With a quick step, a beating heart, and an intense, indescribable feeling of joy, sorrow, hope, despondency and
happiness, I approached the door of Mr. Halsey, and
knocked; it was opened by an aged female, a stranger to
me; I entered, and inquired for Miss Thankful Halseyin a moment more she had me by the hand, with a look
of welcome which showed she had not forgotten me.'

I spent the day and evening with her; explained to her
all my losses, my poverty and prospects, and the lone retreat where I had spent the previous winter; and the
preparations I had made for a future home. I also opened

 

30 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

my religious views to her, and my desire, which I sometimes had, to try and teach the red man.

"In View of all these things," said I to her, "If you still
love me and desire to share my fortune you are worthy
to be my wife. If not, we will agree to be friends forever; but part to meet no more in time." "I have loved
you during three years' absence," said she, "and I never
can be happy without you."

I repaired to my aunt's—foun(l the usual welcome. After
visiting my mother and kindred, for a few days, I saw
my old friend Wilham S. Herrick, where I had been employed five years before. He was very anxious to employ
me again; and finding I was willing, he discharged a hand
he had already, and gave me double wages. I remained
in his employ till October, and found the same kind reception as formerly.

On the 9th of September, 1827, Parley P. Pratt and
Thankful Halsey were solemnly united in the bonds of
matrimony, by Elder Palmer, Minister of the Baptist
Church, in Canaan, Columbia County, N. Y.

In October we took leave of our friends in Canaan and
took passage for the West. We hired a conveyance to
Albany, and then took passage for Buffalo on a canal boat;
and from there on board a schooner; passing up Lake Erie
we landed in safety at the mouth of Black River, in Ohio,
and within ten miles of my place. My wife had some
money, which we paid in for the land I had purchased.
The following spring found me 21 years of age, married
and settled in a log dwelling, in the midst of a small
clearing made with my own hands, in the place where I
had spent the previous winter in solitude.

 

Digitized by C:-OO%I€

FOREST HON E.

CHAPTER V.

Our Home:—-New Sect:—P1-ogressive Religious Views:—Unexpectod Meet
ing:—Dialogue:—Forsako My Ilome:-Journey to New York:—Public
Ministry:——Strange Bool-::—First Interview with a Latter-Day Saint.

IGHTEEN months had passed since our settlement in
the wilderness. The forest had been displaced by the
labors of the first settlers for some distance around our
cottage. A small frame house was now our dwelling, a
garden and a beautiful meadow were seen in front, flowers
in rich profusion were clustering about our door and windows; while in the background were seen a thriving
young orchard of apple and peach trees, and fields of
grain extending in the distance, beyond which the forest
s_till stood up in its own primeval grandeur, as a wall to
bound the vision and guard the lovely scene. Other houses
and farms were also in view, and some twenty children
were returning from the school actually kept by my wife,
upon the very spot where two years before I had lived
for months without seeing a human being. About this
time one Mr. Sidney Rigdon came into the neighborhood as
a preacher, and it was rumored that he was a kind of
Reformed Baptist, who, with Mr. Alexander Campbell, of

.Virginia, a Mr. Scott, and some other gifted men, had dissented from the regular Baptists, from whom they differed
much in doctrine. At length I went to hear him, and
what was my astonishment when I found he preached
faith in Jesus Christ, repentance towards God, and baptism
for remission of sins, with the promise of the gift of the

Holy Ghost to all who would come forward, with all their
hearts, and obey this doctrine!

32 AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT.

Here was the ancient gospel in due form. Here were the

very principles which I had discovered years before; but

could find no one to minister in. But still one great link
was wanting to complete the chain of the ancient order of
things; and that was, the authority to minister in holy
things-—the apostleship, the power which should accompany
the form. This thought occurred to me as soon as I
heard Mr. Rigdon make proclamation of the gospel.
Peter proclaimed this gospel, and baptized for remission

of sins, and promised the gift of the Holy Ghost, because .

he was commissioned so to do by 'a crucified and risen
Saviour. But who is Mr. Rigdon? Who is Mr. Campbell?
Who commissioned them? W'ho baptized them for remission of sins? Who ordained them to stand up as Peter?
Of course they were baptized by the Baptists, and ordained

by them, and yet they had now left them because they did _

not administer the true gospel. And it was plain that the
Baptists could not claim the apostolic office by succession,
in a regular, unbroken chain from. the Apostles of old,
preserving the gospel in its p1u'ity, and the ordinances
unchanged, from the very fact that they were now living
in the perversion of some, and the entire neglect of others
of these ordinances; this being the very ground of difference between the old Baptists and these Reformers.

Again, these Reformers claimed no new commission by
revelation, or vision from the Lord, while they had not
the least shadow of claim by succession.

It might be said, then, with propriety: "Peter I know.
and Paul I know, but who are ye ?"

However, we were thankful for even the forms of truth,
as none could claim the power, and authority, and gifts of
the Holy Ghost——at least so far as we knew.

After hcarin g Mr. Rigdon several times, I came out, with
a number of others, and embraced the truths which he
taught. We were organized into a society, and frequently
met for public worship.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 33

About this time I took it upon me to impart to my
neighbors, from time to time, both in public and in private,
the light I had received from the Scriptures concerning
the gospel, and also concerning the fulfilment of the things
spoken by the holy prophets. I did not claim any
authority as a minister; I felt the lack in this respect;
but I felt in duty bound to enlighten, mankind, so far as
God had enlightened me.

At the commencement of 1830, I felt drawn out in an
extraordinary manner to search the prophets, and to pray
for an understanding of the same. My prayers were soon
answered, even beyond my expectations; the prophecies of
the ‘holy prophets were opened to my view; I began to
understand the things which were coming on the earththe restoration of Israel, the coming of the Messiah, and
the glory that should follow. I was so astonished at the
darkness of myself and mankind on these subjects that
I could exclaim with the prophet: surely, "darkness covers
the earth, and gross darkness the people."

I was all swallowed up in these things. I felt constrained to devote my time in enlightening my fellow men
on these important truths, and in warning them to prepare
for the coming of the Lord.

My brother William, who journeyed to the W'est with
me in my seventeenth year, had now been missing to
the family for five years, and was supposed to be lead.
About the time he disappeared and was lost sight of, he
was known to leave the city of New York, where he
had been employed, and to pass up the Hudson on a
steamer. He was heard of no t more; and, as a notice
appeared in the papers of the same date that a young
gentleman by the name of VVi1liam Pratt was drowned
in the Hudson, on his way up the river, our parents
and the family had given him up for lost.

One morning, as I was absent from home on business,

about two miles distant, I heard of him; and that b.e
3

34 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

was then residing about ten miles from me. On hearing
this I ran nearly the whole distance on foot, and in
about two hours had him by the hand. He was much
surprised, although he had heard of a man of my name
living in the neighborhood; but could not believe it was
me. We had each of us taken our chance amid the hardships and toils of _a new country for years, and at last
found ourselves together about six hundred miles from
our starting point.

This was a joyful and unexpected meeting of two brothers. He immediately accompanied me home, and was introduced to my wife and our little farm in the wilderness, where we spent some days together. He admired
my wife; but above all my farm. "Brother Parley,"
said he, "how have you done all this? When we were
last together you had no wife, no farm, no house, no
orchard, and now you are here with everything smiling
around you." I replied, that hard work had accomplished
it all. And, continued I, we are now about to leave this
quiet home which we have toiled so hard to make, and,
perhaps, never see it again. "How so ‘I " said he, with
much surprise, and somewhat of disappointment. I then
unfolded to him the gospel and prophecies as they had
been opened to me, and told him that the spirit of these
things had wrought so powerfully on my mind of late
that I could not rest ;——that I could no longer be contented to dwell in quiet and retirement on my farm, while
I had light to impart to mankind, of which I knew they
were in a great measure ignorant. "But," said he, " if
I had fifty acres of land, a comfortable house, a fine orchard, a beautiful garden, with meadow land, grain, and
above all, such beautiful flowers and so valuable a housekeeper as you have, and all these things the work of
our own hands, I am sure I would stay and enjoy the
same while I lived; and the world might go on its own
jog, and its own way, for all me. Besides, how are you

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 35

to get your living 1" This is your all; you have toiled
for years to obtain it, and why not now continue to
enjoy it "I" "Vililliam," said I, "I see plainly you know
but little of my circumstances—ot' the changes which have
taken place with me since we parted five years ago,
nor how vastly wealthy I have become within that time.
Why, sir, I have bank bills enough, on the very best
institutions in the world, to sustain myself and family
while we live."

"Indeed," said he, " well, I should like to see some of
them; I hope they are genuine." "Certainly," I replied,

"there is no doubt of that. They are true bills and

founded on capital that will never fail, though heaven
and earth should pass away. Of this I will convince you
in a moment."

I then unlocked my treasury and drew from thence a
large pocket book, full of promissory notes like the following: " Whoever shall forsake father or mother, brethren or sisters, houses or lands, wife or children, for my sake and the
gospel's, shall receive an hundred fold in this life, and in the
world to come life everlasting." "If ye abide in me, and
my words abide in you, you shall ask what you will in my
name and I will give it you." "All things are possible to
him that believeth."

"Now, William," said I, " are these the words of Jesus
Christ, or are they not i " "They certainly are," said
he, " I always believed the New Testament."

"Then you admit they are genuine bills ?"

" I do."

*‘ Is the signer able to meet his engagements?"

" He certainly is."

"Is he willing ?"

" He is."

"Well, then, I am going to fulfil the conditlons to the
letter on my part. I feel called upon by the Holy
Ghost to forsake my house and home for the gospel's

36 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

sake; and I will do it, placing both feet firm on these
promises with nothing else to rely upon."

" If I sink, they are false." _

" If I am sustained, they are true. I will put them to
the test. Experiment shall now establish the tI'uth of
Christ's promises, or the truth of infidelity."

"VVell," said he, "try it, if you Will: but, for my part,
although I always believed the Bible, I would not dare
believe it literally, and really stand upon its promises,
with no other prop."

W'e parted. He to his business, I to my preparations
for a mission which should only end with my life. "

In August, 1830, I had closed my business, completed
my arrangements, and we bid adieu to our wilderness
home and never saw it afterwards. '

On settling up, at a great sacrifice of property, We had
about ten dollars left in cash. VVith this small sum, We
launched forth into the wide World, determining first to visit
our native place, on our mission, and then such other
places as I might be led to by the Holy Spirit.

We made our way to Cleveland, 30 miles. We then
took passage on a schooner for Buffalo, a distance of 200
miles. We had a fair Wind, and the captain, being short
of hands, gave me the helm, the sails being all set, and
turned in. I steered the vessel the most of the day, with
no other person on deck. Of course, our passage cost us
little besides my labor. Landing in Bufi'alo, We engaged
our passage for Albany on a canal boat, distance 360 miles.
This, including board, cost all our money and some articles
of clothing.

Arriving at Rochester, I informed my wife that, notwithstanding our passage being paid through the Whole
distance, yet I must leave the boat and her to pursue
her passage to our friends; while I would stop awhile in
this region. VVhy, I did 11ot know; but so it was plainly
manifest by the Spirit to me. I said to her, "we part

‘ _,___  t _.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 37

for a season; go and visit o1u- friends in our native place;
1 will come soon, but how soon I know not; for I have
a work to do in this region of country, and what it is,
or how long it will take to perform it, I know not; but
I will come when it is performed."

My wife would have objected to this; but she had seen
the hand of God so plainly manifest in His dealings with
me many times, that she dare not oppose the things manifest to me by His spirit.

She, therefore, consented ; and I accompanied her as far
as Newark, a small town upwards of 100 miles from
Buffalo, and then took leave of her, and of the boat.

It was early in the morning, just at the dawn of day,
I walked ten miles into the country, and stopped to breakfast With a Mr. W'ells. I proposed to preach iii the
evening. Mr. VVe1ls readily accompanied me through the
neighborhood to visit the people, and circulate the appointment.

We visited an old Baptist deacon by the name of Hamlin. After hearing of our appointment for evening, he
began to tell of a book, a STRANGE BOOK, a VERY
STRANGE BOOK! in his possession, which had been
just published. This book, he said, p1u'ported to have
been originally written on plates either of gold or l)l'a:‘,S,
by a branch of the tribes of Israel; and to have been
discovered and translated by a young man near Palmyra,
in the State of New York, by the aid of visions, or the
ministry of angels. I inquired of him how or where
the book was to be obtained. He promised me the perusal of it, at his house the next day, if I would call.
I felt a strange interest in the book. I preached that
evening to a small audience, who appeared to be interested in the truths which I endeavored to unfold to them
in a clear and lucid manner from the Scriptures. Next
morning I called at his house, Where, for the first time,
my eyes beheld the "BOOK OF IvlORMON,"—that book

38 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

of books-—that record which reveals the antiquities of the
" New World" back to the remotest ages, and which unfolds the destiny of its people and the world for all time
to come ;—that Book which contains the fulness of the
gospel of a crucified and risen Redeemer ;—that Book which
reveals a lost remnant of Joseph, and which was the principal means, in the hands of God, of directing the entire
‘course of my ‘future life.

I opened it with eagerness, and read its title page. I
then read the testimony of several witnesses in relation
to the manner of its being found and translated. After
this I commenced its contents by course. I read all
day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food;
sleep was a burden when the night came, for I preferred reading to sleep.

As I read, the spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I
knew and comprehended that the book was true, as plainly and manifestly as a man comprehends and knows that
he exists. My joy was now full, as it Were, and I rejoiced sufficiently to more than pay me for all the sorrows, sacrifices and toils of my life. I soon determined
to see the young man who had been the instrument of
its discovery and translation.

I accordingly visited the village of Palmyra, and inquired
for the residence of Mr. Joseph Smith. I found it some
two or three miles from the village. As I approached the
house at the close of the day I overtook a man who was
driving some cows, and inquired of him for Mr. Joseph
Smith, the translator of the "Book of Mormon." He inI formed me that he now resided in Pennsylvania; some one

hundred miles distant. I inquired for his father, or for any
of the family. He told me that his father had gone a journey; but that his residence was a small house just before
me; and, said he, I am his brother. It was Mr. Hyrum
Smith. I informed him of the interest I felt in the Book,
and of my desire to learn more about it. He welcomed me

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 39

to his house, and we spent the night together; for neither
of us felt disposed to sleep. We conversed most of the
night, during which I unfolded to him much of my experience in my search after truth, and my success so far; together with that which I felt was lacking, viz: a commissioned priesthood, or apostleship to minister in the ordinances of God.

He also unfolded to me the particulars of the discovery
of the Book; its translation; the rise of the Church of Latter-Day Saints, and the commission of his brother Joseph,
and others, by revelation and the ministering of angels, by
which the apostleship and authority had been again restored
to the earth. After duly weighing the Whole matter in my
mind I saw clearly that these things were true; and that
myself and the whole world were without baptism, and
Without the ministry and ordinances of God; and that the
whole world had been in this condition since the days that
inspiration and revelation had ceased—in short, that this
was a new dispensation or commission, in fulfilment of prophecy, and for the restoration of Israel, and to prepare the
way before the second coming of the Lord.

In the morning I was compelled to take leave of this
Worthy man and his family—as I had to hasten hack a
distance of thirty miles, on foot, to fulfill an appointment in
the evening. As We parted he kindly presented me with a
copy of the Book of Mormon. I had not yet completed its
perusal, and was glad indeed to possess a copy of my own.
I travelled on a few miles, and, stopping to rest, I commenced again to read the book. To my great joy I found
that Jesus Christ, in his glorified resurrected body, had appeared to the remnant of Joseph on the continent of
America, soon after his resurrection and ascension into
heaven; a11d that he also administered, in person, to the
ten lost tribes; and that through his personal ministry in
these countries his gospel was revealed and written in
countries and among nations entirely unknown to the Jewish apostles.

 

40 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Thus revealed, written, handed down and preserved, till
revealed in this age by the angels of God, it had, of
course, escaped the corruptions of the great and abominable
church; and been preserved in purity.

This discovery greatly enlarged my heart, and filled my
soul with joy and gladness. I esteemed the Book, or the
information contained in it, more than all the riches of the
world. Yes; I verily believe that I would not at that time
have exchanged the knowledge I then possessed, for a legal
title to all the beautiful farms, houses, villages and property
which passed in review before me, on my journey through
one of the most flourishing settlements of western New
York.

Surely, thought I, Jesus had other sheep, as he said to
his Apostles of old; and here they were, in the wilderness
of the world called new. And. they heard the voice of the
Good Shepherd of Israel; and he brought them to his
fold. Truly, thought I, he was not sent (in person)
save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, as he told
the woman of Canaan; and here were a portion of them.
Truly, thought I, the angels sung with the spirit and
with the understanding when they declared: " We bring
you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to ALL
PEOPLE."

In his mortal tabernacle he confined his ministry and
that of his Apostles to the land of Judea; but afterwards,
released from the bonds of mortal life, or rather death, and
clothed with an immortal body, and with organs strong
and lasting as the immortal mind, he possessed all power
in heaven and on earth; he was then enabled to extend
his ministry to heaven, earth or hell. He could take the
wings of the morning, and, with the speed of light, make
his way to the Heaven of Heavens; and converse and
council among the sons of God; or receive council from
his Father in Heaven; or, leaving again the starry worlds,
he could descend to the dark and gloomy abodes of the

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 41

spirits in prison and preach to them the gospel—bursting
off their shackles and unlocking their prison doors; while
these once dark abodes were now brilliant with light, and,
instead of prison groans, were heard joyful acclamations of
deliverance to the captive, and the opening of the prison
to them that are bound; or coming again to visit the
earth, he could soar away beyond the waves and tempests, which had before set bounds to the geographical
knowledge of man, and stood up as an impregnable barrier
to the intercourse of nations; and there, in other tribes
and tongues, make known the riches of his grace, and his
triumph over death. .

And when ages had passed, and nations slumbered in
the dust—when cruelty and bloodshed had blotted almost
every trace of priesthood and apostleship from the earth;
when saints had been worn out and overcome; times, laws
and ordinances changed; the Bible itself robbed of its
plainness; and all things darkened and corrupted; a pure
and faithful record of his ministry to other nations is
forthcoming from among the archives of the dead, to reveal the " mystery of 2'-niquity ;" to speak, as with a voice of
thunder, in rebuking the evil and revealing the fulness of
the gospel. Such was the Book of Mormon—such its
effect upon the startling nations.

CHAPTER VI.

Interesting Meetings:—Second Interview with Hyrum Smith :—Visit to the
Church in' Seneca County:—Baptism, Confirmation, and Ordination:—
Ministry among my I(indred:—Baptism of my Brother Orson:—Wonderfnl Sign in the Heavens:—Retum to W'estern New York:—First Interview with Joseph Smith :—Description of his Person and Abilities.

AVING rested awhile and perused this sacred book
by the roadside, I again walked on.

In the evening I arrived in time to fill my appointment. I
met a crowded house, and laid before them many interesting truths, which were listened to with deep interest.

The next evening I had another appointment, and the
people came out in great numbers, and were filled with
the spirit of interest and inquiry.

'_I‘hey urged me very much to continue my discourses
among them; but I felt to minister no more till I had
attended to some important duties for myself. I had new
found men on earth commissioned to preach, baptize,
ordain to the ministry, etc., and I determined to obey the
fulness of t-he gospel without delay. I should have do11e
so at the fi1-st interview with Elder Hyrnm Smith; but
these two appointments were already out, and thirty miles'
travel required all the time I had.

I now returned immediately to Hyrum S1nith's residence,
and demanded baptism at his hands. I tarried with him
one night, and the next day we walked some‘ twenty-five
miles to the residence of Mr. W'hitmer, in Seneca County_
Here We arrived in the evening, and found a most Welcome
reception.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 43

This was the family, several of whose names were
attached to the Book of Mormon as witnesses—Mr. Joseph
Smith having translated much of the hook in W'hitmer's
chamber.

I found the little branch of the church in this place
full of joy, faith, humility and charity. We rested that
night, and on the next day, being about the 1st of September, 1830, I was baptized by the hand of an Apostle
of the Church of Jesus Christ, by the name of Oliver
Cowdery. This took place in Seneca Lake, a beautiful
and transparent sheet of water in \Vestern New York.

A meeting was held the same evening, and after singing a hymn and prayer, Elder Cowdery and others proceeded to lay their hands upon my head in the name of
Jesus, for the gift of the Holy Ghost. After which I was

 

ordained to the office of an Elder in the Church, which»

included authority to preach, baptize, administer the sacrament, administer the Holy Spirit, by the laying on of hands
in the name of Jesus Christ, and to take the lead of
meetings of worship.

I now felt that I had authority in the ministry.

On the next Sabbath I preached to a large concourse
of people, assembled at the house of a Mr. Burroughs. The
Holy Ghost came upon me mightily. I spoke the word of
God with power, reasoning out of the Scriptures and the
Book of Mormon. The people were convinced, overwhehned
in tears, and four heads of families came forward, expressing their faith, and Were baptized.

My work was now completed, for which I took leave of
my wife and the canal boat some two or three weeks
previous.

I now took leave of the little branch of the church with
which I had been associated, and pursued my journey to
the land of my fathers and of my boyhood.

I found my wife in health and spirits, enjoying herself
with her friends. I also found my father and mother,

44 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

friends and kindred, and, among others, my good old aunt
and cousins, at the old homestead, where I always found
a welcome reception.

This was a pleasant and retired mountain valley, consisting of a beautiful farm and a small and convenient
house, out-buildings, orchard, meadow, etc., encircled on the
south, west and north with a curve of hills, consisting of
farming lands and pasture, and their smnmits and bosoms
partially clothed with a beautiful forest of pine and chestnut; while the scene opened to the southeast in a descending landscape to a beautiful vale of some miles in extent,
filled with flourishing farms and dwellings, and watered by
a winding stream; while far beyond stretched other hills
and pine-clad mountains, and the spire of a church and a
small town were seen nestling among the hills at two
miles distance.

This was the residence of my aunt Van Cott, and the
place. where I had spent some of the happiest seasons of
my youth. My aunt had three children—an only son,
and two daughters. These were now in the bloom of
early youth, and were fast advancing to a state of maturity. Her husband had died at an early day, after an
illness of seven years; and here lived the widow and orphans, surrounded with peace and plenty, blooming with
health, and smiling with innocence and joy. Retired from
the throng of busy, boisterous life, and strangers to most
of its woes, ills and corruptions, the stranger who happened there was welcome; the hungry were fed, the
naked were clothed, and, above all, the kindred found a
hearty reception. In short, it was a spot, in all respects, adapted to retirement and contemplation, where the
poet and the novelist would find a thousand things to
please the imagination, and to swell their favorite volumes.

In this visit to my native place, there was one family
greatly missed by me. I felt keenly the disappointment at
not seeing the1n—that of my old employer, W' m. S. Her.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 45

rick. He had moved to the West, and his house was
occupied by strangers.

I now commenced my labors in good earnest. I addressed crowded audiencesr almost every day, and the people, who had known me from a child, seemed astonishe-.d— ‘

knowing that I had had but little opportimity of acquiring knowledge by study; and while many were interested in
the truth, some began to be filled with envy, and with a
lying, persecuting spirit. My father, mother, aunt Van
Cott, and many others, believed the truth in part; but
my brother Orson, a youth of nineteen years, received it
with all his heart, and was baptized at that time, and
has ever since spent his days in the ministry.

It was during my labors in these parts, in the autumn
of 1830, that a very singular and extraordinary sign was
shown in the heavens, which I will here describe.

I had been on a visit to a singular people called Shakers, at New Lebanon, about seven miles from my aunt
Van 0ott's, and was returning that distance, on foot, on
a beautiful evening of September. The sky was without
a cloud; the stars shone out beautifully, and all nature
seemed reposing in quiet, as I pursued my solitary way,
wrapt in deep meditations on the predictions of the holy
prophets; the signs of the times; the approaching advent
of the Messiah, to reign on the earth, and the important
revelations of the Book of Mormon; my heart filled with
gratitude to God that He had opened the eyes of my
understanding to receive the truth, and with sorrow for
the blindness of those who lightly rejected the same,
when my attention was aroused by a sudden appearance
of a brilliant light which shone around me, above the
brightness of the sun. I cast my eyes upward to inquire
from whence the light‘ came, when I perceived a long
chain of light extended in the heavens, very bright, and
of a deep fiery red. It at first stood stationary in a
horizontal position; at length bending in the centre, the

46 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

two ends approached each other with a rapid movement.
so as to form an exact square. In this position it again
remained stationary for some time, perhaps. a minute, and
then again the ends approached each other with the same
rapidity, and again ceased to move, remaining stationary,
for perhaps a minute, in the form of a compass; it then
commenced a third movement in the same manner, and
closed like the closing of a compass, the whole forming
a straight line like a chain doubled. It again remained
stationary for a minute, and then faded away.

I fell upon my knees in the street, and thanked the
Lord for so marvellous a sign of the coming of the Son
of Man.

Some persons may smile at this, and say that all these
exact movements were by chance; but, for my part, I
could as soon believe that the letters of the alphabet
would be formed by chance, and be placed so as to spell
my name, as to believe that these signs (known only to
the wise) could be formed and shown forth by chance.

Renewed in spirit and filled with joy I now pursued
my way, and arrived at my aunt Van Cott's, not weary,
but refreshed with a long walk, and deep communion
with myself and God.

Having lifted a warning voice to multitudes in all this
region of country, I now took leave, and repaired again
to the western part of New York, and to the body of
the Church.

On our arrival, we found that brother Joseph Smith,
the translator of the Book of Mormon, had returned from
Pennsylvania to his father's residence in Manchester, near
Palmyra, and here I had the pleasure of seeing him
for the first time.

He received me with a hearty welcome, and with that
frank and kind manner so universal with him in after
years.

On Sunday we held meeting at his house; the two

 

 

 

Born. December 23. 1805.
"LIVERPOOL ROUTE

99

OOPIED PROM

Digitized by C-OO IQ

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY 01-‘ PARLEY P. PRATT. 47

large rooms were filled with attentive listeners, and he
invited me to preach. I did so, and afterwards listened
with interest to a discourse from his own mouth, filled
with intelligence and wisdom. We repaired from the meeting to the water's edge, and, at his request, I baptized
several persons.

President Joseph Smith was in person tall and well
built, strong and active; of a light complexion, light hair,
blue eyes, very little beard, and of an expression peculiar
to himself, on which the eye naturally rested with interest, and was never weary of beholding. His countenance
was ever mild, affable, beaming with intelligence and benevolence; mingled with a look of interest and an uncon, cious smile, or cheerfulness, and entirely free from all

restraint or aifectation of gravity; and there was something connected with the serene and steady penetrating
glance of his eye, as if he would penetrate the deepest
abyss of the human heart, gaze into eternity, penetrate
the heavens, and comprehend all worlds.

He possessed a noble boldness and independence of
character; his manner was easy and familiar; his rebuke
terrible as the lion; his benevolence unbounded as the
ocean; his .intelligence universal, and his language abounding in original eloquence peculiar to himself-—not polished
—not studied—-not smoothed and softened by education
and refined by art; but flowing forth in its own native
simplicity, and profusely abounding in variety of subject
and manner. He interested and edified, while, at the same
time, he amused and entertained his audience; and none
listened to him that were ever weary with his discourse.
I have even known him to retain a congregation of willing and anxious listeners for many hours together, in the
midst of cold or sunshine, rain or wind, while they were
laughing at one moment and weeping the next. Even his
most bitter enemies were generally overcome, if he could
once get their ears. '

 

48 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

I have known him when chained and surrounded with
armed murderers and assassins who were heaping upon him
every possible insult and abuse, rise up in the majesty of a
son of God and rebuke them, in the name of Jesus
Christ, till they quailed before him, dropped their Weapons,
and, on their knees, begged his pardon, and ceased their
abuse.

In short, in him the characters of a Daniel and a Cyrus were Wonderfully blended. The gifts, wisdom and
devotion of a Daniel were" united with the boldness,
courage, temperance, perseverance and generosity of a
Cyrus. And had he been spared a n1artyr's fate till
mature manhood and age, he was certainly endued with
powers and ability to have revolutionized the World in
many respects, and to have transmitted to posterity a
name associated with more brilliant and glorious acts than
has yet fallen to the lot of mortal. As it is, his Works
will live to endless ages, and unnumbered millions yet
unborn will mention his name with honor, as a noble
instrument in the hands of God, who, during his short
and youthful career, laid the foundation of that kingdom
spoken of by Daniel, the prophet, which should break in
pieces all other kingdoms and stand forever.

But I will not forestall the reader. I have yet to speak
of him in my history, under many. and varying circumstances, in which I have necessarily been associated with
him, up to the latest year of his .life.

CHAPTER VII.

Mission to the Western States :—Visit to the Indians :—Wonderful Success in Kirtland, Ohio :—Journey Westward :—Great Excitement. and
Anxiety to Hear the Fulness of the Gospel :—Imprisonment :—Mock
Trial:—Escape:—Preaching:—Success:—Visit the Wyandots:— Journey
Resumed :—Great Hardships :—Arrival on the Frontiers of Missouri.

T was now October, 1830. A revelaon had been given

through the mouth of this Prophet, Seer and Translator, in which Elders Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer,
Ziba Peterson and myself were appointed to go into the
wilderness, through the western States, and to the Indian
territory. Making arrangements for my wife in the family
of the Whitmers, we took leave of our friends and the
church late in October, and started on foot.

After travelling for some day's we called on an Indian
nation at or near Buffalo; and spent part of a day with
them, instructing them in the knowledge of the record of
their forefathers. We were kindly received, and much interest was manifested by them on hearing this news. ‘We
made a present of two copies of the Book of Mormon to
certain of them who could read, and repaired to Buffalo.
Thence we continued our journey, for about two hundred
miles, and at length called on Mr. Rigdon, my former
friend and instructor, in the Reformed Baptist Society.
He received us cordially and entertained us with hospitality. '

We soon presented him with a Book of Mormon, and
related to him the history of the same. He was much

interested, and promised a thorough perusal of the book.
4

50 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

We tarried in this region for some time, and devoted
our time to the ministry, and visiting from house to house.

At length Mr. Rigdon and many others became convinced that they had no authority to minister in the ordinances of God; and that they had not been legally
baptized and ordained. They, therefore, came forward and
were baptized by us, and received the gift of the Holy
Ghost by the laying on of hands, and prayer in the
name of Jesus Christ.

The news of our coming was soon noised abroad, and
the news of the discovery of the Book of Mormon and
the marvellous events connected with it. The interest
and excitement now became general in Kirtland, and in
all the region round about. The people thronged us
night and day, insomuch that we had no time for rest
or retirement. Meetings were convened in different neighborhoods, and multitudes came together soliciting our attendance; while thousands flocked about us daily; some
to be taught, some for curiosity, some to obey the gospel, and some to dispute or resist it.

In two or three weeks from our arrival in the neighborhood with the news, we had baptized one hundred and
twenty-seven souls, and this number soon increased to one
thousand. The disciples were filled with joy and gladness; while rage and lying was abundantly manifested by
gainsayers; faith was strong, joy was great, and persecution heavy.

We proceeded to ordain Sidney Rigdon, Isaac Morley,
John Murdock, Lyman Wight, Edward Partridga and
many others to the ministry; and, leaving them to take
care of the churches and to minister the gospel, we took
leave of the saints and continued our journey.

Fifty miles west of Kirtland, we had occasion to pass
through the neighborhood where I first settled in the
wilderness, after my marriage. We found the people all
excited with the news of the great work we had been

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. 51

PRATT.

the humble instruments of doing in Kirtland and vicinity.
Some wished to learn and obey the fulness of the gospel—were ready to entertain us and hear us preach.
Others were filled with envy, rage and lying.

VVe had stopped for the night at the house of Simeon
Carter, by whom we were kindly received, and were in
the act of reading to him and explaining the Book of
Mormon, when there came a knock at the door, and an
oflicer entered with a warrant from a magistrate by the
name of Byington, to arrest me on a very frivolous
charge. I- dropped the Book of Mormon in Carter's
house, and went with him some two miles, in a dark,
muddy read; one of the brethren accompanied me. We
arrived at the place of trial late in the evening; found
false witnesses in attendance, and a Judge who boasted of
his intention to thrust us into prison, for the purpose of
testing the powers of our apostleship, as he called it;
although I was only an Elder in the Church. The
Judge boasting thus, and the witnesses being entirely false
in their testimony, I concluded to make no defence, but
to treat the whole matter with contempt.

I was soon ordered to prison, or to pay a sum ‘of
money which I had not in the world. It was now a late
hour, and I was still retained in court, tantalized, abused
and urged to settle the matter, to all of which I made
no reply for some time. This greatly exhausted their
patience. It was near midnight. I now called on brother
Peterson to sing a hymn in the court. We sung, " 0
how happy are they." This exasperated them still more,
and they pressed us greatly to settle the business, by
paying the money.

I then observed as follows: "May it please the court, I
have one proposal to make for a final settlement of the
things that seem to trouble you. It is this: if the witnesses who have given testimony in the case will repent
of their false swearing, and the magistrate of his unjust

I

52 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

and wicked- judgment and of his persecution, blackguardism and abuse, and all kneel down together, we will pray
for you, that God might forgive you in these matters."

" My big bull dog pray for me," says the Judge.

"The devil help us," exclaimed another.

They now urged me for some time to pay the money;
but got no further answer.

The court adjourned, and I was conducted to a public
house over the way, and locked in till morning; the
prison being some miles distant.

In the morning the oflicer appeared and took me to
breakfast; this over, we sat waiting in the inn for all
things to be ready to conduct me to prison. In the
mean time my fellow travellers came past on their journey, and called to see me. I told them in an under
tone to pursue their journey and leave me to manage my
own aifairs, promising to overtake them soon. They
did so.

After sitting awhile by the fire in charge of the ofllcer,
I requested to step out. I walked out into the public
square accompanied by him. Said I, " Mr. Peabody, are
you good at a race ‘P' " No," said he, " but my big bull
dog is, and he has been trained to assist me in my ofilce
these several years; he will take any man down at my
bidding." "Well, Mr. Peabody, you compelled me to go
a mile, I have gone with you two miles. You have given
me an opportunity to preach, sing, and have also entertained me with lodging and breakfast. I must now go
on my journey; if you are good at a race you can accompany me. I thank you for all your kindness-—good day,
sir." '

I then started on my journey, while he stood amazed
and not able to step one foot before the other. Seeing
this, I halted, turned to him and again invited him to a
race. He still stood amazed. I then renewed my exertions, and soon increased my speed to something like that

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 53

of a deer. He did not awake from his astonishment
sufiiciently to start in pursuit till I had gained, perhaps,
two hundred yards. I had already leaped a fence, and
was making my way through a field to the forest on the
right of the road. He now came hallooing after me, and
shouting to his dog to seize me. The dog, being one of
the largest I ever saw, came close on my footsteps with
all his fury; the officer behind still in pursuit, clapping
his hands and hallooing, " stu-boy, stu-boy—take him
Watch-—lay hold of him, I say—-down with him," and
pointing his finger in the direction 1 was running. The
dog was fast overtaking me, and in the act of leaping
upon me, when, quick as lightning, the thought struck
me, to assist the oflicer, in sending the dog with all fury
to the forest a little distance before me. I pointed my
finger in that direction, clapped my hands, and shouted
in imitation of the officer. The dog hastened past me
with redoubled speed towards the forest; being urged by
the oflicer and myself, and both of us running in the
same direction.

Gaining the forest, I soon lost sight of the officer and
dog, and have not seen them since. I took a back course,
crossed the road, took round into the wilderness, on the
lefl-, and made the road again in time to cross a bridge
over Vermilion River,‘ where I was hailed by half a dozen
men, who had been anxiously waiting our arrival to that
part of the country, and who urged me very earnestly to
stop and preach. I told them that I could not then do
it, for an oflicer was on my track. I passed on six miles
further, through mud and rain, and overtook the brethren,
and preached the same evening to a crowded audience,
among whom we were well entertained.

The Book of Mormon, which I dropped at the house of
Simeon Carter, when taken by the oflicer, was by these
circumstances left with him. He read it with attention.
It wrought deeply upon his mind, and he went fifty miles

 

54 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

to the church we had left in Kirtland, and was there
baptized and ordained an Elder. He then returned to his
home and commenced to preach and baptize. A church
of about sixty members was soon organized in the place
where I had played such a trick of deception on the dog.

We now pursued our journey for some days, and at
length arrived in Sandusky, in the western part of Ohio.
Here resided a tribe, or nation of Indians, called Wyandots, on whom we called, and with whom we spent several
days. We were well received, and had an opportunity of
laying before them the record of their forefathers, which
we did. They rejoiced in the tidings, bid us God speed,
and desired us to write to them in relation to our success
among the tribes further west, who had already removed to
the Indian territory, where these expected soon to go.

Taking an affectionate leave of this people, we continued
our journey to Cincinnati. In this city we spent several
days, and preached to many of the people, but without
much success. About the 20th of December we took passage on a steamer for St. Louis. In a few days we arrived
at the mouth of the Ohio, and finding the river blocked
with ice, the boat did not proceed further. We therefore
landed and pursued our journey on foot for two hundred
miles, to the neighborhood of St. Louis.

We halted for a few days in Illinois, about twenty miles
from St. Louis, on account of a dreadful storm of rain and
snow, which lasted for a week or more, during which the
snow fell in some places near three feet deep. Although
in the midst of strangers, we were kindly entertained, found
many friends, and preached to large congregations in several neighborhoods.

In the beginning of 1831 we renewed our journey; and,
passing through St. Louis and St. Charles, we travelled on
foot for three hundred miles through vast prairies and
through trackless wilds of snow—no beaten road; houses
few and far between; and the bleak northwest wind always

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 55

blowing in our faces with a keenness which would almost
take the skin off the face. We travelled for whole days,
from morning till night, without a house or fire, wading
in snow to the knees at every step, and the cold so
intense that the snow did not melt on the south side of
the houses, even in the mid-day sun, for nearly six weeks.
We carried on our backs our changes of clothing, several
books, and corn bread and raw pork. We often eat our
frozen bread and pork by the way, when the bread would
be so frozen that we could not bite or penetrate any part
of it but the outside crust.

After much fatigue and some suffering we all arrived in
Independence, in the county of Jackson, on the extreme
western frontiers of Missouri, and of the United States.

This was about fifteen hundred miles from where we
started, -and we had performed most of the journey on
foot, through a wilderness Country, in the worst season of
the year, occupying about four months, during which we
had preached the gospel to tens of thousands of Gentiles
and two nations of Indians; baptizing, confirming and
organizing many hundreds of people into churches of LatterDay Saints.

This was the first mission performed by the Elders of
the Church in any of the States west of New York, and

we were the first members of the same which were ever
on this frontier.

 

 

CHAPTER VIII.

Visit the Delawares of Kansas :—Interview with the Chief and Council :—Speech
and Reply :—Great Excitement :—0pposition from Missionaries :—Compelled
to Leave the Indian Countryr—Ministry in Jackson County :—-Council in
Independence:—Return Eastward :—Disguise:—Hospitality of a. Family of
the Saints '—Dialogue -.—Sickness .—Reunion with Pres. Joseph Smith :—
Mission to the Shakers :—Ministry Among the Churches :—False Spirits :—
Inquire of the Lord :—Mode of Receiving Revelations.

W0 of our number now commenced work as tailors in

the village of Independence, While the others crossed

the frontier line and commenced a mission among the Lamanites, or Indians.

Passing through the tribe of Shawnees we tarried one
night with them, and the next day crossed the Kansas river
and entered among the Delawares. We immediately inquired for the residence of the principal Chief, and were
soon introduced to an aged and venerable looking man,
who had long stood at the head of the Delawares, and
been looked up to as the Great Grandfather, or Sachem of
ten nations or tribes.

He was seated on a sofa of furs, skins and blankets,
before a fire in the centre of his lodge; which was a comfortable cabin, consisting of two large rooms.

His wives were neatly dressed, partly in calicoes and
partly in skins; and Wore a vast amount of silver ornaments. As we entered his cabin he took us by the hand
with a hearty welcome, and then motioned us to be seated
on a pleasant seat of blankets, or robes. His wives, at his
bidding, set before us a tin pan full of beans and corn

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 57

boiled up together, which proved to be good eating; although
three of us made use alternately of the same wooden
spoon.

There was an interpreter present and through him we
commenced‘ to make known our errand, and to tell him of
the Book of Mormon. We asked him to call the council
of his nation together and give us a hearing in full. He
promised to consider on it till next day, in the mean
time recommending us to a certain Mr. Pool for entertainment; this was their blacksmith, employed by government.

The man entertained us kindly and comfortably. Next
morning we again called on Mr. Anderson, the old chief,
and explained to him something of the Book. He was at
first unwilling to call his council; made several excuses,
and finally refused; as he had ever been opposed to the
introduction of missionaries among his tribe.

We continued the conversation a little longer, till he at
last began to understand the nature of the Book. He then
changed his mind; became suddenly interested, and requested us to proceed no further with our conversation till
he could call a council. He despatched a messenger, and
in about an hour had some forty men collected around us
in his lodge, who, after shaking us by the hand_. were seated
in silence; and in a grave and dignified manner awaited
the amiouncement of what we had to oifer. The chief then
requested us to proceed; or rather, begin where we began
before, and to complete our communication. Elder Cowdery
then commenced as follows:

"Aged Chief and Venerable Council of the Delaware nation; we are glad of this opportunity to address you as
our red brethren and friends. \Ve have travelled a long
distance from towards the rising sun to bring you glad
news; we have travelled the wilderness, crossed the deep
and Wide rivers, and waded in the deep snows, and in the
face of the storms of winter, to communicate to you great
knowledge which has lately come to our ears and hearts;

 

58 . AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

and which will do the red man good as well as the pale
face.

"Once the red men were many; they occupied the
country from sea to sea—from the rising to the setting
sun; the whole land was theirs; the Great Spirit gave it
to them, and no pale faces dwelt among them. But now
they are few in numbers; their possessions are small, and
the pale faces are many.

"Thousands of moons ago, when the red men's forefathers dwelt in peace and possessed this whole land, the
Great Spirit talked with them, and revealed His law and
His will, and much knowledge to their wise men and
prophets. This they wrote in a Book; together with their
history, and the things which should befall their children
in the latter days.

"This Book was written on plates of gold, and handed
down from father to son for many ages and generations.

" It was then that the people prospered, and were strong
and mighty; they cultivated the earth; built buildings and
cities, and abounded in all good things, as the pale faces
now do.

"But they became wicked; they killed one another and
shed much blood; they killed their prophets and wise men,
and sought to destroy the Book. The Great Spirit became
angry, and would speak to them no more; they had no
more good and wise dreams; no more visions; no more
angels sent among them by the Great Spirit; and the
Lord commanded Mormon and Moroni, their last wise men
and prophets, to hide the Book in the earth, that it might
be preserved in safety, and be found and made known in
the latter day to the pale faces who should possess the
land; that they might again make it known to the red
man; _in order to restore them to the knowledge of the
will of the Great Spirit and to His favor. And if the red
man would then receive this Book and learn the things
written in it, and do according thereunto, they should be

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 59

restored to all their rights and privileges; should cease
to fight and kill one another; should become one people;
cultivate the earth in peace, in common with the pale
faces, who were willing to believe and obey the same book,
and be good men and live in peace.

Then should the red men become great, and have plenty
to eat and good clothes to wear, and should be in favor
with the Great Spirit and be his children, while he would
be their Great Father, and talk with them, and raise up
prophets and wise and good men amongst them again,
who should teach them many things.

" This Book, which contained these things, was hid in
the earth by Moroni, in a hill called by him, Cumorah,
which hill is now in the State of New York, near the
village of Palmyra, in Ontario county.

"In that neighborhood there lived a young man named
Joseph Smith, who prayed to the Great Spirit much, in
order that he might know the truth; and the Great Spirit
sent an angel to him, and told him where this Book was
hid by Moroni; and commanded him to go and get it.
He accordingly went to the place, and dug in the earth,
and found the Book written on" golden plates.

"But it was written in the language of the forefathers
of the red man; therefore this young man, being a pale
face, could not understand it; but the angel told him and
showed him, and gave him knowledge of the language,
and how to interpret the Book. So he interpreted it into
the language of the pale faces, and wrote it on paper,
and caused it to be printed, and published thousands of
copies of it among them; and then sent us to the red
men to bring some copies of it to them, and to tell them
this news. So we have now come from him, and here
is a copy of the Book, which we now present to our red
friend, the chief of the Delawares, and which we hope he

will cause to be read and known among his tribe; it will
do them good."

60 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

We then presented him with a Book of Mormon.

There was a pause in the council, and some conversation in their own tongue, after which the chief made the
following reply;

" We feel truly thankful to our white friends who have
come so far, and been at such pains to tell us good
news, and especially this new news concerning the Book
of our forefathers; it makes us glad in here "—placing
his hand on his heart. .

" It is now winter, we are new settlers in this place;
the snow is deep, our cattle and horses are dying, our
wigwams are poor; we have much to do in the springto build houses, and fence and make farms; but we will
build a council house, and meet together, and you shall
read to us and teach us more concerning the Book of our
fathers and the will of the Great Spirit."

We again lodged at Mr. Pool's, told him of the Book,
had a very pleasant interview with him, and he became
a believer and advocate for the Book, and served as an
interpreter.

We continued for several days to instruct the old chief
and many of his tribe. The interest became more and
more intense on their part, from day to day, until at
length nearly the whole tribe began to feel a spirit of
inquiry and excitement on the subject.

We found several among them who could read, and to
them Awe gave copies of the Book, explaining to them
that it was the Book of their forefathers.

Some began to rejoice exceedingly, and took great pains
to tell the news to others, in their own language.

The excitement now reached the frontier settlements in
Missouri, and stirred up the jealousy and envy of the
Indian. agents and sectarian missionaries to that degree
that we were soon ordered out of the Indian country as
disturbers of the peace; and even threatened with the
military in case of non-compliance.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 61

We accordingly departed from the Indian country, and
came over the line, and commenced laboring in Jackson
County, Missouri, among the whites. We were well received, and listened to by many; and some were baptized
and added to the Church.

Thus ended our first Indian Mission, in which we had
preached the gospel in its fulness, and distributed the
record of their forefathers among three tribes, viz.: the
Catteraugus Indians, near Buffalo, N. Y., the Wyandots
of Ohio, and the Delawares west of Missouri.

We trust that at some future day, when the servants
of God go forth in power to the remnant of Joseph,
some precious seed will be found growing in their hearts,
which was sown by us in that early day.

It was now the 14th of February, 1831. The cold north
wind which had blown for several weeks, accompanied
with very severe weather, had begun to give place to a
milder breeze from the south; and the deep snows were
fast settling down, with every prospect of returning spring.

Elders Cowdery, Whitmer, Peterson, myself, and F. G.
Williams, who accompanied us from Kirtland, now assembled in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, and came
to the conclusion that one of our number had better return to the church in Ohio, and perhaps to head quarters in New York, in order to communicate with the
Presidency,' report ourselves, pay a visit to the numerous
churches we had organized on our outward journey, and
also to procure more books.

For this laborious enterprise I was selected by the voice
of my four brethren. I accordingly took leave of them,
and of our friends in that country, and started on foot.

In nine days I arrived at St. Louis, distance three
hundred miles. It was now the latter part of February;
the snow had disappeared, the rivers were breaking up,
and the whole country inundated as it were with mud
and water. I spent a few days with a friend in the

 

62 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

country, at the same place we had tarried on the way
out; and then took a steamer in St. Louis bound for
Cincinnati, where I landed in safety after a passage
of one week. From Cincinnati I travelled on foot to
Strongville, Ohio, forty miles from Kirtland. '

This last walk consisted of some two hundred and fifty
miles, over very bad, muddy road; and for some days I
had found myself much fatigued, and quite out of health.
Hearing of some brethren in Strongville, I determined to
inquire them out, and try their hospitality to a sick and
weary stranger Without making myself known.

I accordingly approached the house of an old gentleman
by the name of Coltrin, about sundown, and inquired if
they could entertain a weary stranger who had no money.
The old gentleman cast his eyes upon me, and beheld a
weary, weather-beaten traveller; soiled with the toil of a
long journey; besmeared with mud, eyes inflamed _with
pain, long beard, and a visage lengthened by sickness
and extreme fatigue. After a moment's hesitation he bade
me welcome, and invited me into his house. Several
ladies were at tea. I addressed them as a stranger who
had come to partake of their hospitality for the night.

They received me with a smile of welcome, and immediately insisted on my sitting down to tea, during which
something like the following conversation took place :—

"Stranger, where are you from‘! you certainly look weary;
you must have travelled a long distance I"

"Yes; I am from beyond the frontiers of Missouri; a
distance of twelve hundred miles."

" Ah, indeed! Did you hear anything of the four great
prophets out that way ?"

"Prophets! What prophets ‘P'

"Why, four men---strange men—who came through this
country and preached, and baptized hundreds of people;
and, after ordaining Elders and organizing churches, they
continued on westward, as we suppose, to the frontiers

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 63

on a mission to the Indians; and we have never heard
from them since. But the great work commenced by them
still rolls on. It commenced last fall in Kirtland, and has
spread for a hundred miles around; thousands have embraced it, and among others ourselves and many in this
neighborhood."

" But what did they preach‘! And why do you call
them prophets 1"

"Why they opened the Scriptures in a wonderful manner ; showed the people plainly of many things to come;
opened the doctrine of Christ, as we never understood it
before; and, among other things, they introduced a very
extraordinary Book, which, they said, was an ancient record
of the forefathers of the Indian tribes.

" How were they dressed, and in what style did they
travel 1"

" They were dressed plainly and comely, very neat in
their persons, and each one were a hat of a drab color,
low round crown and broad brim, after the manner of the
Shakers, so it is said; for we had not the privilege of
seeing them ourselves. I

 

" However, these fashioned hats were not a peculiarity.

of this people; but were given to each of them by the
Shakers, at the time they passed through this country; so
they wore them. As to their style of travelling, they
sometimes go on foot, sometimes in a carriage, and sometimes, perhaps, by water; but they provide themselves with
neither purse nor scrip for their journey, neither shoes nor
two coats apiece."

"Well, from your description of these four men I think
I have seen them on the frontiers of Missouri. They had
commenced a mission in the Indian territory; but were
compelled by the United States agents, influenced, no
doubt, by missionaries, to depart from the Indian country,
although well received by the Indians themselves."

" You saw them, then 1"

64 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

"I did."

" Were they well 7"

" I believe they were all in good health and spirits."

" Will they return soon? 0, who would not give the
world to see them I"

" VVell, I am one of them, and the others you may,
perhaps, see."

" You one of them! God bless you. What is your
name 1"

" My name is Parley P. Pratt, one of the four men you
have described, but not much of a prophet; and as to a
sight of me in my present plight, I think it would not be
worth half a world."

The rest of the conversation I cannot write, for all
spoke, all laughed, and all rejoiced at once.

The next morning I found myself unable to arise from
my bed, being severely attacked with the measles.

 

I came near dying, and was confined for one or two

weeks among them, being scarcely able to raise my head.
I was watched over night and day, and had all the care
that a man could have in his father's house.

As I recovered in part, being still very weak, I was
provided with a horse, on which I arrived at Kirtland.

Hundreds of the saints now crowded around to welcome
me, and to inquire after my brethren whom I had left in
Missouri.

Here also I again met President Joseph Smith, who had,
during our absence, come up from the State of New
York.

I found the churches in Ohio had increased to more
than a thousand members, and those in New York to
several hundred.

I also heard from my wife, from whom I had been
absent about six months. The news was that the whole
Church in the State of New York, including herself (for
she had joined. during my absence), was about to remove

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 65

to Ohio in the opening spring. I, therefore, was advised
to proceed no farther eastward, but to await their arrival.

After visiting the saints a few days, I commenced to
labor with my hands; but the Lord would not suifer me
to continue long in this occupation.

Some time in March, I was commanded of the Lord, in
connection with S. Rigdon and L. Copley, to visit a people
called the Shakers,‘ and preach the gospel unto them.

We fulfilled this mission, as we were commanded, in a
settlement of this strange people, near Cleveland, Ohio;

but they utterly refused to hear or obey the gospel. After
this I paid a visit to the churches round about Kirtland.

As I went forth among the different branches, some very
strange spiritual operations were manifested, which were
disgusting, rather than edifyihg. Some persons would seem
to swoon away, and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn
or disfigured in their countenances. Others would fall into
ecstacies, and be drawn into contortions, ‘cramp, fits, etc.
Others would seem to have visions and revelations, which
were not edifying, and which were not congenial to the
doctrine and spirit of the gospel. In short, a false and
lying spirit seemed to be creeping into the Church.

All these things were new and strange to me, and had
originated in the Church during our absence, and previous
to the arrival of President Joseph Smith from New York.

Feeling our weakness and inexperience, and lest we
should err in judgment concerning these spiritual phenomena, myself, John Murdock, and several other Elders.
went to Joseph Smith, and asked him to inquire of the
Lord concerning these spirits or manifestations.

After we had joined in prayer in his translating room,
he dictated in our presence the following revelation :(Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly,
and with a pause between each, sufiiciently long for it to
be recorded, by an ordinary writer, in long hand.

" See Book of Doctrine and Covenants, section 66.
5

 

 

66 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

This was the manner in which all his written revelations
were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation,
reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of
the subject; neither did any of these communications
undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections. As he dictated them so they stood, so far as I have witnessed; and
I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each;

This inquiry was made‘ and the answer given in May,
1831.)

 

CHAPTER IX.

Revelation on False Spirits :—Ministry Among the Churches :—Rema1-kable
Miracle of Healing :—Arrival of Emigrant Saints from New York :Severe Disappointment.

" EARKEN, 0 ye Elders of my Church, and give ear,

to the voice of the living God ; attend to the words
of wisdom which shall be given unto you, according as ye
have asked and are agreed, as touching the Church, and
the spirits which have gone abroad in the earth. Behold,
verily I say unto you, that there are many spirits which
are false spirits, which have gone forth in the earth, deceiving the world; and also Satan hath sought to deceive
you, that he might overthrow you.

" Behold, I, the Lord, have looked upon you, and have
seen abominations in the Church that possess my name;
but blessed are they who are faithful and endure, whether
in life or in death; for they shall inherit eternal life.
But woe unto them that are deceivers and hypocrites,
for, thus saith the Lord, I will bring them to judgment.

" Behold, I say unto you, there are hypocrites among
you, and have deceived some, which has given the adversary power; but, behold, such shall be reclaimed; but
the hypocrites shall be detected and cut off, either in life
or in death, even as I will; and woe unto them who are
cut off from my Church, for the same are overcome of
the world; wherefore, let every man beware, lest he do
that which is not in truth and righteousness before me.

" And now come, saith the Lord, by the Spirit, unto
the Elders of His Church, and let us reason together,

68 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

that ye may understand: Let us reason—even as a man
reasoneth—one with another, face to face; now, when a
man reasoneth, he is understood of man, because he reasoneth as a man; even so will I, the Lord, reason with
you, that you may understand: wherefore, I, the Lord,
asketh you this question, unto What were ye ordained?
To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter
which was sent forth to teach the truth; and then received ye spirits which ye could not understand, and received them to be of God, and in this are ye justified?
Behold, ye shall answer this question yourselves; nevertheless, I will be merciful unto you; he that is weak
among you, hereafter, shall be made strong.

"Verily, I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and
sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter,
in the spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the spirit of
truth, or some other way? And if it be by some other
way, it be not of God. And, again, he that reeeiveth
the Word of truth, doth he receive it by the spirit of
truth, or some other way? If it be some other way, it
be not of God; therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand, and know that he that reeeiveth the word by
the spirit of truth, reeeiveth it as it is preached by the
spirit of truth? '

"Wherefore, he that preaeheth and he that reeeiveth,
understandeth one another, and both are edified and reioice together; and that which doth not edify, is not of
God, and is darkness; that which is of God is light, and
he that reeeiveth light and continueth in God, reeeiveth
more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter
until the perfect day. And, again, verily I say unto you,
and I say it that you may know the truth, that you may
chase darkness from among you; for he that is ordained
of God and sent forth, the same is appointed to be the
greatest, notwithstanding he is least, and the servant
of all; wherefore, he is possessor of all things, for all

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 69

things are subject unto him, both in Heaven and on the
earth; the life and the light, the spirit and the power
sent forth by the will of the Father through Jesus Christ,
his Son; but no man is possessor of all things, except he
be purified and cleansed from all sin; and if ye are purilied and cleansed from all sin, ye shall ask whatsoever
you will in the name of Jesus, and it shall be done; but,
know this, it shall be given you what you shall ask, and as
ye are appointed to the head, the spirits shall be subject unto you.

" "Therefore, it shall come to pass, that if you behold
a spirit manifested that you cannot understand, and you
receive not that spirit, ye shall ask of the Father in the
name of Jesus, and if he give not unto you that spirit,
that you 1nay know that it is not of God; and it shall
be given unto you power over that spirit, and you shall
proclaim against that spirit with a loud voice, that it is
not of God; not with railing accusation, that ye be not
overcome; neither with boasting, nor rejoicing, lest you
be seized therewith; he that receiveth of God, let him
account it of God, and let him rejoice that he is accounted
of God worthy to receive, and by giving heed and doing these things which ye have received, and which
ye shall hereafter receive, and the kingdom is given you
of the Father, and power to overcome all things which
is not ordained of Him; and, behold, verily I say unto
you, blessed are you who are now hearing these words
of mine from the mouth of my servant, for your sins
are forgiven you.

" Let my servant, Joseph Wakefield, in whom I am
pleased, and my servant, Parley P. Pratt, go forth among
the churches and strengthen them by the word of exhortation; and also my servant, John Corrill, or as many
of my servants as are ordained unto this office, and let
them labor in the vineyard; and let no man hinder them
of doing that which I have appointed unto them; where 

70 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

fore, in this thing, my servant, Edward Partridge, is not
justified; nevertheless, let him repent and he shall be forgiven. Behold, ye are little children, and ye cannot bear
all things now; ye must grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth. Fear not, little children, for you are
mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are Of
them that my Father hath given me; and none Ot' them
that my Father hath given me shall be lost; and the
Father and I are one. I am in the Father and the
Father in me; and, inasmuch as ye have received me, ye
are in me and I in you; wherefore, I am in your midst,
and I am the good Shepherd (and the stone of Israel;
he that buildeth upon this rock shall never fall), and the
day cometh that you shall hear my voice and see me,
and know that I am. VVatch, therefore, that ye may be
ready; even so. Amen." '

In obedience to the foregoing, Joseph Wakefield and
myself visited the several branches of the Church, rebukeing the wrong spirits which had crept in among them,
setting in order things that were wanting; ordaining Elders and other oiiicers; baptizing such as believed and repented of their sins; administering the gift of the Holy
Ghost by the laying on of hands, in the name of Jesus
Christ; laying hands On little children and blessing them;
praying for the sick, and comforting the aiilicted, etc.
On some occasions ‘we assembled fifty or sixty little children in one circle, in the midst of the assembly of the
saints, and laid our hands upon them all, and prayed
for them, and blessed them in the name of Jesus.

Thus my time passed sweetly and swiftly away for
some weeks. I was sometimes in the society of President Smith, in Kirtland, and of the saints in that place,
and sometimes in the branches abroad.

About this time a young lady, by the name of Chloe
Smith, being a member of the Church, was lying very
low with a lingering fever, with a family who Occupied one

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 71

of the houses on the farm of Isaac Morley, in Kirtland.
Many of the Church had visited and prayed with her, but
all to no effect; she seemed at the point of death, but would
not consent to have a physician. This greatly enraged
her relatives, who had cast her out because she belonged
to the Church, and who, together with many of the people of the neighborhood, were greatly stirred up to anger.
saying, " these wicked deceivers will let her lie and die
without a physician, because of their superstitions; and if
they do, we will prosecute them for so doing." Now these
were daily watchin g for her last breath, with many threats.

Under these circumstances, President Smith and myself, '

with several other Elders, called to see her. She was so
low that no one had been allowed for some days previous to speak above a whisper, and even the door of the
log dwelling was muilled with cloths to prevent a noise.

We kneeled down and prayed vocally all around, each
in turn; after which President Smith arose, went to the
bedside, took her by the hand, and said unto her with a
loud voice, "in the name of Jesus Christ arise and walk 1"
She immediately arose, was dressed by a woman in attendance, when she walked to a chair before the fire, and
was seated and joined in singing a hymn. The house was
thronged with people in a few moments, and the young
lady arose and shook hands with each as they came in; and
from that minute she was perfectly restored to health.

Some time in May, 1831, the Church arrived with their
families from the State of New York, to settle in Kirt
land; but, to my inexpressible disappointment, my wife had
not come with them, but had gone to spend the summer
in the East with her friends. It was now too late to go
to her, as the time was near when I was in duty bound to
return to my fellow laborers in Missouri. To be so long
absent from her, and then undertake a second journey without seeing her, was a severe trial, but God gave me grace
to overcome my feelings, for his sake and the gospel's.

CHAPTER X.

Conference at Kirt1and:—Revelation of the High Priesthood :—Ordina.tions to
the Same:—Appointment of Missions through the Western States:—Re.
turn Westward, Accompanied by my Brother Orson:—Our Success by the

Way :—Arriva.l at the Frontiers :—Sickness :—Remarkable Conversion of
Newel Knight :—A Dream.

N the sixth of June, 1831, a general conference was convened at Kirtland, consisting of all the Elders, far and
near, who could be got together. In this conference much
instruction was given by President Smith, who spake in
great power, as he was moved by the Holy Ghost; and
the spirit of power and of testimony rested down upon the
Elders in a marvellous manner. Here also were some

strange manifestations of false spirits, which were immediately rebuked.

Several were then selected by revelation, through Pres- dent Smith, and ordained to the High Priesthood after
the order of the Son of God; which is after the order of
Melchisedec. This was the first occasion in which this
priesthood had been revealed and conferred upon the Elders in this dispensation, although the otiice of an Elder
is the same in a certain degree, but not in the fulness.
On this occasion I was ordained to this holy ordinance
and calling by President Smith.

After these things, and the business of the conference
was over, myself and Orson Pratt were appointed by
revelation to perform a mission together, through the Western States, and to meet the brethren I had left in Jackson County, Missouri; and many others also who were

Born. September 19. 1811.

Cnpied from ll l'hdoqmph.

Digitized by C:-00813
 

 

Digitized by C:-OO%I€

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 73

sent in a similar manner, two and two through the Western
States, and who were all appointed to meet in Jackson
County, Missouri, and hold the next conference.‘

Soon after the conference my brother and myself commenced our journey without any means to bear our expenses. VVe travelled through the States of Ohio, Indiana,
Illinois and Missouri, in the midst of the heat of summer
on foot, and faithfully preached the gospel in many parts
of all these States. We suifered the hardships incident to
a new and, in many places, unsettled country, such as hunger, thirst, fatigue, etc. We arrived in upper Missouri in
September, having baptized many people and organized
branches of the Church in several parts of Ohio, Illinois
and Indiana. On our arrival we found a considerable settlement of the brethren from Ohio, who had immigrated
during the summer and taken up their residence in Jackson County. President Smith, and many of the Elders, had
been there and held a conference, and, having organized a
Stake of Zion, pointed out and consecrated certain grounds
for a city and temple, they had again returned to the East.
With them, the brethren whom I had left there the previous winter, had also returned.

I felt somewhat disappointed in not meeting with the
brethren; but was consoled with the reflection that I had
been diligent in preaching the gospel on my journey, while
others had hurried through the country, perhaps, without
tarrying to do much good. .

I was now taken sick with the fever and ague, owing
to the exposures of the climate through which we had
travelled. I suffered extremely for several months; being
brought very low with fever, and with other afflictions.

I tarried mostly with a branch of the Church commonly
called the Colesville branch. They had removed from Colesville, in the State of New York. and settled on the borders
of a fertile prairie, about twelve miles west of the village

' See revelation, Book of Doctrlne and Covenants, Section 66.

 

74 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

of Independence, and near the boundaries which divide the
State of Missouri from the Indian Territory._ They consisted of about sixty souls, and were under the presidency
of a faithful and zealous Elder by the name of Newel
Knight—an account of whose miraculous conversion we here
record, as extracted from the life of Joseph Smith, published in the Mz'llenm'al Star, vol. 4, p. 116:

"During this month of April, I (Joseph Smith) went on
a visit to the residence of Mr. Joseph Knight, of Colesville, Broom county, N. Y., with whom and his family I had
been previously acquainted, and whose name I have above
mentioned as having been so kind and thoughtful towards
us while translating the Book of Mormon. Mr. Knight
and his family were Universalists; but were willing to
reason with me upon my religious views, and were, as usual,
friendly and hospitable. We held several meetings in the
neighborhood; we had many friends and some enemies.
Our meetings were well attended, and many began to pray
fervently to Almighty God that He would give them wisdom to understand the truth. Among those who attended
our meetings regularly was Newel Knight, son of Joseph
Knight. He and I had many serious conversations on the
important subject of man's eternal salvation. We were in
the habit of praying much at our meetings, and Newel had
said that he would try and take up his cross and pray
vocally during meeting; but when we again met together
he rather excused himself. I tried to prevail upon him,
making use of the figure, supposing that he should get
into a mud hole would he not try to help himself out?
And that we were willing now to help him out of the
mud hole. He replied, ‘that provided he had got into a
mud hole through carelessness, he would rather wait and
get out himself than have others to help him, and so he
would wait until he should get into the woods by himself
and there he would pray.' Accordingly he deferred praying
until next morning, when he retired into the woods, where,

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY 1'. PRATT. 75

according to his own account afterwards, he made several
attempts to pray, but_ could scarcely do so—feeling that he
had not done his duty, but that he should have prayed
in the presence of others. He began to feel uneasy, and
continued to feel worse both in mind and body until, upon
reaching his own house, his appearance was such as to
alarm his wife very much. He requested her to go and
bring me to him. I went and found him suifering very
much in his mind, and his body acted upon in a very
strange manner. His visage and limbs distorted and twisted
in every shape and appearance possible to imagine; and
finally, he was caught up oil‘ the floor of the apartment
and tossed about most fearfully. His situation was soon
made known to his neighbors and relatives, and in a short
time as many as eight or nine grown persons had got together to witness the scene. After ‘he had thus suffered
for a time, I succeeded in getting hold of him by the hand,
when almost immediately he spoke to me, and with very
great earnestness requested of me that I should cast the
devil out of him; saying, ‘ that he knew that he was in
him, and that he also knew that I could cast him out.' I
replied, ‘if you know that I can it shall be done,' and
then, almost unconsciously, I rebuked the devil, and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to depart from
him; when immediately Newel spoke out and said, ‘that he
saw the devil leave him and vanish from his sight.' "

"The scene was now entirely changed; for as soon as
the devil had departed from our friend his countenance
became natural; his distortions of body ceased; and almost
immediately the Spirit of the Lord descended upon him, and
the visions of eternity were opened to his view. He afterwards related his experience as follows :

* This was the ilrst miracle which was done in this Church, or by any member of it.
and it was done not by man nor the power of man, but it was done by God, and by the
power of godliness; therefore, let the honor and the praise, the dominion and. the glory,
be ascribed to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.

 

76 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

" ‘I now began to feel a most pleasing sensation resting
upon me, and immediately the visions of Heaven were
opened to my view. I felt myself attracted upward, and
remained for some time enrapt in contemplation, insomuch
that I knew not what was going on in the room. By-andby I felt some weight pressing upon my shoulder and the
side of my head, which served to recall me to a sense of
my situation, and I found that the Spirit of the Lord had
actually caught me up oil‘ the floor, and that my shoulder
and head were pressing against the beams.'

" All this was witnessed by many, to their great astonishment and satisfaction, when they saw the devil thus cast
out and the power of God and His holy Spirit thus made
manifest. So soon as consciousness returned, his bodily
weakness was such that we were obliged to lay him upon
his bed and wait upon him for some time. As may be
expected, such a scene as this contributed much to make
believers of those who witnessed it; and, finally, the greater
part of them became members of the Church."

This Colesville branch was among the first organized by
Joseph Smith, and constituted the first settlers of the members of the Church in Missouri. They had arrived late in
the summer, and cut some hay for their cattle, sowed a
little grain, and prepared some ground for cultivation, and
were engaged during the fall and winter in building log
cabins, etc. The winter was cold, and for some time about
ten families lived in one log cabin, which was open and
unfinished, while the frozen ground served for a floor. Our
food consisted of beef and a little bread made of corn,
which had been grated into coarse meal by rubbing the
ears on a tin grater. This was rather an inconvenient way
of living for a sick person; but it was for the gospe1's
sake, and all were very cheerful and happy.

We enjoyed many happy seasons in our prayer and other
meetings, and the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon
us, and even on the little children, insomuch that many of

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 77

eight, ten or twelve years of age spake, and prayed, and
prophesied in our meetings and in our family worship.
There was a spirit of peace and union, and love and good
will manifested in this little Church in the wilderness, the
memory of which will be ever dear to my heart.

It was during my long illness in this dreary Winter that
I had the following dream or vision: I thought I saw
myself dressed in a clean and beautiful linen robe, white as
snow, and extending from the neck downward in beautiful
folds. On either breast were lines of golden writing, in
large Roman letters, about a third of an inch in length, and
the lines extending from the centre of the breast on each
side six or eight inches long. The upper line on each side
appeared, larger and more beautiful or conspicuous than the
others; one ot' these lines was: " HOLY PROPHET," and the
other was : " NEW JERUSALEM."

On awaking from this dream I immediately called to
mind the words of the Saviour to John the Revelator: "He
that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God,
and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the
name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, which is
New Jerusalem."

This dream certainly encouraged me, and enabled me to
hear my' sickness, privation and long absence from my wife
and former friends more patiently.

 

CHAPTER XI.

Attend Conference :-—Insta.ntaneous Healing :-—Return Eastward :—Description
of the Inhabitants on the South Side of the Missouri River :-Strange
Manifestation :—Arrive at St. Louis :—Preaching and Entertainment :—
Arrive at Vandalia :—Rcception :—Exposnre in Crossing an Overfiowed
Bottom :—Dialogue :—Hospitality of a Preacher :—Deaf Landlord :—Meet

my Wife.

OME time in February, 1832, a Conference was held

by Bishop Partridge and the Elders remaining in this
part of the country. To this Conference I was determined
to go, though very feeble and almost unable to sit up.
I was assisted on to a horse, and rode twelve miles. I
kept my bed during the Conference; but at the close,
several Elders being about to take their journey to Ohio,
I determined to go with them. I requested the Elders,
therefore, to lay their hands on me and pray. They did
so. I was instantly healed, and the next morning started,
in company with Elder Levi Hancock, a journey of twelve
hundred miles on foot.

I gained strength at every step, and the second evening,
after wading through the snow about six inches deep for
some ten miles, I was enabled to address a congregation
for the first time in several months.

I now parted with Levi Hancock, and had John Murdock for a fellow traveller. We passed down the south
side of the Missouri river, among a thin settlement of people-—mostly very ignorant but extremely hospitable. Some
families were entirely dressed in skins, without any other
clothing; including ladies young and old. Buildings were
generally without glass windows, and the door open in

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 79

winter for a light. We preached, and warned the people,
and taught them as well as we could.

While ministering in these settlements, and exposed to
a heavy snow storm, brother John Murdock was taken
sick with a heavy fever; this caused us to stop early in
the day among strangers, in a small log cabin consisting
of one room; we held a meeting in the evening, and then
had a bed made down on the floor, before the fire. Before morning brother Murdock was much better, but I
was seized with a most dreadful chill, followed by a heavy
turn of fever; morning found me unable to rise or speak.
As the bed was in the way, they lifted it by the four
corners, with me on it, and placed it in the back part
of the room, on another bed. Here I lay, entirely helpless with a burning fever, during which I distinctly heard
a dialogue betwwn John Murdock and the lady of the
house; she upbraiding us as imposters thrown upon them
at this inclement season, while they were out of milling
and of wood, and but illy prepared for such a burden;
that one was sick the night before, and now the other
was taken down; that it was. six miles to the next house,
deep snow and no road broke, and we would probably
be on their hands for weeks.

To these inhospitable remarks brother Murdock mildly
replied, trying to soothe the woman; reasoning with her,
and telling her that brother Parley would soon be better,
and then we would go our way.

This dialogue gave me such a sense of unwelcome, and
I pitied brother Murdock to that degree for having to
stay with such spirits on my account, that I felt I could
endure it no longer. With the utmost effort I roused
myself sumciently to call brother Murdock to my bed,
whispering to him to lay hands on me unobserved, so as
not to be seen or overheard. He did so; I then asked
him to give me a drink of water. The effort had been
too much, I swooned away while he was gone for the

 

80 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

water; he could hardly arouse me sutliciently to drink of
it; it was like waking from the dead. I drank of it,
bounded on my feet, dressed myself, put on my shoes and
hat, and told him I was ready to start. The family all
marvelled; one exclaimed, " what a strange disease; it
could not be fever, and then be cured in an instant."
We gave no explanations, but started on our journey up
a steep hill, in the deep snow, in the midst of their urgings to stay to breakfast, or at least have a cup of coffee.
I said nothing, but thought to myself: ye hypocrites, to
murmur as you have, and then ask me to stay and eat.

VVe travelled on‘ for some miles nearly in silence—I
waiting all the while for brother Murdock to make some
remarks referring to our inhospitable treatment, and the
dialogue with the mistress of the house.

At last I broke silence. Said 1, "Brother Murdock,
how did you feel to be so talked to by that woman? I
thought you bore it with great patience, and I pitied you
from my heart, or I never should have had faith and
coinage to be thus healed and start my journey."

He replied that no such conversation had occurred between him and the lady, nor had she uttered one word
indicative of any such inhospitable feeling.

"Well," said I, " I heard it articulated in plain English
by some two persons, perfectly imitating her voice and
yours; it was no imagination, or raging deliriiun of a
fever. I can swear I heard a conversation to that effect
for a length of time.

" If it was not the lady and yourself, then it was something from an invisible world, which clearly revealed to
me the spirit of our hostess."

We reached the next house; I was a well man; found
good quarters, and we were kindly and hospitably entertained for some days.

Pursuing our journey, we arrived at St. Louis, were
kindly received by some citizens of that place, and held

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 81

meeting with them. They conveyed us over the Mississippi free of charge, and we continued our journey,
preaching by the way. We arrived at length at Vandalia, the then capital of Illinois. Here we were invited to
a hotel, where we sojourned free of charge, and preached
to a good audience in the Presbyterian meeting house.
Next morning resuming our journey, we crossed the Okah
river on a bridge, but the bottoms for two or three miles
were overflowed to various depths, from six inches to
three or four feet, and frozen over, except in the main
channels, with a coat of ice, which we had to break by
lifting our feet to the surface at every step. This occupied some hours and called into requisition our utmost
strength, and sometimes we were" entirely covered with
water. At length we got through in safety and came to
a house where we warmed and dried our clothes and
took some whiskey. Our legs and feet had lost all feeling, became benumbed, and were dreadfully bruised and
cut with the ice.

On the next day we had to cross a plain fifteen miles
in length, without a house, a tree, or any kind of shelter;
a cold northwest wind was blowing, and the ground covered with snow and ice. We had made two or three
miles into the plain when I was attacked with a severe
return of my old complaint, which had confined me so
many months in Jackson County, and from which I had
recovered by a miracle at the outset of this journey—[
mean the fever and ague.

I travelled and shook, and shook and travelled, till 1
could stand it no longer; I vomited severely several
times, and finally fell down on the snow, overwhelmed with
fever, and became helpless and nearly insensible. This was
about seven or eight miles from the nearest house.

Brother John Murdock laid his hands on me and prayed
in the name of Jesus; and, taking me by the hand, he

commanded me with a loud voice, saying: "In the name
6

82 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

of Jesus of Nazareth arise and walk !" I attempted to
arise, I staggered a few paces, and was about falling again
when I found my fever suddenly depart and my strength
come. I walked at the rate of about four miles per hour,
arrived at a house, and was sick no more.

VVe continued our journey, preaching by the way, and
crossing the Wabash at Vincennes, we stopped in that
vicinity for several days, drawing crowded houses. Here
we met with Elders Dustin and Bebee, who left Jackson
County, Missouri, when we did, and for the same purpose.

" Well, brethren, how do you do 1" said we to them.

" Tolerably well; only we have spent ten dollars each
which was given us by the Bishop when we started, and
we have sold books and spent the avails of them; and
besides this we have . been compelled to borrow money
in a certain branch of the Church, and have spent that
also; and we think it hard to travel for the public good
and this at our own charges."

" Ah !" said I, " and how is this? we have not yet spent
the first cent since we left the Church in Jackson County;
nor shall we have any occasion for any spending money
for Weeks to come. VVhere did you stay last night 1"

" In the large village of Washington."

" Did you preach to the people!"

"Yes; in the Court House."

"Did they charge you for your keeping 1"

*‘ Yes. A dollar and a quarter."

" Well, we are going there tonight, and, although entire
strangers, we shall be well entertained free of charge,
preach or no preach."

" How do you do it 3" said they.

"O, we hold up our heads like honest men; go to the
best houses, call for the best they have, make known our
calling, pray with, or preach to them, ask for their bill
on taking leave, but they will take nothing from us; but
always invite us to call again."

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 83

" Well, they will not treat you so in Washington tonight; you will have to pay a good round sum."

" Well, we shall see."

We took leave of them and of the good people where

we had been preaching, having nrst sent an appointment
by the mail carrier, that if the inhabitants of Washington would get together we would address them that evening.

We entered the town at dark, stopped at a hotel, called
for lodging and supper and a room for ourselves; and
asked the landlord if a meeting had been got up for us.
He said the mail carrier brought the news of our appointment, but he believed it had been neglected to be given

out; was very sorry, made many apologies, and still offered
to have the bell rung and the people assembled if we
wished. We told him we were glad of an opportunity to
rest, and did not wish a meeting at so late an hour.
We retired to our room and made no further acquaintance. Next morning on taking leave, we asked what was
to pay. He answered, "not anything," said we were welcome to his hospitality at any time, and bid us call again.
Leaving Washington, we were next entertained by a
very hospitable preacher of the Christian order, whose
name I have forgotten. We tarried at his house a week
or two, and preached to crowded congregations in all the
region; be frequently going with us to introduce us and
open the way. While here, having a little leisure between
appointments, I went alone and on foot to the town of
Madison, about nine miles from his house. My design was
to get out an appointment and preach, which came to pass
the same evening in the following manner: I stepped
into a hotel, they were all at dinner, I placed the Book
of Mormon on a public table and sat down to read a
newspaper; soon the boarders came out, and one by one
looked at the Book, and inquired whose it was; soon the
landlord came out, who I learned was so very deaf that

 

 

84 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

one could only be heard by placing mouth to ear and
shouting at the very top of the voice. He caught up the
Book and inquired, "Whose is this 1" I arose, placed my
arm round his neck, and my mouth close to his ear, and
shouted. "IT IS MINE, AND I HAVE com: TO PREACHH"
This was so loud that it almost alarmed the town. He
welcomed me to entertainment free of charge, had the
Court House opened, the town notified, and evening found
me in the judge's seat, a reporter in the‘ clerk's desk,
and a crowded audience. I had good liberty and all
seemed much interested.

GIVING OUT A.\' Al'P0l.\'TMEN'l'.

After a few days we resumed our journey, and in May
arrived in Kirtland, Where I again met my wife after an
absence of one year and seven months.

CHAPTER XII.

Mission in Ohio :—Start to Western Missouri :—Incidents by the Way :-—Discourse on Board a Steamer on the 4th of July :—Its Enact :—Arrival on
the Frontiers :—Farming :—Extortion :—Mission in Missouri and Illinois :—
Treatment by Inlidels :—Great Success in Illinois :——Oppositn'on from Baptist Ministers :—Outlines of Mr. Peck's Speech and my Reply :—Result :—
Return Home :—A Voice from the Dead.

SHALL not attempt to describe our feelings or our
joy; these things are known by experience, not by
language. I found her health much impaired, and she
had long suffered from complaints of the nature of consumption; but she was now reduced still further by her
anxious solicitude about my long absence. I
When she found herself once more in the quiet enjoyment of my society, she gradually resumed her wonted
cheerfulness, and began to enjoy better health; but still
she was far from being well.

After spending a few weeks at home, I performed a
short mission in the southeastern part of Ohio, and again
returned, having travelled on foot in the heat of summer
about three hundred miles. In this mission I met with no
success in the ministry, owing to the prejudice, ignorance
and bigotry of the people, who either would not hear at
all, or else heard in a careless manner, and went away
with the same indifference as they came.

I now determined to take my wife and our little effects
and remove to Western Missouri. To bear the expenses of
this long journey my wife had some sixty dollars, which
she brought with her from the east, and certain men also,

86 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

put into my hands sums of money to be expended in
lands and improvements in that country. With brother
J oseph's counsel and blessing I bade farewell to Kirtland.

\'Ve took a stage coach for the Ohio River, thence by
steamer to St. Louis, and again by steamer up the Missouri. 1 took a steerage passage among the poorer class,
and was dressed more like a laborer than a public minister.

 

However, the throng of A passengers on the boat learned by _

some means that I was a preacher, and on the 4th of
July they pressed me very hard to address them in the
cabin in honor of our national anniversary. I refused for
awhile; but at length complied, on conditions that steerage
passengers, boat hands, firemen, and all classes, black or
white, should have the privilege of assembling in the cabin
to hear the discourse.

This was readily complied with, and very soon a large
assembly was convened and in waiting, consisting of ladies
and gentlemen, lawyers, merchants, farmefs, servants,
waiters and colored gentlemen.

I presented myself before this motley assembly in a plain
coat of gray satinet, and bowed respectfully. All tried to
be grave, but a smile, a sneer, a look of contempt would
now and then escape from some of the more genteel portion of the assembly, as if they would say, " (Jan any good
thing come out of Nazareth," or, in other words, can so plain
a man be possessed of knowledge suiiicient to entertain such
an assembly on so important an occasion as the 4th of July,
and this, too, without preparing a discourse beforehand‘!

I read a chapter; all was serious attention. I odered up
a prayer; all was deep interest. I commenced a discourse,
and nearly all were in tears. I introduced the Book of
Mormon as a record of ancient America; I dwelt upon its
history and prophetic declarations, now being verified by
the erection of free institutions in this great country,
and their growing influence. I spoke of the general
prosperity and resources of the country, acknowledging the

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT'. 87

hand of Providence in the same; warned them against
national pride, ambition, and injustice; exhorted them, in
common with all citizens, to use the utmost diligence to
preserve the general peace and the pure influence of our
national institutions; and to improve in light, intelligence
and love, without which we, too, might be brought down
to destruction like the Israelites and Nephites of old; and
our bones and ruined cities and monuments alone be left
to other people, as theirs were left to us, as a testimony
of our greatness which would have passed away. I also
showed them from the Book of Mormon that we were
destined to remain forever as a blessed and free people
on this land, on conditions of keeping the commandments
of Jesus Christ, and that our settlements and commerce
would soon extend to the vast shores of the Pacific ocean,
and our ensign stand out to the nations as a standard
inviting them to a. banquet of freedom, peace and plenty.

After meeting I was pressed upon to come into the
cabin for the rest of the passage. And even when we
changed boats at Louisville, such was the influence of my
fellow passengers, that the gentlemen's and also the ladies'
cabin and board was free to me without money or price.
One gentleman offered as high as ten dollars for a copy
of the Book of Mormon; but, unluckily, I had none with
me.

Arriving at the Colesville branch, on the western boundaries of the State (where I had spent the previous winter
in sickness and poverty), about the 1st of August, 1832,
we commenced cutting hay, building, purchasing and planting land, and making every preparation to receive those
who had sent funds for this purpose. During the months
of August and September I had, with a little help, secured
about fifteen tons of hay, and put into the ground fifteen
acres of wheat, besides building a log house and doing
something at fencing, etc. These exertions in the heat of
the season brought on a severe illness, in which I was

88 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

nigh unto death; but I was again restored in a few days
by the laying on of hands and prayer in the name of Jesus.
About this time Lewis Abbott arrived with his family
from Kirtland, and having sent some money by me, partly
to aid in my expenses, and partly for the purpose of
making improvements, he became dissatisfied and demanded
the utmost farthing. This took everthing I had done ;-—
my wheat on the ground, my hay, my cows all but one,
and left me entirely destitute, after all my laborious exertions. At this brother Abbott seemed satisiled, and
thought he had got quite rich, and turned his money to
good advantage; but the curse of God rested upon all
his property as was soon manifest. .
The next winter I took a mission in company with Elder
Wilham E. McLel1in down through the State of Missouri
and into Illinois, crossing the Mississippi at Clarksville.
As we approached Clarksville, we were told by several
of the inhabitants near, not to attempt a meeting or any
religious instruction there, for they were a hardened and
irreclaimable set of blasphemers and infldels, given to
gambling, drinking and cursing, etc.; and that many different orders of the clergy had attempted in vain to reclaim
them, or even to get a hearing. Before entering the town
we ascended a mountain and cried mightily unto the
Lord that He would open our way, and move upon the
hearts of the people to receive us and hear the Word.
\Ve then entered the town and called at a -hotel. We
told the landlord that we had come in the name of Jesus
Christ to preach the gospel to the people, being sent by
him without purse or scrip. "Well," said be, "you are
welcome to my house and to such fare as we have; and
we will meet together and hear your religion, and if it
proves to be better than ours We will embrace it; for we
confess that our religion is to fiddle and dance, and eat and
drink, and be merry, and gamble and swear a little; and
we believe this is better than priestcraft."

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 89

We replied that we would try them anyhow. So a
meeting was convened; we preached, had good attention,
and much of a candid spirit of inquiry was manifest, and
we were treated with hospitality and friendship, and even
ferried over the river free; and this was more than those
religious secta.ries would do, who had warned us against
them.

Passing over the river, the next day we came to Green
County, Illinois; and as the day drew to a close we began to circulate an appointment as we travelled along a
thick settlement of thrifty farmers, for preaching in a
school house in the neighborhood that evening.

As we sat by the highway side to rest ourselves, an
old farmer rode past on horseback, and halted to ask if
we were travellers. We replied that we were travelling
to preach the ‘gospel, and had an appointment that evening at the school house just ahead, and invited him to
come and hear.

" N 0," said he, "I have not attended a religious meeting this five years; I have long been disgusted and
tired of priestcraft and religious ignorance and division,
and have concluded to stand aloof from it all."

" Well, we are as much opposed to these things as you
can be, and, therefore, have come to preach the gospel,
and show the knowledge of God in its ancient purity,
being instructed and sent of Him without purse or scrip.
So come and hear us,"

" O! indeed, if that is the case, I will."

So he came; the house was crowded with Baptists,
Methodists, Universalists, N on-professors, Inhdels, etc.

We preached. After meeting, a Baptist minister by the
name of John Russell, a very learned and influential man,
invited us to tarry in the neighborhood and continue to
preach; he said his house should be our home, and he
called a vote of the people whether they wished us to
preach more. The vote was unanimous in the amrmative.

 

90 .All'l‘OBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

We tarried in the neighborhood some two months, and
preached daily in all that region to vast multitudes, both
in town and country, in the grove, and in school houses,
barns and dwellings.

All parties were our hearers and friends, and contributed liberally to our wants; and the old farmer, whose
name was Calvin, who had not been to meeting before
for live years, became a constant hearer, and opened his
house for our home. He was very wealthy, and bade us
welcome to shoes, clothing, or anything we needed; many
Intldels, Universalists, etc., did the same.

In -this neighborhood there lived a Baptist minister by
the name of Dotson, who opposed us with much zeal,
from time to time, both in public and in private, and
from house to house.

He said the Book of Mormon was a fable; a silly foolish mixture of matter, possessing no interest, and that he
could write a better book himself. However, his principal objection was, that God could give no new revelation
—the New Testament contained all the knowledge that
God had in store for man, and there was nothing remaining unrevealed.

We asked him to open the New Testament and read
to us the history and destiny of the American continent
and its inhabitants, and the origin and lineage of the
same; also, the history of the ten tribes of Israel, and
where they now were. We also asked him to read to
us from that book his .own commission, and that of other
ministers of this age to preach the gospel. But he could
do none of these things; but still insisted that there was
no subject worthy of new revelation, and that no revelation could be given.

 

Said I, " Mr. Dotson, relate to me your experience and .

call to the ministry?"
"Well," he replied, "I will do so, seeing that it is you,

friend Pratt; for you are able to bear it, and to compre-‘

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 91

hend something about it; but I have never told it to my
own members; and I dare not, for they would not believe
me."

"Well, Mr. Dotson, be particular on the manner and
means by which you were called to the ministry."

"Why, sir," said he, "I was called by a vocal voice from
Heaven." ,

"Well, Mr. Dotson, there is one exception to your general rule. We come to you with a new revelation, and you

- reject it; because there can be no new revelation; and yet

you profess to have a new revelation, God having spoken
from the heavens and cal!ed you, and commissioned you to
preach eighteen hundred years after the New Testament

.- was written, and all revelation ilnished! How is this‘!

"The New Testament no where calls you by name;
neither makes mention of you as a minister of the gospel;
but new revelation does, if we are to believe you. And yet
you would teach your hearers and us, and all the world,
to disbelieve all modern revelation merely because it is
new. Consequently, we are all bound by your own rule to
reject your call to the ministry, and to believe it is a lie."

He could say no more.

At another time he was at Mr. Russel's with us, and,
in presence of Mr. R. and others, was opposing the Book
of Mormon with all his power. 1'

We asked him to listen while we read a chapter in it.
He did so, and was melted into tears, and so affected and
confounded that he could not utter a word for some time.
He then, on recovering, asked us to his house, and opened
the door for us to preach in his neighborhood. We did
so, and were kindly entertained by him.

But after this, he again hardened his heart, and finding
his opposition all in vain, he wrote a letter to the Rev.
Mr. Peck, of Rock Spring, some sixty miles distant, informing him that the " Mormons" were about to take Green
County, and requesting his immediate attendance.

 

92 AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT.

This Mr. Peck was a man of note, as one of the early
settlers of Illinois, and one of its first missionaries. He had
labored for many years in that new country and in Missouri, and was now Editor of a paper devoted to Baptist

principles.

This gentleman was soon forthcoming, and commenced his
public addresses among the people, to try to convince them
of the great errors we had taught.

He said, there were no antiquities in America; no ruined
cities, buildings, monuments, inscriptions, mounds, or fortifications, to show the existence of such a people as the Book
of Mormon described.

He also said, that there were no domestic animals such
as the cow, the ox, or the horse, found here when Europeans flrst discovered the country. He then inquired how
these animals became extinct since the destruction of the

Nephites.

 

He said further, that the fortifications and mounds of this .

country were nothing more than the works of Nature.

He then warned the people against the study of the
prophetic parts of the Old and New Testaments, observing
that these mysterious prophecies were directly calculated to
lead them into delusion and bewilderment; that the best
way to read and understand prophecy was, to read it backwards——that is to say, after it is fulfilled; that it "was
never designed to be understood before it came to pass.

He also taught that the Millennium was already commenced, and that Jesus Christ would not come, in person,
till the great and last judgment; and that the Millennium
must first continue a year for each day of the thousand
years, spoken of by John the Revelator, etc.

A meeting was held for the purpose of replying to him;
the people came out in great numbers.

I then replied in substance as follows:

" My hearers :—The Rev. Mr. Peck is a great man. He is
a man of age and varied experience and learning. I am but

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 93

a youth, inferior to him in all these respects. I reverence
his gray hairs; I respect his learning; I admire .his talents
and ingenuity; and I feel a delicacy in replying to him;
and nothing but a love for the truth and a hatred of error and falsehood, could induce me to come in contact
with him before the public; but where truth and salvation
are at stake I cannot shrink from duty, in consideration
of age or talent; I cannot spare the man, even if he were
my father.

" To do away the Book of Mormon, we are called upon
to believe that the temples, statues, pyramids, sculptures,
monuments, engravings, mounds and fortifications, now in
ruins on the American continent, are all the works of Nature in her playful moments; that the bones of slumbering nations were never clothed upon with flesh, and that
their sleeping dust was never animated with life.

" This is too monstrous; it is too marvellous, too miraculous for our credulity; we can never believe that these
things are the works of Nature, unaided by human art;
we are not so fond of the marvellous.

"Again, we are told that no cows or oxen were here
when Europeans first came to the country. I would ask
what the wild buffalo are, if they are not the cattle of
the ancient inhabitants? I would ask how horse tracks
came to be imbedded in the petrified rock of Kentucky,
without a horse to make them? And if no race of ‘animals could become extinct, which once existed here, I
would ask Mr. Peck either to produce a living mammoth, or annihilate his bones. But, perhaps, the reverend
gentleman would say that those bones, too, were the
works of nature, and that the huge animal they seem to
represent never existed.

"Again, my hearers, we are warned against the study of
prophecy. We are told that a careful perusal of the
prophecies, which the reverend gentleman is pleased to
call ‘mysterious,' is a principal cause of our delusion

94 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

and blindness; and that the prophecies were only designed
to be read and understood after they were fulfilled.

" We will apply this rule, and learn its workings by practical experience.

"The people at the time of the flood adopted this
rule, all save eight souls. Mr. Peck's theology was then
almost catholic. The_ universal world (save eight) were
disposed to remain in ignorance as to the meaning of
prophecy till after its fulfilment. The result was that they
knew not until the flood came and swept them all away;
then they could understand.

"The people of Sodom were all of Mr. Peck's faith—'all
save Lot and his family; they also perished unawares.

"The Jews also were of this same school—I mean those
who perished in the siege of Jerusalem, in fulfilment of
the prophecy of Jesus Christ, recorded in the 21st chapter of Luke.

"And permit me here to remind my hearers that this
ancient system of theology, will certainly prevail to an almost universal extent at the time of the coming of the
Son of Man. For Jesus himself testitied that, as it was
in the days of Noah and in the days of Lot, so should
it be in the days of the coming of the Son of Man. I
would here pause and congratulate my reverend friend on
the glorious and popular prospects before him. Certain it
is that most of the world will, at some future day, be
of his faith in this respect; they will let the prophecies
of the Holy Scriptures alone, and not attempt to understand them until after their fulfilment.

" But we are of another school.

" We believe in Jesus, who said ‘search the Scriptures ;'
we believe with Peter, that we have a more sure word
of prophecy, unto which we do well to take heed, as unto
a light shining in a dark place; until the day dawn, and
the day star arise in our hearts.

" We believe the Apostle when he says that, ‘whatso 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 95

ever was written aforetime was written for our profit and
learning; that, we through patience and comfort of t-he
Scriptures, might have hope! We wish to be children of
the light and not of darkness; that that day come not
upon us unawares. In short we wish, like Timothy of
old, to understand the Scriptures from our very childhood; considering that they are able to make us wise
unto salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus.

"Again, we are told that the world is in the enjoyment
of the Millennium, or thousand years of rest, spoken of
by John, the Revelator.

"Of course then Satan is bound, and does not tempt
any man. The martyrs of Jesus, and those who kept his
commandments are raised from the dead, and are now
present on the earth reigning with Jesus Christ. The
nations learn war no more, none are in ignorance, none
in darkness, the knowledge of God covers the earth as
the waters do the seas. The cow and the leopard, the
kid and the bear, the wolf and the lamb, the lion, the
serpent and the little child, all dwell together in peace.
For such events the prophets have described in connection
with the Millennium.

" But the great announcement of all—the most important
communication made to us by Mr. Peck is concerning the
time of the second coming of Jesus Christ. It was now
ascertained by him to be postponed till the great and
last day; and that ‘ we are to have a Millennium of three
hundred and m'.z'ty-j‘iz*e thousand years first, before Christ
comes. Only think! ‘three hundred and sz°.r:ty-jive thousand P
Why, according to this calculation the world is yet in its
infancy; we are early in the morning of creation. The
great day of the existence of the world has only dawned;
a long and glorious race is yet before the generations of
man. What is the age of Adam or Methuselah! What
the few fleet years of the earthls existence, compared to
the time yet to come before its end!

.96 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

"O, ye holy apostles and saints of old, had you been
in possession of the knowledge of the astounding facts now
announced by this reverend gentleman, you would never
have warned mankind so repeatedly to be ready for the
great day of the Lord, for it was soon at hand.

"And had Jesus Christ known this fact, he would never
have warned the world of the danger of that day coming
on them unawares. He and his Apostles would have said:
it is yet far—very far off. The Millennium must first
dawn, and then continue three hundred and sixty-five
thousand years; and then, behold, I will come to judge
the world.

" But, my hearers, please read the prophet Zechariah on
this subject, chap. 14.

"We are there informed that ‘Jesus Christ will come,
and all the saints with him,l—that he will ‘set his feet
on the Mount of Olives ;i that he will ‘deliver the Jews

and Jerusalem from their enemies ;i that he will ‘destroy

those who are in the seige against that city ;l and that
he will ‘reign as a king over all the earth, from that
time forth; and there shall be one Lord and his name
one}

"Now, if he comes and all the saints with him, it cannot be his first coming. If he comes to fight for the
Jews and overthrow their enemies, it cannot be his first
coming. If the Mount of Olives rends in twain at the
same time, and opens so as to form a great valley in the
place thereof, it has no connection with his first coming.

"Again, if he comes to reign as a ‘King over all the
earth,‘ it can have no allusion to the last judgment,—the
end of the earth. Consequently, if Zechariah has told the
truth, we are to expect the coming of Jesus Christ distinct from his first coming; unconnected with the last

judgment, at the very commencement of his reign of a _

thousand years, which we call the Millennium; but which,
Mr. Peck says, has commenced, entirely independent of any

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. M

such event. But what can we expect of a man when he

 

comments upon the prophecies, while at the same time he contends that none can understand them until after their
fulfilment.

"Of course, my hearers, he himself acts upon the principle which he lays down to others; and if he does, he
never studies, never searches the prophecies, acknowledges
himself in darkness on all subjects connected with unfultilled prophecy; expects to remain so, and expects his
hearers to do the same.

"0, my beloved friends, have the people of this western
country been led in darkness for so many years by learned
and reverened gentlemen? are they willing to remain in
darkness now, when the veil is withdrawn, and his folly
made manifest before all the people, and this too by his
own words, uttered in presence of you all?

"If so, follow him, and cleave to him as your teacher.

But if not, we exhort you to hold fast the truth as we.

have delivered it to you ; come forward this day, and obey
the ordinances of God; seek for the Holy Spirit to guide
you into all truth, and continue to search the Scriptures
for more light, and God will bless you forever. Amen."

After this meeting some of the Baptists and others
came forward and were baptized, and joined the Church
of the Saints; and the people in general remained stead4
fast in the faith, and were unmoved by the exertions of
Messrs. Peck and Dotson.

This tilled them with envy, and they soon began to

manifest a lying and abusive spirit to such a degree that

all the people could see and distinguish plainly between
the spirits of truth and error.
Mr. Peck soon took leave and retired home, and we continued .our mission. '
Hundreds_of the people were convinced of the truth, but
the hearts of many were too much set on the world to

obey the gospel; we, therefore, baptized only a few of the
,, .

98 AUTOBIOGRAPHY» or PARLEY P. PRATT.

people, and organized a small society, and about the first

of June took leave and returned home.
Having rested myself a few days, I now commenced

- again to cultivate the earth. I plowed about six acres

of ground for wheat, and was busy from day to day in
the woods, preparing timber to fence the same, when the
following dream, or night vision, was given me:

A man came to me and called me with a loud voice:

" Parley, Parley." I answered, "Here am I." Said he,
"Cease splitting rails, for the Lord has prepared you for
a greater work." I answered, " Whereby shall I know
that this message is from the Lord 1" He replied, " Follow
me, and I will show you." ‘
y I followed him for some distance along a long path, and
at last came to a place of ancient sepulchres, where
many of the Nephites of old had been buried. One of
these opened,—the flesh of e the man withered away; he
became like a skeleton, and passed down into the grave.
I understood and knew by the spirit, that this signified
that it was the voice of one from the dead which had
spoken to me. I therefore exclaimed, "It is enough; I
know the message is of the Lord; return unto me, that
we may converse together." He then came forth out of
the grave, was again clothed upon with a body like a
man, and he talked with me, and told me many things.

I awoke the next morning, and thought of my dream,
but I was necessitated, as I thought, to finish my fence
and sow my crop before I ceased to labor with my hands.
I, therefore, continued to make and haul rails from the
woods. I perfected my fence and sowed my crop, b11t I
never reaped; I never saw the wheat after it was more
than three inches high.

 

 

CHAPTER XIII.

Prosperity of the Church :——School in Zion :—Revelation :—Mob :-Destruction
of Printing Otilce :—Defenee :—Prisoners :—-Journey to Lexington :—A
Dream:-Its Fu1filment:—Battle:—Defeat of the Robbers :—A Miracle:—
Defence Construed into Murder :—Gov. Boggs and Militia J cm the Mob.
—Chu1-ch Driven from the County:—Plunderings and Burnings:—Insur_ rections :——-Signs in the Heavens :—Action of the Governor:-AttorneyGeneral Driven from Court :—Refugees Settle in the North :--A Bandit
Chief Made Governor.

T was now the summer of 1833. Immigration had poured
into the County of Jackson in great numbers; and the
Church in that county new numbered upwards of one
thousand souls. These had all purchased lands and paid
for them, and most of them were improving in buildings
and in cultivation. Peace and plenty had crowned their
labors, and the wilderness became a fruitful field, and the
solitary place began to bud and blossom as the rose.
, They lived in peace and quiet; no lawsuits with each
other or with the world ; few or no debts were contracted;
few promises broken; there were no thieves, robbers, or
murderers; few or no idlers; all seemed to worship God
with a ready heart. On Sundays the people assembled to
preach, pray, sing, and rmzeive the ordinances of God.
Other days all seemed busy in the various pursuits of
industry. In short, there has seldom, if ever, been a
happier people upon the earth than the Church of the
Saints now were.  
In the latter part of summer and in the autumn, I
devoted almost my entire time in ministering among the
churches; holding meetings; visiting the sick: comforting

100 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

the afflicted, and giving counsel. A school of Elders was
also organized, over which I was called to preside. This
class, to the number of about sixty, met for instruction
once a week. The place of meeting was in the open air,
under some tall trees, in a retired place in the wilderness,
where we prayed, preached and prophesied, and exercised
ourselves in the gifts of the Holy Spirit. Here great
blessings were poured out, and many great and marvellous
things were manifested and taught. The Lord gave me
great wisdom, and enabled me to teach and edify the
Elders, and comfort and encourage them in their preparations for the great work which lay before us. I was also
much ediiled and strengthened. To attend this school I had
to travel on foot, and sometimes with bare feet at that,
about six miles. This I did once a week, besides visiting
and preaching in five or six branches a week.

While thus engaged, and in answer to our correspondence with the Prophet, Joseph Smith, at Kirtland, Ohio,
the following revelation was sent to us by him, dated
August, 1833 :

" Verily I say unto you, my friends, I speak unto you
with my voice, even the voice of my Spirit; that I may
show unto you my will concerning your brethren in the
land of Zion; many of whom are truly humble, and are
seeking diligently to learn wisdom and to find truth;
verily, verily I say unto you, blessed are such for they
shall obtain; for I, the Lord, showet-h mercy unto all the
meek, and upon all whomsoever I will, that I may be
justified when I shall bring them into judgment.

"Behold, I say unto you, concerning the school in Zion.
I the Lord am well pleased that there should be a school
in Zion; and also with my servant, Parley P. Pratt, for
he abideth in me; and inasmuch as he continueth to abide
in me, he shall continue to preside over the school in the
land _of Zion until I shall give unto him other commandments; and I will bless him with a multiplicity of blessAUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 101

ings in expounding all Scriptures and mysteries to the
edilication of the school and of the Church in Zion, and to
the residue of the school I, the Lord, am willing to show
mercy; nevertheless, there are those that must needs be
chasteued, and their works shall be made known. The axe
is laid at the root of the trees, and every tree that bringeth
not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the
fire; I, the Lord have spoken it. Verily I say unto you,
all among them who know their hearts are honest, and are
broken, and their spirits contrite, and are willing to observe
their covenants by sacrifice; yea, every sacrifice which I,
the Lord, shall command, they are all accepted of me, for I,
the Lord, will cause them to bring forth as a very fruitful
tree which is planted in a goodly land, by a pure stream
that yieldeth much precious fruit.

" Verily I say unto you, that it is my will that an house
should be built unto me in the land of Zion, like unto the
pattern which I have ‘given you; yea, let it be built
speedily by the tithing of my people; behold, this is the
tithing and the sacrifice which I, the Lord, require at their
hands; that there may be an house built unto me for the
salvation of Zion, for a place of thanksgiving for all saints,
and for a place of instruction for all those who are called
to the work of the ministry in all their several callings and
offices, that they may be perfected in the understanding of
their ministry in theory, in principle, and in doctrine; in
all things pertaining to the kingdom of God on the earth,
the keys of which kingdom have been conferred upon you.

" And inasmuch as my people build an house unto me
in the name of the Lord, and do not suffer any unclean
thing to come into it that it be not deliled, My glory
shall rest upon it; yea, and my presence shall be there;
for I will come into it, and all the pure in heart that
shall come into it shall see God; but if it be deiiled I
will not come into it, and my glory shall not be there
for I will not come into unholy temples.

 

102 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

"And now behold, if Zion do these things she shall

 

prosper and spread herself and become very glorious, very  

great, and very terrible; and the nations of the earth
shall honor her and shall say, surely Zion is the city ot'
our God; and surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved
out of her place; for God is there,- and the hand of the
Lord is there, and He hath sworn by the power of His
might to be her salvation and her high tower; therefore,
verily thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is
Zion, THE PURE IN HEART; therefore let Zion rejoice
while all the wicked shall mourn; for behold, and lo!
vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the whirlwind, and who shall escape it? The Lordls scourge shall
pass over by night and by day, and‘ the report thereof
shall vex all people; yet it shall not be stayed until the
Lord come; for the indignation of the Lord is kindled
against their abominations and all their wicked works;
nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all
things whatsoever I have commanded her; but if she
observes not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I
will visit her, according to all her works, with sore aiiiic.
tion; with pestilence; with plague; with sword; with
vengeance; with devouring fire; nevertheless, let it be
read this once in their ears, that I, the Lord, have
accepted of their offering; and if she sin no more none
of these things shall come upon her, and I will bless her
with blessings, and multiply a multiplicity of blessings
upon her and upon her generations forever and ever, saith
the Lord your God. Amen."

This revelation was not complied with by the leaders
and Church in Missouri, as a whole ; notwithstanding many
were humble and faithful. Therefore, the threatened judgment was poured out to the uttermost, as the history of
the ilve following years will show.

That portion of the inhabitants of Jackson County which
did not belong to the Church, became jealous of our

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 103

growing influence and numbers. Political demagogucs
were afraid we should rule the county; and religious
priests and bigots felt that we were powerful rivals, and
about to excel all other societies in the State in numbers,
and in power and influence.

These feelings, and the false statements and influences
growing out of ‘them, gave rise to the organization of a
company of outlaws, whose avowed object was to drive
the Church of the Saints from the county. ‘

These were composed of lawyers, magistrates, county
oiiicers, civil and military; religious ministers, and great
numbers of the ignorant and uninformed portion of the
population, whose prejudices were easily aroused.

They commenced operations by assembling in great numbers, destroying a printing oiilce and its materials; demolishing dwellings and stores, and plundering the contents and strewing them in the street; cutting open

.feather beds, breaking furniture, destroying fences and

crops, whipping, threatening and variously abusing men,
women and children, etc.

The saints submitted to these outrages for a time in
all patience, without defence or resistance of any kind,
supposing that the public authorities would of course put
a stop to them, as in duty bound.

But they were soon convinced to the contrary, and were
compelled to take up arms for defence; and also to make
the most vigorous exertions to prosecute according to
law. We assembled in small bodies in different neighborhoods, and stood on guard during the nights, being
ready to march in a moment to any place of attack.

I had the command of about sixty men who were thus
assembled in the Colesville branch; and rendezvoused in
some log * buildings during a very rainy time.

It was evening. I was out in the act of posting guards
a short distance from the dwellings, when two men assailed
us, armed with guns and pistols; and supposing it against

 

104 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

our principles to make any defence, they attacked the
guards. I was without arms, but stepped forward to interfere between them, when one of them drew his gun backwards, and, with both hands, struck the barrel of it across
the top of my head. I staggered back, but did not fall;
the blood came streaming down my face, and I was for
an instant stunned by the blow; but, recovering myself, I
called help from the house and disarmed them, and put
them under guard till morning. Their arms were then
restored, and they let go in peace.

The taking of these two men proved a preventive
against an attack that night. They were the advance of
a party of men who were about to come upon the settlement, but were disconcerted by this means.

On the next day, about sunset, myself and a Mr.
Marsh set out on horseback to visit the Circuit Judge at
Lexington, a distance of some forty miles. We were under the necessity of travelling the most private paths
across the country, in order to avoid our enemies; but
we had a most faithful pilot, an old resident of the
country, who knew every crook and turn of the diiferent
paths.

We had ridden but a few miles when it became so excessively dark that we could not see each other, or distinguish any object. Our pilot dismounted several times
and tried to feel his way. We were at last compelled
to halt for some time, until it cleared and became a
little lighter; but the rain began to fall in torrents, and
continued all the latter part of the night. We soon became drenched, and every thread about us perfectly wet;
but still we dare not stop for any refreshment or shelter,
until day dawned, when we found ourselves forty miles
from home and at the door of a friend, where we breakfasted and refreshed ourselves.

We then repaired to Lexington, and made oath before
Judge Ryland of the outrages committed upon us, but

0

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 105

were refused a warrant. The Judge advised us to fight
and kill the outlaws whenever they came upon us. We
then returned to the place where we breakfasted, and,
night coming on, we retired to bed. Having been without sleep for the three previous nights, and much of the
time drenched with rain, this, together with the severe
wound I had received, caused me to feel much exhausted.
No sooner had sleep enfolded me in her kind embrace
than a vision opened before me.

I was in Jackson County; heard the sound of firearms,
and saw the killed and wounded lying in their blood. At
this I awoke from slumber, and awaking Mr Marsh and the
family with whom we lodged, I told them what I had seen
and heard in my dream, and that I was sure a battle had
just occurred. Next morning we pursued our journey homeward with
feelings of anxiety indescribable Every otilcer of the peace
had abandoned us to our fate; and it seemed as if there was
no alternative but for men, women and children to be exterminated. As we rode on, ruminating upon these things, a man
met us from Independence, who told us there was a battle
raging when he leit; and how it had terminated he knew not.

This only heightened our feelings of anxiety and suspense. We were every instant drawing nearer to the‘ spot
where we might find our friends alive and victorious, or
dead, or perhaps in bondage, in the hands of a worse than
savage enemy.

On coming within four miles of Independence, we ventured to inquire the distance at a certain house; this we
did in order to pass as strangers, and also, in hopes to
learn some news; the man seemed frightened, and inquired
where we were from. We replied, from Lexington. Said he,
" Have you heard what has happened 1" We replied, "That
we had heard there was some diiliculty, but of all the particulars we had not been informed." "Why," said he, " the
Mormons have riz, and have killed six men."

106 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

We then passed on, and as soon as we were out of
sight we left- the road and took into the woods.

Taking a circuitous route, through thickets of hazel interwoven with grape vine, we came in sight of Independence, after some diiiiculty and entanglement, and advanced
towards it; but seeing parties of armed men advancing
towards us, we wheeled about, and retreating a distance,
turned again into the woods, and, galloping about a half
mile, reached the tents of our friends.

But what was our astonishment when we found our
brethren without arms, having surrendered them to the
enemy!

The truth was this: The same evening that I dreamed
of the battle, a large body of the outlaws had marched to
a certain settlement, where they had before committed many
outrages, and commenced to unroof dwellings, destroy property, and threaten and abuse women and children. While
some sixty men were thus engaged, and their horses quietly
regaling themselves in the corntields of the brethren, about
thirty of our men marched upon them, and drove them
from the field. Several were severely if not mortally
wounded on both sides; and one young man of the Church
died of his wounds the next day—his name was Barber.

In the battle brother Philo Dibble, of Ohio, was shot in
the body through his waistband; the ball remained in him.

 

He bled much inwardly, and, in a day or two his bowels V

were so filled with blood and so inflamed that he was about
to die, or, rather, he had been slowly dying from the time
he was wounded. The smell of himself had become intolerable to him and those about him. At length Elder
Newel Knight administered to him, by the laying on of
hands, in the name of Jesus; his hands had scarcely
touched his head when he felt an operation penetrating his
whole system as if it had been a purifying fire. He immediately discharged several quarts of blood and corruption, among which was the ball with which he had been

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 107

wounded. He was instantly healed, and went to work chopping wood. He remained an able bodied man, a hard
worker, and even did military duty for many years after.
He is still living in Davis County, Utah.

The next morning, Nov. 5, armed men were assembled in
Independence from every part of the county. These joined
the outlaws, and called themselves militia, and placed themselves under the command of Lieutenant-Governor Boggs
and a colonel by the name of Pitcher. Thus organized,
manned and oiilcered, they were a formidable band of outlaws; capable of murder, or any other violence or outrage
which would accomplish their purpose; which was to drive
the people of the Church from the county, and plunder
their property and possess their lands. Very early the same morning, several volunteers united
their forces from diiferent branches of the Church and
marched towards Independence, in order to defend their
brethren and friends. When within a short distance from
the town they halted, and were soon informed that the
militia were called out for their protection; but in this they
did not place confidence; for they saw that the armed body
congregated had joined with the mobbers and outlaws, and
were one ‘with them to carry out their murderous purposes.
On communicating with the leaders, Boggs and Pitcher, it
was found that there was no alternative but for the Church
to leave the county forthwith, and deliver up their arms,
and certain men to be tried for murder, said to have been
committed in the battle the previous evening.

Rather than have submitted to these outrageous requirements the saints would willingly have shed their blood; but
they knew that if they resisted this mob, the lies of the
designing and the prejudice of the ignorant would construe
their resistance into a violation of law, and thus bring certain destruction upon them; therefore, they surrendered
their arms and agreed to leave the county forthwith. The
men who were demanded as prisoners were also surrendered

 

103 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

and imprisoned, but were dismissed in a day or two without trial.

A few hours after the surrender we arrived at the
camp of our brethren on our return from Lexington.

The struggle was now over, our liberties were gone,
our homes to be deserted and possessed by a lawless
banditti; and all this in the United States of America.

The sun was then setting, and twelve miles separated
me from my family.; but I determined to reach home that
night. My horse being weary I started on foot, and walked
through the wilderness in darkness; avoiding the road
lest I should fall into the hands of the enemy.

I arrived home about the middle of the night, and furnishing my wife with a horse, we made our escape in
safety.

When night again overtook us we were on the bank of
the Missouri River, which divided between Jackson and
Clay Counties. Here we camped for the night, as we
could not cross the ferry till morning. Next morning we
crossed the river, and formed an encampment amid the
cottonwoods on its bank.

While we thus made our escape companies of ruiiians
were ranging the county in every direction; bursting into

‘houses without fear, knowing that the people were disarmed; frightening women and children, and threatening
to kill them if they did not flee immediately. At the
head of one of these parties appeared the Rev. Isaac
McCoy (a noted Baptist missionary to the Indians), with
gun in hand, ordering the people to leave their homes
immediately and surrender everything in the shape of
arms.

Other pretended preachers of the gospel took part in
the persecution-—speaking of the Church as the common
enemies of mankind, and exulting in their aiiiictions. On
Tuesday and Wednesday nights, the 5th and 6th of November, women and children fled in every direction. One

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 109

party of about one hundred and fifty fled to the prairie,
where they wandered for several days, mostly without food;
and nothing but the open ilrmament for their shelter.
Other parties fled towards the Missouri River. During
the dispersion of women and children, parties were hunting the men, tiring upon some, tying up and whipping
others, and some they pursued several miles.

Thursday, November 7. The shore began to be lined.

on both sides of the ferry with men, women and children;
goods, wagons, boxes, provisions, etc., while the ferry was
constantly employed; and when night again closed upon
us the cottonwood bottom had much the appearance of
a camp meeting. Hundreds of people were seen in every
direction, some in tents and some in the open air around
their fires, while the rain descended in torrents. HusTHE EXODU8.

110 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

bands were inquiring for their wives, wives for their
husbands; parents for children, and children for parents. Some had the good fortune to escape with their
families, household goods, and some provisions; while
others knew not the fate of their friends, and had
lost all their goods. The scene was indescribable, and, I
am sure, would have melted the hearts of any people on
the earth, except our blind oppressors, and a blind and
ignorant community.

Next day our company still increased, and we were principally engaged in felling cottonwood trees and erecting
them into small cabins. The next night being clear, we
began to enjoy some degree of comfort.

About two olclock the next morning we were called up
by the cry of signs in the heavens. We arose, and to our
great astonishment all the iirmament seemed enveloped in
splendid fire works, as if every star in the broad expanse had been hurled from its course, and sent lawless
through the wilds of ether. Thousands of bright meteors
were shooting through space in every direction, with long
trains of light following in their course. This lasted for
sen to 1 hours, and was only closed by the dawn of the
rising sun. Every heart was filled with joy at this majestic display of signs and wonders, showing the near
approach of the coming of the Son of God.

All our goods were left behind; but I obtained some of
them afterwards at the risk of my life. But all my provisions for the winter were destroyed or stolen, and my
grain left growing on the ground for my enemies to harvest. My house was afterwards burned, and my fruit trees
and improvements destroyed or plundered. In short, every
member of the society was driven from the county, and
fields of corn were ravaged and destroyed; stacks of
wheat burned, household goods plundered, and improvements and every kind of property destroyed. One of this
banditti afterwards boasted to one of the brethren that,

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 111

according to their own account of the matter, the number
of houses burned was two hundred and three.

The Saints who fled teok refuge in the adjoining counties, mostly in Clay County, which received them with
some degree of kindness. Those who fled to the county
of Van Buren were again driven and compelled to flee;
and those who fled to Lafayette County were soon expelled,
or the most part of them, and had to move to wherever
they could find protection.

When the news of these outrages reached the Governor
of the State, courts of inquiry, both civil and military,
were ordered by him, but nothing effectual was ever done
to restore our rights, or to protect us in the least. It is
true the Attorney—General, and a military escort under
Colonel, afterwards General Doniphan, and our witnesses
went to Jackson County and demanded indictments; but
the court refused to do anything in the case, and the
military, Attorney-General and witnesses were mobbed out
of the county; and thus that matter ended.

The Governor also ordered them to restore the arms of
which they robbed us, but they never were restored. Even
our lands were robbed of their timber, and either occupied
by our enemies for years or left desolate. Soon after

‘Jackson County had rebelled against the laws and constitution of the General and State governments, several of the
adjacent counties followed the example, by justifying her
proceedings, and by opposing the Saints in settling among
them. The counties of Clay, Ray, Clinton and various
others, held public meetings, the tenor of which was
to deprive the members of our society of the rights of
citizenship, drive them from among them, and to compel
them to settle only in such places as these outlaws should
dictate; and even at that time some of their proceedings
went so far as to publicly threaten to drive the whole society from the State. The excuses they offered for these

outrages were:

 

112 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

First: The society were guilty principally of being east
em or northern people.

Secondly: They were guilty of some slight variations
in marmers and language from the other citizens of the
State, who were mostly from the South.

Thirdly: Their religious principles differed in some important particulars from most other societies.

Fourthly: They were guilty of immigrating rapidly from
the different States, and of purchasing large quantities of
land, and of being more enterprising and industrious than
their neighbors.

Fifthly: Some of them were guilty of poverty—especially
those who had been driven, from time to time, and robbed
of their all. And,

Lastly: They were said to be guilty of believing in the
present Government administration of Indian aifairs, viz.:
that the land west of the Mississippi, which Goverment
had deeded in fee simple to the immigrating tribes, was
destined by Providence for their permanent homes. '

All these crimes were charged upon our society, in the
public proceedings of the several counties, and were deemed
suiiicient to justify their unlawful proceedings against us.
The reader may smile at this statement, but the public
journals of Upper Missouri in 1835, actually printed charges
and declarations against us, of the tenor of the foregoing.

By these wicked proceedings our people were once more
compelled to remove, at a great sacrifice of property, and
were at last permitted to settle in the north of Bay
County, where, by the next legislature, they were organized into the counties of Caldwell and Davies. Here
again they exercised the utmost industry and enterprise,
and these wild regions soon presented a more flourishing
aspect than the oldest counties of the State.

In the meantime, the majority of the State so far countenanced these outrages that they actually elected Lilburn

.W. Boggs (one of the oldest actors in the scenes of Jack 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT. 113

son County, who had assisted in murder and plunder, and
the expulsion of twelve hundred citizens, in 1833) for Governor of the State, and placed him in the executive chair,
instead of suspending him by the .neck, between the heavens and the earth, as his crimes justly merited. This
movement may be said to have put an end to liberty, law
and government in that State. About this time, Colonel
Lucas, a. leader of the banditti, was elected Major-General.
instead of being hung for treason and murder. And Moses
Wilson, another leader of the mob, was elected BrigadierGeneral; and others were advanced accordingly. These all
very readily received their commissions from their accomplice, Governor Boggs, and thus corruption, rebellion and
conspiracy had spread on every side, being fostered and
encouraged by a large majority of the State; and thus the
treason became general.

In the meantime, our society had greatly increased by
a rapid immigration, and having long felt the withering
hand of oppression from so corrupt an administration, they
had endeavored to organize themselves, both civil and
military, in the counties where they composed the majority, by electing such officers as they thought would stand
for equal rights, and for the laws and Constitution of the
country. In this way they hoped to withstand the storm
which had so- long beaten upon them, and whose black
clouds now seemed lowering in awful gloom, preparing to
burst with overwhelming fury upon all who dared to stand

for liberty and law.

 

 

CHAPTER XIV.

Labors in Clay County :—Conference :—Appointment to a Tedious J ourney:
A Case of Hea.ling:—Arrivo at Kirtland :—Revelation:—Travel Eastward,
in Company with President Joseph Smith :—Conference in Geneseo:-Pleasing Rcminisccnee:——Prestdent Smith and Others Return Home :—Visit
Sackett's Harbor :—Crowded Meeting:—Requestcd to Visit the Sick :—A
Little Boy Healed:—Baptisms, etc. :—Miraculous Gifts :—Lying Priests
and Ra.bble:—Visit my Parents in Canaan, N. Y. :—Return to Kirtland.

S the history of this horrible persecution of the Church

was interwoven with my own, I have traced it for a
few years in connection; in which I have of necessity digressed from the main thread of my own personal narrative, to which I must return.

After making our escape into the county of C1ay—beiug
reduced to the lowest poverty—I made a living by day
labor, jobbing, building, or wood cutting, till some time in
the winter of 1834, when a general Conference was held at
my house, in which it was decided that two of the Elders
should be sent to Ohio, in order to counsel with President
Smith and the Church at Kirtland, and take some measures for the relief or restoration of the people thus plundered and driven from their homes. The question was put
to the Conference: "Who would volunteer to perform so
great a journey?"

The poverty of zall, .and ‘the "inclement season of the year
made all hesitate. At length Lyman Wight and myself
offered our services, -which were :readily accepted. I was at
this time entirely destitute of proper clothing for the journey; and I had neither horse, saddle, bridle, money nor

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 115

provisions to take with me; or to leave with my wife, who
lay sick and helpless most of the time.

Under these circumstances I knew not what to do. Nearly
all had been robbed and plundered, and all were poor. As
we had to start without delay, I almost trembled at the
undertaking; it seemed to be all but an impossibility;
but "to him that believeth all things are possible." I
started out of my house to do something towards making
preparation; I hardly knew which way to go, but I found
myself in the house of brother John Lowry, and was intending to ask him for money; but as I entered his miserable cottage in the swamp, amid the low, timbered bottoms of the Missouri river, I found him sick in bed with
a heavy fever, and two or three others of his family down
with the same complaint, on djiferent beds in the same
room. He was vomiting severely, and was hardly sensible
of my presence. I thought to myself, " well, this is a poor
place to come for money, and yet I must have it; I know
of no one else that has got it; what shall I do 1" I sat

 

a little while confounded and amazed. At length another,

Elder happened in; at that instant faith sprung up in my
heart; the Spirit whispered to me, " is there anything too
hard for the Lord ‘l" I said to the Elder that came in:
"Brother, I am glad you have come; these people must
be healed, for I want some money of them, and must have
it."

We laid hands on them and rebuked the disease;
brother Lowry rose up well; I did my errand, and readily
obtained all I asked. This provided in part for my familyls sustenance while I should leave them. I went a little
further into the woods of the Missouri bottoms, and_ came
to a camp of some brethren, by the name of Higbee, who
owned some horses; they saw me coming, and, moved by
the Spirit, one of them said to the other, "there comes
brother Parley; hels in want of a horse for his journey—I
must let him have old Dick ;" this being the name of the

116 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

best horse he had. "Yes," said I, " brother, you have
guessed right; but what will I do for a saddle 1" "Well,"
says the other, " I believe P11 have to let you have mine."
I blessed them and went on my way rejoicing.

. I next called on Sidney A. Gilbert, a merchant, then sojourning in the village of Liberty—his store in Jackson
County having been broken up, and his goods plundered
and destroyed by the mob. "Well," says he, "brother
Parley, you certainly look too shabby to start a journey;
you must have a new suit; I have got some remnants
left that will make you a coat," etc. A neighboring tailoress and two or three other sisters happened to be present on a visit, and hearing the conversation, exclaimed,
" Yes, brother Gilbert, you find the stulf and Weill make it
up for him." This arranged, I now lacked only a cloak;
this was also furnished by brother Gilbert.

Brother Wight was also prosperal in a similar manner
in his preparations. Thus faith and the blessings of God
had cleared up our way to accomplish what seemed impossible. We were soon ready, and on the first of February we mounted our horses, and started in good cheer to
ride one thousand or fifteen hundred miles through a wilderness country. We had not one cent of money in our
pockets on starting.

.We travelled every day, whether through storm or sunshine, mud, rain or snow; except when our public duties
called us to tarry. We arrived in Kirtland early in the
spring, all safe and sound; we had lacked for nothing on
the road, and now had plenty of funds in hand. President
Joseph Smith and the Church in Kirtland received us with
a hospitality and joy unknown except among the Saints;
and much interest was felt there, as well as elsewhere, on
the subject of our persecution.

The President inquired of the Lord concerning the matter, and a further mission was appointed us.‘ In ful1ll* Bee Revelation, Book of Doctrine and Covenants, Section 101.

 

AlI'I‘OBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT. 117

ment of which we continued our journey eastward, in connection with President Joseph Smith, S. Rigdon, Hyrum
Smith, Frederick G. Williams, Orson Hyde and Orson
Pratt.

We journeyed two and two in different routes, visiting
the _churches and instructing the people as we travelled.
President Joseph Smith and myself journeyed together.
VVe had a pleasant and prosperous mission among the
churches, and some very interesting times in preaching
to the public. We visited Freedom, Catteraugus County,
N. Y.; tarried over Sunday, and preached several discourses, to which the people listened with great interest;
we were kindly and hospitably entertained among them. .
We baptized a young man named Heman Hyde; his
parents were Presbyterians, and his mother, on account of
the strength of her traditions, thought that we were
wrong, and told me afterwards that she would much rather
have followed him to an earthly grave than to have seen
him baptized.

Soon afterwards, however, herself, her husband, and the
rest of the family, with some thirty or forty others, were
all baptized and organized into a branch of the Churchcalled the Freedom branch—from which nucleus the light
spread and souls were gathered into the fold in all the
regions round. Thus mightily grew the word of God, or
the seed sown by that extraordinary personage, the Prophet
and Seer of the nineteenth century. ‘

As we journeyed day after day, and generally lodged
together, we had much sweet communion concerning the
things of God and the mysteries _of His kingdom, and I
received many admonitions and instructions which I shall
never forget.

Arriving in Geneseo, we met with the other Elders
who had started from Kirtland on the same mission, and
with others who were local, and held a general Conference.
Among those whose hospitality we shared in that vicinity

118 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT.

was old father Beeman and his amiable and interesting
family. He was a good singer, and so were his three
daughters; we were much editled and comforted in their
society, and were deeply interested in hearing the old
gentleman and brother Joseph converse on their early
acquaintance and history. He had been intimate with
Joseph long before the iirst organization of the Church;
had assisted him to preserve the plates of the Book of
Mormon from the enemy, and had at one time had them
concealed under his own hearth.

At this Conference we had an interesting time; public
meetings were convened; multitudes assembled to hear, and

'Presidents Joseph Smith and s. Rigdon addressed the
crowds in great plainness of speech with mighty power.
At the close of this Conference we again parted company,
President Smith and most of the Elders returned home to
Kirtland.

I then journeyed in connection with a young Elder,
named H. Brown, as far as Henderson County, in northern
New York, where lived Elder Brownls father, and where
there was quite a branch of the Church. I visited with
them for a few days, resting from my toils and ministering
among them. Taking leave of these friends, I went to
Sackettls Harbor, where all were yet strangers to the
fullness of the gospel. Leaving an appointment at a
hotel that I would return in a few days thence, and
address the people wherever they saw lit to assemble, . I
crossed over the bay to a country neighborhood, called
Pillar Point; In this neighborhood there had been some
preaching by our Elders; but no branch of the Church
organized, though there had been one or two instances of
healing, and some few were believing. Here I appointed
a meeting for evening in a school house; it was crowded
full of people; indeed, all could not get in.

As the meeting closed a man named William Cory
stepped forward, and earnestly begged of me to go home

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT. 119

with him and minister to his wife, as she was lying at
the point of death in consequence of a lingering sickness,
not having risen up in her bed for six days without
swooning or going into fits. He further said that he was
worn out by being up with her every night, and that his
neighbors were weary with watching, and it was doubted
whether, she could survive through the night without
relief.

The Spirit would not suffer me to go with him that
night, but I promised to call in the morning. At this
many voices were heard, saying: " Yes, yes, thereis a case
in hand; let him heal her and we'll all believe." Others
exclaimed: " I wonder if shelll be at his meeting to-morrow! We shall see, and if so, Weill all believe." Expres. sions like these, joined with my own weakness, only tended

to dampen my courage and confidence in the case.

I went home with a friend who invited me to partake
of his hospitality for the night. As we entered his house,
we found one of his children very sick with a violent pain
in the head, to which it had been subject from its birth,
and which came at regular periods, and was never relieved
till it gathered and «broke at his ear—s0 said his
parents. The little fellow was rolling from side to side
in his bed, and screeching and screaming with pain. I
stepped to the bedside, and laid my hands upon his head
in the name of Jesus Christ; he was instantly made
whole and went to sleep. Next morning he got up well,
and continued so; he said that the pain all left him as
soon as my hands touched his head.

In the morning, before I arose, I had a vision, as follows: I saw a log house, and entered it through a door
at the northwest corner; in the ‘northeast corner lay a
woman sick in bed; in the southeast corner was a small
door opening into an adjoining room, and near it a stairway, where stood a ladder; the iireplace being in the
south end. As I entered the house and laid my hands

 

120 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

on the woman, she rose up and was made whole; the
house being crowded, she took her seat near the tire and
under the ladder, or near by it, and she praised God with a
shout of glory, clapping her hands for joy, and exclaimed:
" Thank God, Pm every whit whole." I awoke from my
vision and related the same to the family where I staid.

The man harnessed his horses, and with seven or eight
persons in the wagon, including myself, we started for
meeting, intending to call and see Mrs. Cory on our way,
as I had appointed the previous evening. On alighting at
her house I saw it was the same that I had seen in the
vision; there were the doors, the stairway, ladder, fireplace,
bed, and sick woman, just as I had seen and described.

I laid my hands upon the woman, and said: "In the
name of Jesus Christ, be thou made whole this instant."
I then commanded her to arise and walk. Her husband
burst into tears; the people looked surprised; but the
woman arose and walked to the fire, and happened to
take her seat near the ladder, as I had related in the
vision before I saw her. She then clapped her hands for
joy, gave a shout of " Glory to God in the highest," and
testified that she was every whit whole. We invited her
to accompany us to the meeting; she immediately made
ready, walked out, helped herself into the wagon, and
rode some two miles over a very rough road. She then
got out of the wagon, and walked with a strong and
quick step into the meeting, where she sat till the discourse was over; when she arose and testiiied what the
Lord had done for her. She then rode home, and was
baptized in connection with several others, who came forward and obeyed the fulness of the gospel. We afterwards laid our hands on them for the gift of the Holy
Ghost, when it fell upon them in great power, insomuch
that all in the room felt its power and imluence and
glorified God; some spake in tongues, others prophesied
and bore testimony to the truth.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 121

The next evening I went over to Sackettls Harbor in
order to preach; many of the people from Pillar Point,
who had witnessed these things, went with me, and,
among others, Mr. Cory with his wife, who had been so
miraculously healed. A great rabble came out to hear,
or rather to disturb the meeting; and among others, some
half dozen clergymen of diiferent orders, who were loud in
their challenges and calls for miracles ; " give us a miracle
—we want a miracle—heal the sick—raise the dead, and
then well believe." The lying, rage, and confusion excited by these wicked spirits, broke up the meeting, and I
had much ado to get out of the crowd without being
stoned or torn to pieces.

After ta-rrying a few days in this region, I took leave
and continued my journey as far as Columbia County,
east of the Hudson. I arrived at my Aunt Van Cottls,
and found them all well; paid a visit to my father and
mother; gave them money sutlicient to enable them to
remove to Kirtland, Ohio, and then commenced my return. I had started from the frontiers of Missouri and
ridden on horseback iifteen hundred miles.

As I returned towards the West, I came to the town
of Freedom, Catteraugus County, N. Y., where President
Joseph Smith and myself had preached on our outward
journey, a few weeks previously, and where we had baptized a young man by the name of Heman Hyde, as the
first fruits in that place. As I called for the night, I
found that a large Church had been gathered during my
absence, consisting of some forty members or more, principally through the labors of my brother Orson. The
new members, and the people in general, rejoiced to see
me, and aided me on my journey; and Heman Hyde
accompanied me to Kirtland, where we arrived the latter
part of April, and were kindly and hospitably entertained
by President Joseph Smith.

 

CHAPTER XV.

An Army:—A Long March :—Recruits :—A Voice :—Camp Arrives in
Missouri :—Delegation to the Governor :—Interview :‘-—Return to Camp :—
Council :—Great Storm and Flood :—Battle Providentially Prevented :—
Cholera :—Army Disba.nded:—Sudden Destruction :—Labor with my Hands:
—-Journey to Ohio :—Labor and Ministry :—Accusat.ions :—Repair to Kittland :—Interview with the President :—His Action on the Matter :—Calling and Ordination of a Quorum of Twelve Apostles :—My Ordination,
Blessing and Charge :—Charge to the Quorum.

IT was now the first of May, 1834, and our mission had
resulted in the assembling of about two hundred men
at Kirtland, with teams, baggage, provisions, arms, etc.,
for a march of one thousand miles, for the purpose of
carrying some supplies to the atllicted and perscuted Saints
in Missouri, and to reinforce and strengthen them; and,
if possible, to influence the Governor of the State to call
out suflicient additional force to cooperate in restoring them
to their rights. This little army was led by President
Joseph Smith in person. It commenced its march about
the first of May; passing through Ohio, Indiana, and
Illinois, it entered Missouri some time in June.

I was chiefly engaged as a recruiting otlicer, and, not
being much with the camp, can give but little of its history. I visited branches of the Church in Ohio, Indiana,

Illinois and Missouri, and obtaining what men and means
I could, fell in with the camp from time to time with
additional men, arms, stores and money. On one occasion, I had travelled all night to overtake the camp with
some men and means, and having breakfasted with them
and changed horses, I again started ahead on express to

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or mnnnr P. PRATT. 123

visit other branches, and do business to again overtake
them. At noon I had turned my horse loose from, the
carriage to feed on the grass in the midst of a broad,
level plain. No habitation was near; stillness and repose
reigned around me; I sank down overpowered with a
deep sleep, and might have lain in a state of oblivion
till the shades of night had gathered about me, so completely was I exhausted for want of sleep and rest; but
I had only slept a few moments till the horse had grazed
sufliciently, when a voice, more loud and shrill than I
had ever before heard, fell on my ear, and thrilled through
every part of my system; it said: " Parley, it is time to
be up and on your journey? In the twinkling of an eye
I was perfectly amused; I sprang to my feet so suddenly that I could not at first recollect where I was, or
what was before me to perform. I related the circumstance afterwards to brother Joseph Smith, and he borc
testimony that it was the angel of the Lord who went
before the camp, who found me overpowered with sleep,
and thus awoke me.

Arriving in the Allred settlement, near Salt River, Missouri, where there was a large branch of the Church, the camp
rested a little, and despatched Elder Orson Hyde and myself to Jefferson City, to request of His Excellency, Governor Daniel Dunklin, a suiiicient military force, with orders
to reinstate the exiles, and protect them in the possession
of their homes in Jackson County.

We had an interview with the Governor, who readily
acknowledged the justice of the demand, but frankly told
us he dare not attempt the execution of the laws in
that respect, for fear of deluging the whole country in
civil war and bloodshed. He advised us to relinquish our
rights, for the sake of peace, and to sell our lands from
which we had been driven. To this we replied with
firmness, that we would hold no terms with land pirates
and murderers. If we could not be permitted to live on

 

124 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

lands which we had purchased of the United States, and
be protected in our persons and rights, our lands would,
at least, make a good burying ground, on which to lay
our bones; and, like Abrahamls possession in Canaan, we
should hold on to our possessions in the county of Jackson, for this purpose, at least. He replied that he did
not blame us in the least, but trembled for the country,
and dare not carry out the plain, acknowledged and imperative duties of his otlice. We retired, saying to ourselves: " That poor coward ought, in duty, to resign; he
owes this, morally at least, in justice to his oath of oilicef

We returned to the camp, which was then on the march,
somewhere below the county of Ray. President Joseph
Smith, his brother Hyrum, L. W'ight and others, repaired
with us into a solitary grove, apart, to learn the result
of our mission.

After hearing our report, the President called on the
God of our fathers to witness the justice of our cause
and the sincerity of our vows, which we engaged to fulfill,
whether in this life or in the life to come. For, as
God lives, truth, justice and innocence shall triumph, and
iniquity shall not reign.

Pursuing our journey, we arrived at Fishing River, Bay
County, and encamped for the night on a hill between its
forks. This stream was then about six inches deep in
each of its branches where the road crossed it. We had
but just camped, when there arose such a storm as has
been seldom witnessed on our earth; the wind blew, the
vivid lightning flashed, the thunder rolled, the earth
trembled, and the floods descended in a manner never before witnessed by us. Our tents were blown down, and
some of us lay six or eight inches deep in water. There
was a large meeting house there with the door open, into
which many of us gathered for shelter, after being nearly
drowned.

Next morning the fords of Fishing River were said to

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 125

be twenty to forty feet deep. We afterwards learned
that an army of ‘outlaws were in our neighborhood, and
would have attacked us that night but for the storm; the
floods in the river each side of us prevented a hostile
meeting, until certain citizens made the acquaintance of
our leaders, and learned their intentions. Thus the excitement was allayed, and the outlaws finally disbanded.

About this time, owing to some murmurings and insubordination in the camp, the cholera broke out among them,
in fulfilment of ‘ the word of the Lord, by the mouth of
His servant Joseph, and resulted in the death of some
fifteen or twenty of the camp, or of others connected with
the Saints. Finally, the camp was by the word of the
Lord, disbanded; some remained as settlers in that country, and others returned to their homes and families in
Ohio.

I left the camp at Fishing River, and arrived home in
Clay County, where my family resided, late in July. I
found my wife still afilicted, and on account of long sickness, was reduced to greater poverty than before, and I
was somewhat embarrassed with debts on account of her
board, etc., while I was absent.

About the time of the arrival of the camp at Fishing
River, the mob of Jackson County sent a committee of
twelve of their leaders, to confer with the authorities of
the exiled Church in Clay County, to make proposals for
the settlement of the whole matter, by purchasing the
lands from which they had been driven. The Saints
would not sell their lands to their murderers and the
land pirates who had driven and plundered them; therefore the mobls representatives were unsuccessful.

As this committee of twelve returned, and were crossing
the Missouri River at evening, their boat sank in an instant in the middle of the stream, and only about half of
the committee ever reached the shore alive. Brother Joseph
said it was the angel of the Lord who sank the boat.

>

136 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Having no means of support except by the labor of my
hands, I now commenced again to exert myself at hard
labor. In this I continued till October of the same year,
when, being counselled by the Presidency to remove to
Ohio, I started a journey of one thousand miles with my
wife, in a wagon drawn by two horses. We had not a
single dollar in money, but we trusted in God, and lacked
for nothing. During this journey my wife continued in a
very feeble state of health.

After a journey of near one thousand miles, we arrived at New Portage, fifty miles from Kirtland, early in
the winter, and finding a large society of the Saints who
welcomed us among them, we stopped for the winter. I
now wmmenced to preach, both in that place and in all
the region round, to multitudes who turned out to hear
the Word. Many embraced the gospel, and enjoyed the
gifts of God; instances of healing were of almost daily
occurrence, and the people waxed strong in the faith and
in the gifts and power of God. I also labored with my

hands with all diligence, when time would permit; thusthe winter passed away.

While laboring here, letters were received from VV. W.
Phelps, then President of the Church in Missouri, suspending my papers because I had gone away in debt;
which debt had been wntracted in behalf of my sick
wife while I had been away in the service of the Conference, as recorded in the previous chapter. I had once
o&'ered the money on the same, but the person to whom
it was due, in view of my public services, refused to take
it; nevertheless, President Phelps now censured me ‘severely, observing in his letter, that such conduct was not
the way of the pure in heart.

Under this censure I ceased to otiiciate, at which both
the Church and people in general in and about New
Portage were much grieved. In the fore part of February, 1835, I repaired to Kirtland, laid the case before

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. . 127

President Smith, with my defence in writing, in which is
stated the true circumstances. I proceeded to plead the
injustice of the accusation, when the President arose to
his feet, lifted his hand to heaven, and with a voice,
and energy, and power of the Holy Spirit which thrilled
the inmost soul, and would have raised the dead, be exclaimed: " Brother Parley, God bless you, go your way
rejoicing, preach the gospel, fill the measure of your mission, and walk such things under your feet; it was a
trick of Satan to hinder your usefulness ;, God Almighty
shall be with you, and nothing shall stay your handf

I was comforted, encouraged, filled with new life, thanking God that there was one noble spirit on the earth
who could discern justice and equity, appreciate the labors
of others, and had boldness of soul to judge and act
accordingly.

In accordance with one of the early revelations to the
Church concerning the calling and ordination of Twelve
Apostles,‘ this quorum was now being filled. Among those
chosen for this high and holy calling was my brother
Orson and myself. He being still absent, and the other
members having been already ordained, a meeting was convened at Kirtland, and very numerously attended, in which,
on the 21st day of February, 1835, I took the oath and
wvenant of apostleship, and was solemnly set apart and
ordained to that office; and as a member of that quorum
under the hands of Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and
David Whitmer; the minutes of which in the Church
History are as follows:

" Kirtland, February 21st, 1835. Pursuant to adjournment, a meeting of the Church was held, and, after prayer

-by President David Whitmer, and a short address by

President Oliver Cowdery to the congregation, Elder Parley
P. Pratt was called to the stand, and ordained one of
the Twelve by President Joseph Smith, J r., David Whit‘ See Revelation, Book of Doctrine and Covenants, Section 48.

 

128 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARITEY P. PRATT.

mer and Oliver Cowdery. ‘O, Lord, smile from heaven
upon this thy servant; forgive his sins, sanctify his heart,
and prepare him to receive the blessing. Increase his
love for thee and for thy cause; increase his intelligence,
wmmunicate to him all that wisdom, that prudence and
that understanding which he needs as a minister of right 

eousness, and to magnify the apostleship whereunto he is‘

called. May a double portion of that Spirit which was
communicated to the disciples of our Lord and Saviour, to
lead them to all truth, rest down upon him, and go with
him where he goes, that nothing shall prevail against
him; that he may be delivered from prisons, from the
power of his enemies, and from the adversary of all righteousness. May he be able to mount up on wings as an
eagle; to run and not be weary, to walk and not to
faint; may he have great wisdom and intelligence, and be
able to lead thine elect through this thorny maze. Let
sickness and death have no power over him; let him be
equal with his brethren in bringing many sons and
daughters to glory, and many nations to a knowledge of
the truth. Great blessings shall rest upon thee; thy faith
shall increase, thou shalt have great power to prevail.
The veil of the heavens shall be rolled up, thou shalt be
permitted to gaze within it, and receive instructions from
on high. No arm that is formed and lifted against thee
shall prosper, no power shall prevail, for thou shalt have
power with God, and shalt proclaim His gospel. Thou
wilt be adlicted, but thou shalt be delivered, and conquer
all thy foes. Thine odice shall never be taken from thee,
thou shalt be called great, angels shall _carry thee from
place to place. Thy sins are forgiven, and thy name written in the Lamvs Book of Life; even so. Amen!

CHARGE GIVEN BY 0. COWDERY TO P. P. PRATT.

"I am aware, dear brother, that the mind naturally claims
something new; but the same thing rehearsed frequently

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or rmmv P. rnur. .139

protlts us. You will have the same dimculties to encounter
in fulfilling this ministry that the ancient Apostles bad. You
have enlisted in a cause that requires your whole attention; you ought, therefore, to count the cost; and to
become a polished shaft, you must be sensible, requires
the labor of years, and your station requires a perfect
polish. It is required not merely to travel a few miles in
the country, but in distant countries; you must endure
much toil, much labor, and many privations to become
perfectly polished. Your calling is not like that of the
husbandman, to cultivate a stinted portion of the planet
on which we dwell, and when Heaven has given the
former and the latter rain, and mellow autumn ripened his
fruits, gather it in, and congratulate himself for a season
in the remission of his toils, while he anticipates his
winter evenings of relaxation and fireside enjoyments. But,
dear brother, it is far otherwise with you. Your labor
must be incessant, and your toil great; you must go forth
and labor till the great work is done. It will require a
series of years to accomplish it; but you will have this
pleasing consolation, that your Heavenly Father requires
it; the field is His; the work is His; and He will not
only cheer you, animate you, and buoy you up in your
pilgrim age, in your arduous toils; but when your work is
done and your labor der, he will take you to himself.
But before this consummation of your felicity, bring your
mind to bear upon what will be imperiously required of
you to accomplish the great work that lies before you.
Count well the cost. You have read of the persecutions
and trials of ancient days. Has not bitter experience
taught you that they are the same now? You will be
dragged before the authorities for the religion you profess;
and it were better not to set out than to start, look back,
or shrink when dangers thicken upon, or appalling death
stares you in the face. I have spoken these things, dear

brother, because I have seen them in visions. There are
9

130 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

strong dungeons and gloomy prisons for you. These should
not appall you. You must be called a good or bad man.
The ancients passed through the same. They had this
testimony, that they had seen the Saviour after he rose
from the dead. You must bear some testimony, or your
mission, your labor, your toil will be in vain. You must
bear the same testimony that there is but one God, one
Mediator; he that has seen Him will know Him, and testify of Him. Beware of pride; beware of evil; shun the
very appearance of it; for the time is coming when, if
you do not give heed to these things, you will have a
fall. Among your many afflictions you will have many
blessings also ; but you must pass through many aiilictions
in order to receive the glory that is in reserve for you.
You will see thousands who, when they first see you, will
know nothing about salvation by Jesus Christ; you shall
see a nation born in a day. A great work lies before
you, and the time is near when you must bid farewell to
your native land, cross the mighty deep, and sound the
toesin of alarm to other nations, kindreds, tongues and
people. Remember, that all your hopes of deliverance
from danger and from death will rest upon your faithfulness to God; in His cause you must necessarily serve
Him with a perfect heart and a willing mind. Avoid
strife and vain glory; think not yourself better than your
brethren, but pray for them as well as for yourself; and
if you are faithful, great will be your blessings; but if
you are not, your stewardship will be taken from you and
another appointed in your stead!

"Elder Pratt gave his hand to President 0. Cowdery,
and said he had received ordination, and should fulfil the
ministry according to the grace given him; to which the
President replied: ‘Go forth, and angels shall bear thee
up, and thou shalt come forth at the last day, bringing
many with thee! " A

Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Pratt were absent on a

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 131

mission. Elder Marsh returned to Kirtland on the 25th of
April, and Elder Pratt on the 26th, and received their
ordinations and blessing.

The following charge was given to the Twelve by President O. Cowdery:

" Dear Brethren: Previous to delivering the charge,
I shall read a part of a revelation. It is known to you
that, previous to the organization of this Church, in 1830,
the Lord gave revelations, or the Church could not have
been organized. The people of this Church were weak in
faith compared with the ancients. Those who embarked
in this cause were desirous to know how the work
was to be conducted. They read many things in the
Book of Mormon concerning their duty, and the way the
great work ought to be done; but the minds of men are
so constructed that they will not believe without a testimony of seeing or hearing. The Lord gave us a revelation that, in process of time, there should be twelve men

chosen to preach His gospel to Jew and Gentile.
" Our minds have been on a wnstant stretch to find

who these twelve were, when the time should come we
could not tell; but we sought the Lord by fasting and
prayer to have our lives prolonged to see this day; to
see you; and to take a retrospect of the ditiiculties
through which we have passed; but, having seen the day,
it becomes my duty to deliver to you a charge; and
first, a few remarks respecting your ministry. You have
many revelations put into your hands; revelations to make
you acquainted with the nature of your mission; you will
have ditliculties by reason of your visiting all the nations
of the world. You will need wisdom in a ten-fold proportion to what you have ever had; you will have to
combat all the prejudices of all nations."

He then read the revelation and said: "Have you
desired this ministry with all your hearts? If you have
desired it, you are called of God, not of man, to go into

 

132 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

all the world! He then read again from the revelation
what the Lord said to the Twelve. "Brethren, you have
your duty presented in this revelation. You have been
ordained to the holy priesthood; you have received it
from those who have their power and authority from an
angel; you are to preach the gospel to every nation.
Should you in the least degree come short of your duty,
great will be your condemnation; for the greater the calling the greater the transgression. I, therefore, warn you
to cultivate great humility, for I know the pride of the
human heart. Beware, lest the ilatterers of the world lift
you up; beware. lest your aifections are captivated by
worldly objects. Let your ministry be first. Remember,
the souls of men are committed to your charge, and, if
you mind your calling, you shall always prosper.

"You have been indebted to other men in the first instance for evidence; on that you have acted; but it is
necessary that you receive a testimony from Heaven for
yourselves; so that you can bear testimony to the truth
of the Book of Mormon, and that you have seen the face
of God. That is more than the testimony of an angel.
When the proper time arrives, you shall be able to bear
this testimony to the world. When you bear testimony that
you have seen God, this testimony God will never suffer
to fall, but will bear you out; although many will not
give heed, yet others will. You will, therefore, see the necessity of getting this testimony from Heaven.

"Never cease striving till you -have seen God face to
face. Strengthen your faith; cast oil‘ your doubts, your
sins, and all your unbelief, and nothing can prevent you
from coming to God. Your ordination is not full and com 

plete _ till God has laid His hands upon you. We require.

as much to qualify us as did those who have gone before
us; God is the same. If the Saviour in former days laid
his hands on his disciples, why not in latter days?

" With regard to superiority I must make a few remarks.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 133

The ancient Apostles sought to be great; but lest the
seeds of discord be sown in this matter, understand particularly the voice of the Spirit on this occasion. God does
not love you better or more than others. You are to contend for the faith once delivered to the saints. Jacob, you
know, wrestled till he obtained. It was by fervent prayer
and diligent search that you have obtained the testimony
you are now able to bear. You are as one; you are equal
in bearing the keys of the kingdom to all nations. You
are called to preach the gospel of the Son of God to the
nations of the earth; it is the will of your Heavenly
Father that you proclaim His gospel to the ends of the
earth, and the islands of the sea.

" Be zealous to save souls. The soul of one man is as
precious as the soul of another. You are to bear this message to those who consider themselves wise; and such
may persecute you; they may seek your life. The adversary has always sought the life of the servants of God;
you are, therefore, to be prepared at‘ all times to make a
sacridce of your lives, should God require them in the advancement and building up of His cause. Murmur not at
God. Be always prayerful; be always watchful. You will
bear with me while I relieve the feelings of my heart. We
shall not see another day like this; the time has fully
come; the voice of the Spirit has come to set these men
apart.

" You will see the time when you will desire to see such
a day as this, and you will not see it. Every heart wishes
you peace and prosperity; but the scene with you will inevitably change. Let no man take your bishopric; and
beware that you lose not your crowns. It will require your
whole souls; it will require courage like Enochls.

"The time is near when you will be in the midst of
congregations who will gnash their teeth upon you. This
gospel must roll, and will roll until it dlls the whole earth.
Did I say congregations would gnash upon you? Yea, I

 

134 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

say nations will gnash upon you; you will be considered
the worst of men. Be not discouraged at this. When
God pours out His Spirit the enemy will rage; but God,
remember, is on your right hand and on your left. A man,
though he be wnsidered the worst, has joy, who is conscious that he pleases God. The lives of those who proclaim the true gospel will be in danger; this has been
the case ever since the days of righteous Abel. The same
opposition has been manifest whenever men came forward
to publish the gospel. The time is coming when you will
be considered the worst by many, and by some the best
of men. The time is coming when you will be perfectly
familiar with the things of God. This testimony will
make those who do not believe your testimony seek
your lives; but there are whole nations who will receive
your testimony. They will call you good men. Be not
lifted up when you are called good men. Remember you
are young men, and you shall be spared. I include the
other three. Bear them in mind in your prayers; carry
their cases to a throne of grace; although they are not
present, yet you and they are equal. This appointment is
calculated to create an aifection in you for each other
stronger than death. You will travel to other nations;
hear each other in mind. If one or more is cast into prison, let the others pray for him, and deliver him by their
prayers. Your lives shall be in great jeopardy; but the
promise of God is, that you shall be delivered.
"Remember you are not to go to other nations till you
receive your endowment. Tarry at Kirtland until you are
endowed with power from on high. You need a fountain
of wisdom, knowledge and intelligence, such as you never
had. Relative to the endowment, I make a remark or two,
that there be no mistake. The world cannot receive the
things of God. He can endow you without worldly pomp
or great parade. He can give you that wisdom, that intelligence and that power which characterized the ancient

 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or rmmr P. rnur. 135.

saints, and now characterizes the inhabitants of the upper
world. The greatness of your commission consists in this:
You are to hold the keys of this ministry; you are to go
to the nations afar oil‘ ; nations that sit in darkness. The
day is coming when the work of God must be done. Israel
shall be gathered. The seed of Jacob shall be gathered
from their long dispersion. There will be a feast to Israel,
the elect of God. It is a sorrowful tale, but the gospel
must be preached, and Godls ministers rejected; but where
can Israel be found and receive your testimony and not
rejoice? No where! The prophecies are full of great
things that are to take place in the last days. After the
elect are gathered out, destruction shall come on the inhabitants of the earth; all nations shall feel the wrath of
God, after they have been warned by the saints of the
Most High. If you will not warn them others will, and you
will lose your crowns.

" You must prepare your minds to bid a long farewell
to Kirtland,‘ even till the great day mine. You will see
what you never expected to see; you will need the mind
of Enoch or Elijah, and the faith of the brother of Jared;
you must be prepared to walk by faith, however appalling
the prospect to human view; you, and each of you, should
feel the force of the imperious mandate, ‘Son, go labor in
my vineyard] and cheerfully receive what wines; but in
the end you will stand while others will fall. You have
read in the revelation mncerning ordination: ‘ Beware how
you ordain, for all nations are not like this nation; they
will willingly receive the ordinances at your hands to put
you out of the way. There will be times when nothing
but the angels of God can deliver you out of their hands!

" We appeal to your intelligence, we appeal to your understanding, that we have so far discharged our duty to
you. We wnsider it one of the greatest condescensions
of our Heavenly Father in pointing you out to us; you
will be stewards over this ministry; you have a work to

136 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

do that no other men can do; you must proclaim the
gospel in its simplicity and "purity, and we commend you
to God and the word of His grace. You have our best
wishes, . you have our most. fervent. prayers, that you may
be able to bear this testimony,—that you have seen the
face of God. Therefore, call upon Him in faith and
mighty prayer, till you prevail; for it is your duty and
privilege to bear such testimony for yourselves. We now
exhort you to be faithful to fulfil your ca1ling,—there must
be no lack here; you must fulfil in all things, and permit us to repeat, all nations have a claim on you; you
are bound together as the three witnesses were ; you, notwithstanding, can part and meet, and meet and part again,
till your heads are silvered oler with age}?

He then took them separately by the hand, and said,
" Do you with full purpose of heart take part in this
ministry, to proclaim the gospel with all diligence, with
these your brethren, according to the tenor and intent of
the charge you have received W Each of whom answered
in the aiiirmative.

 

CHAPTER XVI.

Return to New Portage:—Fire:—B.eturn to Kirtland:—ln[ob:—Journey Eastward, as far as Maine :—Return to Boston :—Removal to Kin-tland:—A
Temple:—Schoo1, Endowments, Prophecyings, Visions, etc.:—Visit from
Brother II. C. Kimball and Others :—My Wife Healed and Blessed :—A
Remarkable Prophecy and its Ful1ilment:—Mission to Canada :—Falls of
Niagara :—Reflections.

FTER this solemn ordinance was completed, together
with the blessings, charges and instructions connected
therewith, I was instructed to I prepare for a mission in
the coming spring, in connection with my brethren of the
quorum. \

I now returned home to New Portage, and began to
make preparations for my mission, but the state of my
affairs was such that it seemed almost impossible for me
to leave home; my wife was sick, my aged mother had
come to live with me, and looked to me for support—age
and infirmity having rendered my father unable to do for
himself or family. I was also engaged in building a
house, and in other business, while at the same time I
was somewhat in debt, and in, want of most of the necessaries of life.

Under these embarrassed circumstances, I hesitated for
a while whether to attempt to perform the mission assigned
me, or stay at home and finish my building and mechanical
work. While I pondered these things, with my mind unsettled, and continued my work, with a feeling of hesitation whether it was a duty to sacrifice all the labor and
expense to which I had been in my preparations and

138 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or ruznnv P. PRATT.

unfinished work, or whether it was a duty to stay and
complete it, I was called very suddenly to administer to a
brother by the name of Matthews, who was taken suddenly and dangerously ill. I found him writhing and groaning in the utmost agony, being cramped and convulsed in a
horrible manner, while the family were in great consternation, and weeping around him. I kneeled down to pray,
but in the midst of my prayer we were interrupted by the
cry of fire! fire I.' fire 1!! We sprang from our knees, and
ran towards my house, which was all in a blaze, being
an unfinished, two story frame building, open to the fresh
breeze and full of shavings, lumber, shingles, etc., while a
family occupied a small apartment of the same, and no
water near.

Our utmost exertions barely accomplished the removal
of the family and their goods; the building, tools, boards,
shingles, building materials, all were consumed in a few
moments. Thus closed all my hesitation; my works of
that nature were now all completed, and myself ready to
fill my mission. One gave me a coat; another a hat; a
third, house room; a fourth, provisions; while a fifth forgave me the debts due to them; and a sixth bade me
God speed to hasten on my mission.

Taking an affectionate leave of my family ‘and friends
in New Portage, I repaired to Kirtland, ready to accompany my brethren. While they made ready I paid a
visit to an adjoining township called Mentor; and visiting from house to. house, I attempted to preach to them;
but they were full of lying and prejudice, and would not
hear the Word. I then appointed a meeting in the open
air, on the steps of a meeting house owned by a people
called "Campbel1ites,ll one Mr. Alexander Campbell being
their leader; they having refused to open the house to
me. Some came to hear, and some to disturb the
meeting; and one Mr. Newel soon appeared at the head of
a mob of some fifty men and a band of music. These

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT. 139

formed in order of battle and marched round several
times near where I stood, drowning my voice with the
noise of their drums and other instruments. I suspended my
discourse several times as they passed, and then resumed.
At length, finding that no disturbance of this kind would
prevent the attempt to discharge my duty, they rushed
upon me with one accord at a given signal, every man
throwing an egg at my person. My forehead, bosom,
and most of my body was completely covered with the
broken eggs. At this I departed, and walked slowly
away, being insulted and followed by this rabble for some
distance. I soon arrived in Kirtland, and was assisted
by my kind friends in cleansing myself and clothes from
the effects of this Christian benevolence. _

All things being in readiness, and the spring fairly
opened, the Twelve took their journey down Lake Erie,
and landed at Dunkirk, in the neighborhood of which we
had appointed to ‘hold a conference. The members of the
Church assembled from the region round, and the people
turned out in great numbers. We addressed them in
several interesting discourses, and had a good time; many
seemed to receive the Word with joy, and some were baptized and added to the Church.

From thence we continued our journey through the
Eastern States, holding conferences in every place where
branches of the Church had been organized, ordaining and
instructing Elders and other otiicers; exhorting the members to continue in prayer and in well doing; ministering to the sick and instructing the ignorant. We also
preached the Word, and baptized such as desired to be
obedient to the faith; confirming them by the laying on
of hands ' and prayer in the name of Jesus Christ; thus
the Holy Ghost and the gifts thereof were shed forth
among the people, and they had great joy. The month
of August, 1835, found us in the State of Maine, and the
mission completed.

 

140 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

We now returned to Boston, and from thence home to
Kirtland, where we arrived sometime in October. After
spending a few days in the society of the Saints in Kittland, I repaired to New Portage, where I found my wife
and mother in usual health, and was received with joy by
them and the Saints. I now made preparation and removed to Kjrtland, in order to be with the body of the
Church at headquarters ; and to improve every opportunity
of obtaining instruction.

A portion of the Temple at Kirtland was now finished,
and schools were opened in several apartments. The
Presidency of the Church, the Twelve, and many others
were organized into a school for the purpose of studying
the Hebrew language. This study, and the meetings of the
several quorums for instruction and endowment, occupied
most of the winter.

KIRTLAND TRIPLE.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT. 141

The ordinances of the priesthood were revealed to a
greater extent than had been known among men since the
prophets and Apostles of old fell asleep; and many were
anointed to their holy calling, and were instructed in principles which were great and glorious in themselves, and
calculated to enlarge the mind and prepare the chosen
servants of God for the great work before them. Many
great and marvellous things were prophesied, which I am
not at liberty to record, and many of which have since
been fulfilled to the very letter. Many persons were
carried away in the visions of the Spirit, and saw and
heard unspeakable things; and many enjoyed the ministering of angels, and the gift of healing and of speaking
in tongues.

Spring at length returned, and the Elders prepared to
take leave of each other, and to go on their several
missions. As» to myself, I was deeply in debt for the
expenses of life during the winter, and on account of purchasing a lot, and building thereon. I, therefore, knew
not what to do, whether to go on a mission or stay at
home, and endeavor by industry to sustain my family and
pay my debts.

It was now April; I had retired to rest one evening at
an early hour, and was pondering my future course, when
there came a knock at the door. I arose and opened it,
when Elder Heber C. Kimball and others entered my
house, and being filled with the spirit of prophecy, they
blessed me and my wife, and prophecied as follows:

“Brother Parley, thy wife shall be healed from this
hour, and shall bear a son, and his name shall be Parley;
and he shall be a chosen instrument in the hands of the
Lord to inherit the priesthood and to‘ walk in the steps
of his father. He shall do a great work in the earth
in ministering the Word and teaching the children of men.
Arise, therefore, and go forth in the ministry, nothing
doubting. Take no thought for your debts, nor the neces 

I42 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

saries of life, for the Lord will supply you with abundant
means for all things. A

“Thou shalt go to Upper Canada, even to the city of
Toronto, the capital, and there thou shalt find a people
prepared for the fulness of the gospel, and they shall receive thee, and thou shalt organize the Church among
them, and it shall spread thence into the regions round
about, and many shall be brought to the knowledge of
the truth _and shall be filled with joy; and from the
things growing out of this mission, shall the fulness of the
gospel spread into England, and cause a great work to
be done in that land.

“You shall not only have means to deliver you from
your present embarrassments, but you shall yet have
riches, silver and gold, till you will loath the counting
thereof."

This prophecy was the more marvellous, because being
married near ten years we had never had any children;
and for near six years my wife had been consumptive,
and had been considered incurable. However, we called
to mind the faith of Abraham of old, and judging Him
faithful who had promised, we took courage.,

I now began in earnest to prepare for the mission, and
in a few days all was ready. I took an afectionate leave
of my wife, mother and friends, and started for Canada in
company with a brother Nickerson, who kindly offered to
bear my expenses. After a long and tedious passage in
a public coach (the roads being very bad and the Lake
not open), we arrived at the Falls of Niagara sometime
in the month of April, 1836.

As this was my first visit to this place it made a deep
and awful impression on my mind. We halted a short
time to view this wonder of nature, and to adore that
God who had formed a world so sublimely grand. The
leaping of a mighty river of waters over a perpendicular
fall of one hundred and sixty feet, the foaming and dash 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY 1?. PRATT. 143

ing of its white spray upon the rocks beneath; the rising
cloud of mist with its glittering rainbow, the yawning
gulf with its thousand Whirlpools; all conspired to fill
the contemplative mind with wonder and admiration, and
with reverence to the Great Author of all the wonders
of creation; while its everlasting roar which may be
heard for many miles distant, seemed a lively emblem of
eternity.

While musing on this spot, I fell into the following
train of reflection: O, Niagara! Generations may pass in
long succession; ages may roll away and others still succeed; empires may rise and flourish, and pass away and
be forgotten; but still thy deafening, thy solemn and awful
voice is heard in one eternal roar. The temples of marble
may moulder to dust, the monuments of the great may
crumble to decay, the palaces of kings fall to ruin and
their very place become unknown, their history forgotten in
the almost countless ages of antiquity; and still thy
sound is heard in everlasting moan, as if mourning over
the ruins of by-gone years. /

With deepest eloquence thou seemest to speak in awful
pride, saying: “ Before Abraham was, I am ;ll and with
mingled feelings of pity and contempt thou seemest to
inquire :—

Where now is Nimrod‘s mighty tower? Where the
Majestic walls, the warlike battlements,

The splendid palaces, the hanging gardens

Of Babylon ?

Where the proud N ebuchadnezzar, who, with
Golden seeptre, swayed the world, and made

The nations tremble? Where the proud N inevah,—
The strong Thebes, with its hundred gates ?

The golden Tyre, the splendid Athens, the
Majestic Rome, with all their works of art—Their monuments of fame, once the pride

And glory of the world ‘P

Where the mighty Pharaoh‘s, the terrible

 

- 144

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT.

Alexanders, the invincible Cesars,

The warlike Hannibal? Tyrants in turn.

Where now the gifted poets, the splendid

Orators, the profound philosophers

Of Greece and Rome, whose mighty genius

Hurled royal tyrants headlong from their thrones,Made senates weep or laugh at will, and ruled
The nations ‘I They are swept away by time;

Their beauty, like the morning flower, is withered
Their pride and glory gone like leaves of autumn ;-Their grandest works are fast decaying,

Houldering to ruin, soon to be forgotten.

But still my store house is unexhausted,

My fountain full and overflowing-—my

Solid munitions of rocks stand secure.-—

_My voice as mighty as when the beauteous

Colors of the rainbow first sported in

The sunbeams :—

As when the intelligences of olden worlds

First gazed with admiration upon my

Expanded waters; or, animated at

The music of my voice joined in the chorus,

And all the sons of God shouted for joy.
But, boast net, 0 proud N iagaral Though

Thou mayest withstand the ravages of time.‘ While countless millions, swept away with all

Their mighty works, are lost in following years.Yet there is a voice to speak, long and loud;

"Pia Michael‘: trump, whose mighty blast shall rend
Thy rocks, and bow thy lofty mountains in the dust,
Before whose awful presence thy waters

Blush in retiring modesty; and in

Respectful silence thou shalt stand in listening
Wonder, and admire, while thundera roll

Majestic round the sky, the lightenings play,. The mountains sink—the valleys rise—till Earth,

Restored to its original, receives
Its dnal rest, and groans and sighs no more.
Till then, weep on, and let thy voice ascend

In solemn music to the skies,—'tis like

A funeral dirge,—'tis fit to weep o'er the miseries
Of a fallen world in anguish deep.

 

CHAPTER XVIL

Journey Resumed :—Ministry :-Striking Answer to Prayer :—Arrival at T0ronto :—John Taylor :—Visit the Religious Ministers, the Sherilf, and
the Public Market, Seeking for an Opening, but in Vain :—Secret
Prayer :—About to leave the City ——God Sends a Widow to Receive
Me :—Great Faith :—Eyes of the Blind Opened :—Great Excitement and
Gainsayings:—Pub1ic Preaching :—Find_ a People Prepared to Receive
the Message.

EAVING the Falls we continued our journey for a day

or two on foot, and as the Sabbath approached we
halted in the neighborhood of Hamilton, and gave out two
or three appointments for meetings. Brother Nickerson
now left me to fill these appointments, and passed on to
his home, in a distant part of the province.

I preached to the people, and was kindly entertained
till Monday morning, when I took leave and entered
Hamilton, a flourishing town at the head of Lake Ontario;
but my place of destination was Toronto, around on the
north side of the lake. If I went by land I would have
a circuitous route, muddy and tedious to go on foot. The
lake had just opened, and steamers had commenced plying
between the two places; two dollars would convey me to
Toronto in a few hours, and save some days of laborious
walking; but I was an entire stranger in Hamilton, and
also in the province; and money I had none. Under
these circumstances I pondered what I should do. I had
many times received answers to prayer in such matters;
but now it seemed hard to exercise faith, because I was

among strangers and entirely unknown. The Spirit seemed
10

 

146 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

to whisper to me to try the Lord, and see if anything
was too hard for him, that I might know and trust Him
under all circumstances. I retired to a secret place in a
forest and prayed to the Lord for money to enable me to
cross the lake. I then entered Hamilton and commenced
to chat with some of the people. I had not tarried many
minutes before I was accosted by a stranger, who inquired
my name and where I was going. He also asked me if
I did not want some money. I said yes. He then gave
me ten dollars and a letter of introduction to John
Taylor, of Toronto, where I arrived the same evening.

Mrs. Taylor received me kindly, and went for her husband, who was busy in his mechanic shop. To them I
made known my errand to the city, but received little
direct encouragement. I took tea with them, and then
sought lodgings at a public house.

In the morning I commenced a regular visit to each of
the clergy of the place, introducing myself and my errand.
I was absolutely refused hospitality, and denied the opportunity of preaching in any of their houses or congregations. Rather an unpromising beginning, thought 1, considering the prophecies on my head concerning Toronto.
However, nothing daunted, I applied to the Sheriff for the
use of the Court House, and then to the authorities for a
public room in the market place; but with no better success. What could I do more? I had exhausted my
influence and power without _eii‘ect. I now repaired to a
pine grove just out of the town, and, kneeling down, called
on the Lord, bearing testimony of my unsuccessful exertions; my inability to open the way; _at the same time
asking Him in the name of Jesus to open an effectual
door for His servant to fulfil his mission in that place.

I then arose and again entered the town, and going to
the house of John Taylor, had placed my hand on my
baggage to depart from a place where I could do no
good, when a few inquiries on the part of Mr. Taylor,

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 147

inspired by a degree of curiosity or of anxiety, caused a
few momentsl delay, during which a lady by the name of
Walton entered the house, and, being an acquaintance of
Mrs. Taylorls, was soon engaged in conversation with her
in an adjoining room. I overheard the following:

“Mrs. Walton, I am glad to see you; there is a gentleman here from the United States who says the Lord sent
him to this city to preach the gospel. He has applied in
vain to the clergy and to the various authorities for opportunity to fuliil his mission, and is now about to leave the
place. He may be a man of God; I am sorry to have him
depart?

“ Indeed W said the lady; “ well, I now understand the
feelings and spirit which brought me to your house at this
time. I have been busy over the wash tub and too weary
to take a walk; but I felt impressed to walk out. I
then thought I would make a call on my sister, the other
side of town; but passing your door, the Spirit bade me
go in; but I said to myself, I will go in when I return;
but the Spirit said: go in now. I accordingly came in,
and I am thankful that I did so. Tell the stranger he is
welcome to my house. I am a widow; but I have a spare
room and bed, and food in plenty. He shall have a home
at my house, and two large rooms to preach in just when
he pleases. Tell him I will send my son John over to
pilot him to my house, while I go and gather my relatives
and friends to come in this very evening and hear him
talk; for I feel by the Spirit that he is a man sent by
the Lord with a message which will do us goodil

The evening found me quietly seated at her house, in
the midst of a number of listeners, who were seated around
a large work table in her parlor, and deeply interested in
conversation like the following:

“Mr. Pratt, we have for some years been anxiously looking for some providential event which would gather the
sheep into one fold; build up the true church as in days

 

148 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

of old, and prepare the humble followers of the Lamb, now
scattered and divided, to receive their coming Lord when he
shall descend to reign on the earth. As soon as Mrs.
Taylor spoke of you I felt assured, as by a strange and
unaccountable presentiment, that you were a_ messenger,
with important tidings on these subjects; and I was constrained to invite you here; and now we are all here anxiously waitin g to hear your words?

“Well, Mrs. Walton, I will frankly relate to you and
your friends the particulars of my message and the nature
of my commission. A young man in the State of New
York, whose name is Joseph Smith, was visited by an angel of God, and, after several visions and much instruction,
was enabled to obtain an ancient record, written by men
of old on the American continent, and containing the history, prophecies and gospel in plainness, as revealed to
them by Jesus and his messengers. This same Joseph
Smith and others, were also commissioned by the angels
in these visions, and ordained to the apostleship; with authority to organize the Church, to administer the ordinances,
and to ordain others, and thus cause the full, plain gospel in its purity to be preached in all the world.

“By these Apostles thus commissioned, I have been ordained as an Apostle, and sent forth by the word of prophecy to minister the baptism of repentance for remission
of sins, in the name of Jesus Christ; and to administer
the gift of the Holy Ghost, to heal the sick, to comfort
the mourner, bind up the broken in heart, and proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord.

“ I was also directed to this city by the Spirit of the
Lord, with a promise that I should find a people here prepared to receive the gospel, and should organize them in
the same. But when I came and was rejected by all parties, I was about to leave the city; but the Lord sent
you, as a widow, to receive me, as I was about to depart;
and thus I was provided for like Elijah of old. And now

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT. 1.19

I bless your house, and all your family and kindred in his
name. Your sins shall be forgiven you; you shall understand and obey the gospel, and be filled with the Holy Ghost;
for so great faith have I never seen in any of my country."

“ Well, Mr. Pratt, this is precisely the message we were
waiting for; we believe your words and are desirous to be
baptized." “ It is your duty and privilege," said I; “ but wait yet
a little while till I have an opportunity to teach others,
with whom you are religiously connected, and invite them
to partake with you of the same blessings."

After conversing with these interesting persons till a
late hour, we retired to rest. Next day Mrs. Walton requested me to call on a friend of hers, who was also a
widow in deep aflliction, being totally blind with inflammation in the eyes; she had suffered extreme pain for several
months, and had also been reduced to want, having four
little children to support. She had lost her husband, of
cholera, two years before, and had sustained herself and
family by teaching school until deprived of sight, since
which she had been dependent on the Methodist society;
herself and children being then a public charge. Mrs. Walton sent her little daughter of twelve years old to show
me the way. I called on the poor blind widow and helpless orphans, and found them in a dark and gloomy apartment, rendered more so by having every ray of light obscured to‘ prevent its painful effects on her eyes. I related
to her the circumstances of my mission, and she believed
the same. I laid my hands upon her in the name of Jesus
Christ, and said unto her, “your eyes shall be well from
this very hour." She threw oil‘ her bandages; opened her
house to the light; dressed herself, and walking with open
eyes, came to the meeting that same evening at sister
Waltonls, with eyes as well and as bright as any other

personis.
The Methodist society were now relieved of their burt-hen

 

150 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

in the person of this widow and four orphans. This remarkable miracle was soon noised abroad, and the poor
womanis house was thronged from all parts of the city and
country with visitors; all curious to witness for themselves,
and to inquire of her how her eyes were healed.

“ How did the man heal your eyes 7" “What did he
do l—te11 us/I were questions so oft repeated that the
woman, wearied of replying, came to me for advice to know
what she should do. I advised her to tell them that the
Lord had healed her, and to give Him the glory, and let
that sutiice. But still they teased her for particulars.
“ What did this man do W “ How were your eyes opened
and made well Y"

“He laid his hands upon my head in the name of Jesus
Christ, and rebuked the iniiammation, and commanded them
to be made whole and restored to sight; and it was instantly done."

“ Well, give God the glory; for, as to this man, it is
well known that he is an imposter, a follower of J 0Smith, the false prophet?

“ Whether he be an imposter or not, I know not ; but
this much I know, whereas I was blind, now I see! Can
an imposter open the eyes of the blind W

“Perhaps, then, you intend to be his disciple, to join
the ‘Mormons P ii '

“He said nothing to me about joining the ‘Monnonsf
but taught me the gospel, and bore testimony that God
had restored its power to the earth. Would you like to
be partakers thereof 1 Or why do you inquire so earnest—
ly about my eyes being healed 1"

“ Oh, we are John Wesleyis disciples. W'e are the
Christian Church. We know John Wesley, but as to this
man, we know not whence he is."

“How is this that you know not whence he'is, and yet
he hath opened my eyes? Did John Wesley open the
eyes of the blind? Can an imposter do it 1"

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 151

“Ah, we see how it is. You are determined to forsake
the Christian Church, the good old way, for the sake of
these fools, these weak imposters—the Mormons. Well,
farewell. But remember, you will have no more support
from our society, no more encouragement of any kind;
you shall not even teach a school for us. How then will
you live 1"

Such contentions and discouragement as these, poured
into the ears of a poor mother from day to day, together
with railings, lyings, and various sophistry and slander,
soon caused her to waver, and like thousands of other poor,
weak mortals, she shrank back into the net of sectarian
delusion, and was seen by the Saints no more. In the
meantime our meetings commenced at Mrs. Walton's. At
first very few at-tended, but they gradually increased till
her rooms, and sometimes her yard, were well iilled with
attentive hearers.

Sunday at length» arrived, and, not wishing to show opposition, or to set up a separate standard without cause,
I appointed no meeting, but accompanied a friend who invited me to hear a preacher in a certain chapel. After
the discourse, I was introduced to the speaker by my
friend, who invited us both to dine at his house. After
much interesting conversation, I was invited to accompany
them to another meeting, held at the residence of a Mr.
Patrick, a wealthy, aristocratic gentleman, who held an
oiiice in the government.

In a large apartment, well furnished, was soon convened a solemn, well dressed, and, apparently, serious and
humble people, nearly filling the room. Each held a bible,
while Mr. Patrick presided in their midst, with a bible in
his hand and several more lying on the table before him.
With one of these I was soon furnished, as was any other
person present who might lack this, apparently, necessary
article. In this manner these people had assembled twice
each week for about two years, for the professed purpose

 

152 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PLRLEY P. PRATT.

of seeking truth, independent of any sectarian organization
to which any of them might nominally belong.

Here had assembled John Taylor, his wife, Mrs. Walton
and some others who now knew me, although to the president and most of the congregation I was entirely unknown,
and, from my appearance, was supposed to be some farmer
from the country, who had dropped in by invitation.

Meeting was soon opened by singing and prayer in a
fervent manner, after which each one was at liberty to
introduce such subject of investigation as he might think
proper. _ John Taylor arose, and read in the New Testa
ment the account of Philip going to Samaria and preaching the gospel, and what followed. Closing the book, he
remarked that the Samaritans received the Word with joy,
and were then baptized, both men and women; after
which the two Apostles, Peter and John, came from Jerusalem, and laid their hands on them in the name of
Jesus, and prayed that they might receive the Holy Ghost;
and they received it, and spake with tongues, and prophesied. “ Nowf said he, “ where is our Philip? Where is
our receiving the Word with joy, and being baptized when
we believed ! \Vhere is our Peter and John? Our apostles?
Where is our Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands?
Where are our gifts of the Holy Ghost? Echo answers,
where?

“ Is this the pattern of the Christian Church, the model
for the organization in all after times? If so, we, as a
people, have not the ministry, the ordinances, the gifts
which constitute the Church of Jesus Christ. We are
told that we were sprinkled in our infancy, but this was
not baptism; and if it was, we neither believed nor rejoiced at the time, nor did we act in the matter at all,
but were acted upon. How different from the Samaritans,
who were baptized when they believed, and received the Word
with joy.

“Again, Peter and John were commissioned as Apostles,

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 153

and they administered the Holy Spirit by the laying on
of hands in the name of Jesus. Instead of which, we
have had ministers commissioned by the King and Parliament of England, or by John Wesley and his successors,
without any pretence of a word from the Lord or his
angels to commission them. Again, the Samaritans had
spiritual gifts. We have none. It‘, then, we diifer entirely from the pattern in all things, what claim have we,
or any of the Christian world, to be considered the Church
of Christ? If we are not members of. the Church of
Christ, wherein do we differ from the heathen, whom we
affect to despise or pity? We even shudder for nations
or individuals grown up without baptism, while at the
same time it would appear that we are all without it,-—
that we are all heathen, so far as the Christain Church
is concerned, as we have not even the shadow of anything
according to the pattern. We cannot boast of even an
approach to a base resemblance or counterfeit. What say
you to this, my brethren W

The subject now opened gave rise to_ a most candid
investigation. Several spoke to the point. Some were of
the opinion that the principles, being lost, were never to
be restored. Others suggested that it was their privilege
to pray that the heavens might be opened and men commissioned by new revelation. Others, again, hinted that
the Lord might, perhaps, have commissioned men already
in some part of the world; and, if so, why not pray
that he would send them to us.

Nothing deilnite was concluded on when the old preacher
who invited me arose and said: “There is a stranger present who, perhaps, might wish to speakll

The chairman observed that he was not aware of the
presence of a stranger, but if such was the case he was at
liberty, as were all persons in these meetings, to make
remarks. I arose, and observed that I was a stranger
from the United States; but not a stranger to the great

154 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

principles under investigation in this meeting. I was prepared to speak on the subject at some length; but should
not do so then, as the time had been well occupied and
the people ediiled.

My credentials were then presented to the meeting
through the chairman, and a special appointment given out
for me at evening.

However they might diifer as to the means of restoration of the Christian Church, certain it is that they
appeared at the close to unite, with one voice, in acknowledgment of their destitution. “O Lord,l' said the chairman, in his closing prayer, “ we have neither apostles,
visions, angels, revelations, gifts, tongues, ordinances, nor
a Christian ministry; we acknowledge that we are destitute of everything like the pattern of the true Church, as
laid down in thy holy Word, and we pray thee to send
whom thou wilt." At this all seemed to say Amen, while
tears and sobs attested their sincerity.

 

CHAPTER XVIII.

Crowded Meeting :—Discourse :—Baptize the People and Organize a Church:
—Sprcad of the Work :—First Visit to the Country :—Opposition:—Remarkable Success :—Retu:'n to Kirtland :—Return with my Wife to
Toronto :—Mcetings at Mr. Laznphcr-o's :—A Woman Hcaled and Evil
Spirits Rebul:e<1:—Mr. Lamareux :—.-1 Meeting :—A Challenge :—Discussion Held in the Open Air :—Grc:1t Crowd :—Opening Propositions by
Elder 0. Hyde :—Resu1t of the Discussion. '

N the evening Mr. Patrickis large rooms were crowded
to excess with anxious listeners. I then addressed
them on the subject they had been investigating. The
following is an outline of the discourse, which occupied
from two to three hours:

“Friends, I am aware that the subject now under consideration is one of the most vital importance to the
Christian world, and, though it may seem to be new to
most persons, it is familiar to me. ' I have traced it in all
its ‘bearings, weighed it in every possible light, and am prepared to impart to others that which, I trust, will satisfy
and enlighten the inquiring mind.

“ It appears from our text, as well as from the general
tenor of the New Testament, that certain definite principles
existed, which, acted upon and enjoyed, constituted the
Christian Church, or body of Christ, viz. :

“First. An inspired priesthood or apostleship, authorized
to administer salvation in the name of Jesus.

“Second. Faith in their words and testimony, on the
part of those who heard them.

“Third. Reformation of life.

“Fourth. Obedience to certain ordinances, as baptism

156 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

and the laying on of hands in the name of Jesus Christ, in
order to the remission of sins and the gift of the Holy
Ghost.

“Fifth. The spiritual gifts imparted to the body thus
organized, in order to its editication, growth and perfection.

“It may be presumed that every portion of the professed Christian Church, without any exception—I mean
those who admit the Scriptures to be a record of things
as they existed—will readily agree, that the live principles
just named did exist, and did constitute the Christian
Church or body of Christ. This, then, constitutes the
model or pattern of the object of our present search.

“We have only to compare modern pretences with this
ancient model, in order to judge of them at once. Either
the same principles would be required to constitute the
body of Christ in all succeeding ages, or else the New
Testament must cease to be a standard, and be superseded
by a dispensation of later origin; claiming power to nullify or make void the dispensation of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, and to introduce another order of things in its
stead.

“ This last alternative none are so bold as to claim. All
agree that the gospel was a perfect system, an unchangeable and everlasting covenant, never to be changed or
altered by the Lord, and only perverted or altered by man
under a severe pena1ty—a dreadful anathema. In physical
matters men are not easily deceived or duped; for instance, a man sees or hears an exact description of a
human body as existing in the days of Socrates or Plato;
it has head, eyes, ears, mouth, arms, hands, legs, feet,
etc. Can an imposter impose upon that man in this age?

 

Can he introduce a wild beast, a fowl, a serpent, a man '

dismembered of his head, eyes, ears, hands, or feet?
Could he pass any of these upon his fellow men as constituting the humau body ; the model or pattern answering
to the former description? No, he could not. He would

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 157

be considered out of his senses, and would he laughed to
scorn for attempting such a thing.

“Why, t-hen, are we at a loss in judging of the various
systems which, in modern times, claim to be the church of
Christ? Why do we not compare them with the model,
and reject or receive at once? Perhaps you will say that
such a course leads to consequences and conclusions so
awful, that it opens truths so unwelcome, that it is natural to shrink from the view; and, like the ostrich in the
desert, when pursued too closely, hides the head and eyes
in a false covering, while the body is exposed to certain
destruction.

“Says one, ‘if the ancient model or pattern is the standard, then the veil of modern Christendom is thrown off,
and the entire world unchristianized—for we no where iind
such a pattern} Well, admit then that there is no Christian church in existence among men, and that there has not
been for many ages. What then! is it a truth‘? If so,
truth will not harm anybody. If the whole world has been
for ages wrapped in mystery and deception, is it not better to iind it out now than to continue in ignorance until
Jesus reveals it at the judgment day, and sinks us in a
moment from the highest pinnacle of hope and expectation
to despair, rendered a thousand-fold more painful by a sudden reverse?

“But suppose, on opening our eyes to this great discovery, we search and find our observations and conclusions
warranted by the whole tenor of ' prophetic writ? Suppose
Jesus Christ and his Apostles and prophets all agree in
bearing testimony, and foretelling the very order of things
which we ilnd to exist; also, its final end or termination,
and the restoration of his Church and the reign of his
Saints? Would not our own observations of what actually
exists, confirmed by the prophetic declarations of such a
host of witnesses, all testifying that it would be so, be a
double assurance that we had opened our eyes to a snare

158 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

in time to escape, and cause us to leap forward with a
thrill of joy and faith to that which is to come?

“ We could then exclaim, in viewing the trumpery, pomp,
splendor and greatness of Catholicism, or the scarcely less
false and glaring systems of absurdity and priestcraft under the name of Protestantism, in their various forms,
0, thou mystery of iniquity! thou art at last revealed,
thou who deceivest all nations with thy sorcery, and with
whom the kings of the earth and the nobles and great
men have committed fornication, and lived deliciously; thy
covering is removed, and the people shall see thy nakedness and abhor thee; and many shall be ready when the
proclamation is made, ‘Come out of her, my people}

“ But suppose, on the other hand, we shut our eyes to
these truths, and hug to our bosoms those systems of
falsehood and error, which claim to be of Christ, but are
not? The result will be a continuance on our part to
build up that which the Lord purposes in due time to
tear down, and to oppose that which the Lord will send
into the world to accomplish his purposes. We would in
this case be his enemies, and be found fighting against
him.
“Let us look at the Jews in the glass of prophecy.
Our own dear selves not being in the scale, perhaps we
can the more readily discern the equity of the balance,
and afterwards venture to be weighed in the same, even
though both Jew and Gentile should be found wanting. i

“For nearly two thousand years we behold the Jews
without a prophet, inspired priest, king, ruler or teacher,
to lead them to light, to freedom, or to God. No voice
from the binning bush; no thunderings upon Sinai; no
still small voice whispering of right and salvation; no call
from the eternal throne; no vision, angel or dream to light
them on their pathway, as they wander and are oppressed
amid the darkness of Gentile dominion. Their temple is in
ruins; their sacrifices have ceased; their priesthood is pow 

AU'I‘0BIOGR.A.PHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 159

erless; while their very city and country is desolate, or
trodden under foot. We say to the Jew, why all this? Is
it not possible that your fathers have rejected the Messiah
and hi 3 holy Apostles and prophets; and these things been
withheld from them in the anger of the Almighty? 0,
no, says the Jew, we are the true church and people of
God; revelations, prophets, visions, angels and gifts were
only given at first to establish the church of Israel, and
the canon of Scripture being complete, there was no further
need of these thin gs; therefore, they ceased.

“Now, you know that this Jew is mistaken. You pity
him. You wonder at his ignorance. You know that when
in the days of Samuells childhood there was no open vision from the Lord; it was because the priesthood, the
proper communication between God and the people, was in
transgression. The priests of the house of Eli were robbing the saeriilces for their own aggrandizement; and were
committing whoredoms with the very women who came
there to worship. You also know that when King Saul was
no longer favored with revelation, when the heavens were
shut against him, and the Lord answered him not, neither
by vision, angel, dream, Urim and Thummim, nor prophet;
it was because the Lord had forsaken him and had rent
the kingdom from him, and had given it to David, dooming him to destruction, and withdrawing His spirit from
him, abandoning him to a spirit of murder and persecution towards the chosen instruments of the Almighty.
You also know that, when, before Christ, these gifts had
ceased in the Jewish church (say from Malachi to John
the Baptist), there were a multitude of sects, none of which
were right. All had to come on a level and repent, and
be baptized by J ohn. in order to prepare the way of the
Lord.

“ You also know that the Jews were no longer favored
with apostles and inspired men after they had rejected
Christ and his Apostles, because they were rejected of the

 

160 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

Lord; and the kingdom, according to the words of Jesus,
was taken from them and given to a people who should
bring forth the fruits of the same. You also know that the
reason why a Jew to this day is without these things is, because his fathers, eighteen hundred years ago, rejected them.

“But the Jew knows none of these things. He is
blinded with the vain and delusive thought that his race,
being the chosen of the Lord, must forever remain in
favor, wh ether they do iniquity or not. Why! exclaims
the Jew, we dare not for a moment look at things in
the light you suggest; it would disfranchise the whole
nation for eighteen centuries, and count them as aliens
from the covenant of their fathers, and from the commonwealth of Israel. Well, what if it does ? Is it not better for them to know the worst in time to mend?

“ Now, let us turn to the Gentile church. They, by
the ministration of the Apostles, received the kingdom of
God, and enjoyed its fruits. The natural branches were
broken off, and they were grafted in; ‘take heed] says
Paul, ‘for if God spared not the natural branches, take
heed, lest he spare not thee}

“When the Gentile church received the kingdom, and
became such, they were everywhere blessed with the ministry of inspired men, and were favored with revelations,
visions, angels and prophets, as the New Testament bears
witness. What became of these things? Under what
circumstances,‘ and in fulfilment of what Scriptures did
they cease from among the Gentiles?

“The prophet Daniel had foretold of the several powers
which would arise and bear rule in the earth. But the
Roman, the most terrible power of all, should ‘destroy the
mighty and the holy people} This power should change
the times and the laws, and wear out the Saints of the
Most High, tmtil the end, when the Saints should take
the kingdom under the whole Heaven, and possess it.
Such in substance is DaniePs testimony.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. rnu-r. 161

“John, in his revelations, bears the same testimony. He
predicts that a certain power under the figure of a woman
upon a beast, with Mystery written upon her forehead,
should have dominion among all nations; have to do with
all kings; and that all nations should be deceived by
her, and their kings live deliciously with her, while she
would be drunken with the blood of the saints and with
the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.

“Paul also predicts a time when men ‘would not endure
sound doctrine, but would turn away their ears from the
truth, and be turned unto fables, heaping to themselves, teachers3 That they would ‘have a form of godliness and deny
the power. Paul also bears testimony that the Gentiles,
if they abide not in faith, shall meet with a similar fall
as did the Jews.

“Jesus Christ speaks of a time when the times of the
Gentiles shall be fulfilled: their dominion come to an end
with great judgment, and Jerusalem no longer be trodden
under foot by them.

“ Now the summary of these things is this:

“ The Gentiles killed the Apostles and inspired men.

“The Gentiles ceased to bring forth the fruits of the
kingdom.

“The Gentiles became dmnken with the blood of the
saints.

“ The Gentiles destroyed the mighty and the holy people.

“The Gentiles changed the times, and laws, and ordinances of God.

“The Gentiles turned away their ears from the truth,
and were turned unto fables. “The Gentiles would not endure sound doctrine, but
heaped to themselves teachers.

“The Gentiles maintained a form of godliness without
its miracles and powers.

“ The Gentiles were ‘full of names of blaephemg/,l and mystery was written as a frontispiece on all their institutions.
11

 

162 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

“ The Gentiles deceived all nations, and drew kings and
great men into the wake of their mysterious abominations
and religious mummeries.

“The Gentiles continue to bear rule by these means
till the judgments of the Almighty sweep them from the
earth, and put an end to their dominion; and God restores Israel and Jerusalem, and gives the dominion to
his Saints.

“How often the Lord may have restored the priesthood
and ordinances, the true Church and its gifts to the earth,
among the humble, is not known. But this much we know,
there would be no peace nor security for men professing
such institutions; they would be either hunted down and
destroyed, or driven to the necessity of secluding themselves in the most secret recesses, where their history
would never come down to us. As Protestants, we can
make no pretences to a successive line of apostleship; for
this would imply that we were never Roman Catholics;
therefore, what need of protestation or dissent from that
to which we never had belonged? Nothing short of a
new dispensation—a new revelation to commission apostles
as at the iirst, could give any religious body a claim, or
a shadow of claim, to be the‘ Church of Jesus Christ, or
entitle them to the spiritual gifts.

“Such, my friends, is the deplorable picture of Gentile
Christianity as presented before us, whether we look
with the naked eye on facts around us, or, aided by the
glass of prophecy and history, review the dim vista of
successive generations in the mighty past. Yet in the
midst of the reign of error and blood there have always
been many individuals who desired to know and serve the
Lord. They have desired to see the triumph of truth;
but the time had not come; they died without the sight;
but they will arise again to enjoy the triumph; they with
us will rejoice when error is overthrown and the Saints
possess the kingdom.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 163

“ I have now reviewed the past, my friends, and have
shown by what means the Jews and Gentiles have lost
the peculiar blessings which characterize the Church of
God. I have detained you long, and am, as yet, only
on the threshold of the great subject before me. In an. other discourse I might draw a brighter picture by setting before you the great and precious promises which ensure to the world a new dispensation, in which all these
things will be restored, and the Church of the Saints
grow, iiourish and triumph in the earth.

“ I must now close by blessing this people who have
opened their hearts to listen with such attention. May
the blessings of the Lord Jesus ‘Christ and his spirit rest
upon you, that you may receive and know the truth.
Amen!

As I finished speaking the unanimous voice was for
another meeting, which was finally given out for the next
evening.

Evening came again. Crowds assembled.

I then went into detail with a chain of prophecy,
beginning with Moses and the prophets, and ending with
J ohnls revelation; showing that the latter-day glory was
to be ushered in by a new dispensation revealed from
heaven; by the ministration of angels, and sustained by
the marvellous power and gifts of God; till it resulted
in the overthrow of all mystery, darkness, ignorance and
corruption, and the ushering in of the universal reign of
peace and truth.

This prophetic review occupied some two or three hours
more. I then closed by saying that had I time I would
give them the details of the commencement of this restoration by a new dispensation revealed from the heavens
by the angels of God, and in exact and detailed fulfilment of some of the prophecies which I had been reviewing. All cried out for another meeting, which was appointed
‘for the next night.

 

104 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

In the third evening I related the visions, manifestations
and many of the details of the organization and movements of the Church of the Saints.

The truth was now plainly before this people, who had
been in so wonderful a manner prepared for its reception,
as predicted by brother Kimball on my head before leaving home. The man of the house now rejected me, and
the meeting of seekers after truth left his house, and
came and were baptized, and held their meetings at the
house of the widow Walton, who had received me, and
who was now baptized with all her household, who were
of sufficient age to receive the gospel.

John Taylor and his wife, whose house I first entered
in Toronto, ,were also baptized. He soon became an assistant in the ministry. This is that same John Taylor
who is now one of the Twelve Apostles.

The work soon spread into the country and enlarged its
operations in all that region; many were gathered into
the Church, and were filled with faith and love, and with
the Holy Spirit, and the Lord confirmed the Word with
signs following. My first visit to the country was about
nine miles from Toronto, among a settlement of farmers,
by one of whom I had sent an appointment beforehand.
John Taylor accompanied me—this was before he was
baptized—we rode on horseback. We called at a Mr.
Joseph Fieldingls, an acquaintance and friend of Mr. Taylorls. This man had two sisters, yotuig ladies, who seeing
us coming ran from their house to one of the neighboring houses, lest they should give welcome, or give countenance to “ Mormonism? Mr. Fielding stayed, and as we
entered the house he said he was sorry we. had come,
he had opposed our holding meeting in the neighborhood;
and, so great was the prejudice, that the Methodist meeting house was closed against us, and the minister refused,
on Sunday, to give out the appointment sent by the farmer.

“ Ah I" said I, “ why do they oppose Mormonism ?" “I

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 165

donlt knowf said he, “ but the name has such a contemptible sound; and, another thing, we do not want
a new revelation, or a new religion contrary to the Bible."
“Oh W said I, “if that is all we shall soon remove your
prejudices. Come, call home your sisters, and lctls have
some supper. Did you say the appointment was not given
out W “ I said, sir, that it was not given out in the
meeting house, nor by the minister; but the farmer by
whom you sent it agreed to have it at his house? “Come
then, send for your sisters, we will take supper with you,
and all go over to meeting together. If you and your
sisters will agree to this, I will agree to preach the old
Bible gospel, and leave out all new revelations which are
opposed to itf

The honest man consented. The young ladies came home,
got us a good supper, and all went to meeting. The house
was crowded; I preached, and the people wished to hear
more. The meeting house was opened for further meetings,
and in a few days we baptized brother Joseph Fielding
and his two amiable and intelligent sisters, for such they
proved to be in an eminent degree. We also baptized
many others _in that neighborhood, and organized a branch
of the Church, for the people there drank in truth as
water, and loved it as they loved life.

After ministering in and about Toronto for about two
months I found it necessary to return home, as some of my
debts were pressing, and we needed a supply of our printed
works to circulate among the people. I accordingly gave
out word, in a meeting in Toronto one Sunday evening,
that I should take boat for home next morning. Now all
this time I had asked no man for money, not had I explained my circumstances. However, on shaking hands at
the close of the next meeting, several bank "bills were
secretly shaken into my hands, amounting in all to several

hundred dollars—including subscriptions for books, 
cals, etc. I thanked the Lord God of Israel for the fulfilment

 

166 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

of the first instalment of brother Kimballls prophecy, and
went on my way rejoicing. On my arrival in Kirtl-and I
was enabled to meet my most urgent debts, and to get
time on the remainder.

I found my wife had been healed of her seven yearsl
illness from the time brother Kimball had ministered unto
her, and I began to realize more fully that every word of
his blessing and prophecy upon my head would surely
come to pass. After a pleasant visit with the Saints, I
took my wife with me and returned again to Toronto, in
June, 1836.

The work I had commenced was still spreading its influence, and the Saints were still increasing in faith and
love, in joy and in good works. There were visions,
prophecyings, speaking in tongues and healings, as well
as the casting out of devils and unclean spirits. One remarkable circumstance, among many, I will relate in detail:

There was living within a short days journey of Toronto,
in a certain neighborhood where I ministered every two
weeks (for the circuit of my labors had now so much
enlarged that I had to travel continually from branch to
branch and neighborhood to neighborhood), a man named
Lamphere, who -was noted for being the most irreligious
man in all the country; he and the family were hardly
ever known to attend a religious meeting; they would
work on the Sabbath, and swear, curse, etc. This man
and his family were so wrought upon by the power of
truth that he opened his house for stated meetings, which
I held there regularly every two weeks. He and the
family always entertained me with every kindness and
every demonstration of hospitality in their power. The
people of the neighborhood always turned out to hear,
and seemed to receive the Word with faith and joy, but
as yet none of them had been baptized, or joined the
Church of the Saints. All noticed the change in the
Lamphere family, and all -rejoiced, and even marvelled at

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 167

so sudden a reformation in a family so gospel hardened, as
they called it, though in truth none of them had ever
heard the gospel in its power and fulness till my visits
commenced there. ‘

N ow there was living 11). that neighborhood a young man
and his wife, named VVhitney; he was a blacksmith by
trade; their residence was perhaps a mile or more from
this Lampherels, where I held my semi-monthly meetings.
His wife was taken down very suddenly about that time
with a strange aiiliction. She would be prostrated by some
power invisible to those about her, and, in an agony of distress indescribable, she would be drawn and twisted in
every limb and joint, and would almost, in fact, be pulled
out of joint. Sometimes, when thrown on to the bed, and
while four or live stout men were endeavoring to hold her,
she would be so drawn out of all shape as to only touch
the bed with her heels and the back part of her head. She
would be bruised, cramped and pinched, while she would
groan, scream, froth at the mouth, etc. She often cried
out that she could see two devils in human form, who
were thus operating upon her, and that she could hear
them talk; but, as the bystanders could not see them,
but only see the effects, they did not know what to think
or how to understand.

She would have one of these spells once in about
twenty-four hours, and when a period of these spells were
over she would lie in bed so lame, and bruised, and
sore, and helpless that she could not rise alone, or even
sit up, for some weeks. All this time she had to have
watchers both night and day, and sometimes four and live
at a time, insomuch that the neighbors were worn out
and weary with watching. Mr. Whitney sent for me two
or three times, or left word for me to call next time I
visited the neighborhood. This, however, I had neglected to do, owing to the extreme pressure of labors upon
me in so large a circuit of meetings—indeed, I had not

 

168 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

a moment to spare. At last, as I came round on the
circuit again, the woman, who had often requested to see
the man of God, that he might minister to her relief, declared she would see him any how, for she knew she
could be healed if she could but get sight of him. In
her agony she sprang from her bed, cleared herself from
her frightened husband and others, who were trying to
hold her, and ran ‘for Mr. Lamphereis, where I was then
holding meeting. At iirst, to use. her own words, she
felt very weak, and nearly fainted, but her strength came
to her, and increased at every step till she reached the
meeting. Her friends were all astonished, and in alarm,
lest she should die in the attempt, tried to pursue her,
and they several times laid hold of her and tried to force
or persuade her back. “ No,'i said she, “let me see the
man of God; I can but die, and I cannot endure such
afiiiction any longer? On she came, until at last they
gave up, and said, “Let her go, perhaps it will be according to her faith." So she came, and when the thing
was egrplained the eyes of the whole multitude were upon
her. I ceased to preach, and, stepping to her in the
presence of the whole meeting, I laid my hands upon her
and said, “ Sister, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven,
thy faith hath made thee whole; and, in the name of Jesus Christ, I rebuke the devils and unclean spirits, and
command them to trouble thee no moref She returned
home well, went about her housekeeping, and remained
well from that time forth.

Her neighbors watched to see if the trouble would return upon her, but, after a few days they gave up all
their fears, and gave glory to God, saying that the ancient gospel had truly been restored.

About seven miles from this place lived a merchant by
the name of Lamareux, who was a man of extended
thought and general information; he sometimes preached
or lectured to the people. This man, on hearing the

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 169

strange reports of what was going on, sent for me. I
visited him on a day appointed; he had shut up his store,
suspended all business, dressed in his best, and prepared
a dinner, while at the same time a general meeting of
the people was convening in his large barn. He received us cordially, and after dinner accompanied us to
the barn, where there was, indeed, a crowd of some hun* dreds of anxious listeners. VVe preached; after which the

old merchant exclaimed to the meeting, that if this was
Mormonism he was a Mormon. ,

He pressed us to tarry a few days, or rather go with
him, to which we consented. So, next morning he furnished a horse and saddle for himself, and another for
me. We mounted—he leading the way. We travelled
through a line settled country of villages and farms, where
I had never been before, and where they were strangers
to “ Mormonism" and to me, but well acquainted with
him.

As we went, he preached, saying to every man he met,
and even crying aloud to those at a distance, and as we
halted in each little village :

“ Hear ye, my friends, the kingdom of Heaven is restored again to man, with the gospel in its ancient fulness and power. Turn out and hear this stranger who
is with me, and do not gainsay him, for I testify to you
that the sick are healed, the eyes of the blind are opened,
and devils are cast out under his hand in the name of
Jesus. And if you do not believe it we can give you
names and particulars, and prove it by scores and hundreds of witnessesxl

The more I tried to keep him still the more he proclaimed these things.

Leaving a chain of appointments, we travelled as far as
Scarborough, and, preaching there, we returned the next
day and tilled the chain of appointments given out the
day before. _The excitement now became general, and a

 

170 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

very learned clergyman, a Mr. Browning, of the Presbyterian order—announced himself as the peoplels chosen
champion to meet us in public debate and put us down, or
receive our doctrine, according as truth might appear on
investigation.

A public discussion was at last agreed upon, to be held
a few weeks thence in the open air, as no building
would hold the people. The preliminaries were as follows:

The Bible to be recognized as a standard of truth.

We were to have the opening speech, in which we
were to set forth our principles; when the reverend gentleman was to have a certain length of time to reply, and
so on alternately.

The meeting at length came oil‘. Thousands attended,
and listened with patience. Elder O. Hyde, who had now
arrived from the States to my assistance, took up the
matter, as I was unavoidably engaged elsewhere. A large
platform had been erected for the speakers, and while
Elder Hyde sat almost alone before that vast assemblage,
the reverend gentleman had five or six other elergymen
beside him as helps.

In the opening speech Elder Hyde laid down the following principles, viz. :

A true Church of Christ is composed of apostles, prophets, elders, teachers and members, who have been baptized (immersed) in the name of Jesus Christ, and who
have received his spirit by the laying on of hands of his
apostles, or authorized servants.

A true Church of Christ believed in visions, angels,
spirits, prophecyings, revelations, healings and miracles of
every kind, as described in the New Testament.

Any creed or religious body differing from this New
Testament pattern could not be considered the Church of
Christ, however sincere they might be.

Having laid down these premises, he demanded 01 his

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 171

opponent a positive admission or denial of the premises,
before he would allow himself to be drawn to a second
question or point of debate. This took his opponents all
aback; they had sense enough to see that if they affirmed
these premises there was an end of Presbyterianism, and
all other sectarian forms which have set aside these
powers. On the other hand, if they denied the premises
laid down by Elder H., it would be denying the Bible
standard, by which both parties agreed to abide. For these
reasons the party of the opposition utterly refused to either
athrm or deny. Attempts were made in every possible
form to draw Elder H. to other points of debate; but all
in vain. Slanderous reports from the press, pamphlets,
and newspaper abuse, were offered in abundance; but were
not suffered to be introduced into the discussion, because
both parties had agreed to abide by the Bible as a
standard. Thus, after a few hours of shuffling and trickery
on the part of the opposition, and a few vain attempts to
introduce the poisonous slanders which so often prevail in
blinding the public mind, they were utterly silenced.
Elder Hyde then proceeded to address the vast assemblage at considerable length, congratulating them on the
triumph of truth, and exhorting them to obey the gospel,
and thus avail themselves of its blessings, after which the
discussion closed ; but the truth grew and prevailed.

 

 

CHAPTER XIX.

A Vision :—Remarkable Signs in the Heavens :—A False Prophet :—A
Dream :—Imprcssion :—P1-ayer :—Interpretation Given in a Second
Dream :—Attend Mr. Cain-d's Meeting :—He Shows Himself to be a
Railer and a Liar :—We Challenge Him to an Investigation :—He Visits
Toronto :—We Return There :—Continues His Opposition :—Refusing to

Meet Us :—Great Meetings :—Exeitement :—Text :—Summary of the Discourse Proving Him 3. False Teacher :—He Retires to Private Life :—
Return to Kirtland:—Birth of My First Born.

IN July, 1836, while lodging at the house of brother
Joseph Fielding, the voice of the Lord came unto me
in a dream, saying: “Parley !" And I answered: “Here am
I ii for I was in a vision of the Spirit and knew that
it was the Lord who spake unto me. And he said:
“ When did I ever reveal anything unto you in a
dream and it failed to come to pass W ‘And I answered: “Never, Lord? “ Well, then? He continued,
“go unto this people and cry unto them with a
mighty voice that they repent, lest I smite them with
a curse and they die; for, notwithstanding the present
fruitfulness of the earth, there shall be a famine in the
land; and not only a famine for bread, but a famine for
the Word of the Lord; for I will call my servants out
from their midst and send them to the nations afar off?
Having heard these words I took courage, and I continued to lift up my voice in the congregations, both in
town and country, testifying of the gospel and warning the
people of things to come. Many repented and were baptized, while many hardened their hearts and were filled

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. -173

with a contentious and lying spirit. But the Saints were
filled with faith, joy, and love; and they met together
oft, and had great union‘ and peace, and were happy in the
society of each other.

In the autumn of the same year—I think in September
—I had preached on Sunday in the chapel, on the
subject of the coming of the Son of Man and the signs
which would precede his coming. I prophecied that
they would see signs in the heavens very soon, such
as were spoken of by Jesus Christ in the New Testament; and that when they should begin to see them
they might know for themselves that his coming was nigh
at hand.

After thus preaching I returned in the evening to the
house of brother and sisters Fielding, at the hour of 9
P. M.; we sat up for an hour or two conversing on these
important things and rejoicing, when, on going out at the
door and looking abroad, we beheld a most wonderful
scene in the heavens, and, as it continued for some time,
we finally went to some of the nearest neighbors and
called them out to behold it.

A wave of white light extended like a rainbow from
east to west over the entire horizon, a little south of the
meridian. It was in appearance about twenty feet wide,
and seemed agitated in its motions like a wave of the
sea; at length it removed like the motions of a great swell
of the sea towards the south and disappeared; when lo!
another similar light appeared immediately in the place of
the former, and, after remaining stationary with agitated
motions for some time, it rolled away to the south and
disappeared like the former, and was replaced by a third.
Thus the same scene was renewed and continued for hours.
We finally all retired to rest, while it yet continued to be
exhibited.

After spending the season in continued labors, and organizing the Church in many places, I was about to return

 

174 ' AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

in October to Kirtland, Ohio, to my home. Now, there was

s a man named Caird, who, previous to my visit to Canada,

had been over from England as a preacher, who pretended
to be sent of God by revelation. He had preached many
things, and told the people that God had raised up apostles in England, and organized the true church, and was
sending preachers from thence into all the world, to prepare the way for the coming of the Son of Man. This
man held to the sprinkling of infants, which he called
baptism. He also held that the church of which he was

 

a representative and messenger, included the national‘

Church of England; and all others who had been baptized (sprinkled), whether Catholic or Protestant. This
great, universal church was the true church, only needing
the restoration of apostles and gifts which had now commenced to be restored.

This man had great influence in Canada on his former
visit, and he had long been looked for to return to Toronto
on his second visit. The people were all expectation, and
very anxious that he should arrive in time to meet me before
I should return home; for many persons greatly wondered
that there should arise about the same time one church in
America and another in England, both professing apostolic
power and universal jurisdiction. Some of those who had
heard both of us, tried to think that both systems were
one and would run together. Others said they would wait
and see which serpent swa1loW.cd the other before they
would join either. Some aiiirmed that Mr. Caird would
never shrink from the investigation of anything, therefore,
‘he must embrace “ Mormonism ,-ll for it has only to be investigated to be appreciated. Others equally afiirmed that
Mr. Pratt never shrank from investigation, and, therefore,
they must meet each other; must come to an understanding; must become one, or else one of their systems must
be shown to be very erroneous; for these men have neither
of them ever found his master in any of the sects here

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 175

in Canada at any rate. Such is a specimen of the sayings
and feelings of an excited public, in view of the meeting
of two such men. On my own part, although I knew his
system was erroneous and not founded in truth, yet I had
formed a very favorable opinion of the man, and had made
up my mind to meet a fearless champion who would not
shrink one moment from a full and free investigation. Believing this, I felt in high hopes that he would be an instrument in the hands of God to receive and spread the
truth.

This man still lingered at Kingston, two hundred miles
distant, and did not come up to Toronto as expected. To
satisfy the anxiety of the people, I at length proposed in
our meeting one Sabbath, that I would take steamer the
next morning and go down to Kingston, and see this
strange man.

That same night I had a dream, as follows: I thought
I was in a vast wilderness of wild beasts of every description, among which was a species of elephant so large that
its trunk reached nearly to the tops of the tall trees, and
when he walked the earth trembled; the beasts of the
field fled from before him, and the trees were swayed on
either side of him as slender reeds. At this I was afraid,
and I wafted myself up by the power of the Spirit, and
sat in the top of a tall tree. As he approached, I reflected
as follows: Why should such a man as I fear? I have
any amount of power given me of God, I will, therefore,
descend to earth before him; for he can never harm me.
I accordingly descended. He considered this a. defiance on
my part, so he boasted that I had no power, and that I
could not stand before him.

 

At this I put forth my hand and caught him by the I

trunk, and lifting him from the ground by the power of
the Spirit, I dashed him to the ground a number of times;
at this he seemed to dwindle down to about the size of
a suckling calf, and finally turned into a serpent and

176 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

swelled out to the length of about a hundred feet, and
half ‘ the size of a manls body. He then spoke great
swelling words in defiance of my power; said it was not
the power of God, but only the power of a man; and he
continued to mock and defy me, saying, “If you have the
great power of God, why do you not pull me in pieces ‘W

At this I saw a great white stone, smooth and round
at the top, in the shape of the half of an egg, and
about six feet in diameter. The serpent coiled himself
around this stone, and professed to be fastened to it.
And he said: “ Now I will remain fast to this rock, and
give you a fair chance to pull me to pieces? I answered, “ you are not fastened to the rock, but will slip
from it the moment I pullil “ Nay," said he, “try me,
and see? I laid hold of him, and the same power came

. on me as before, but as I began to pull he slipped from

the rock. I then tried to fasten him to some weeds or
some rubbish» which was near, but the moment I pulled
he would slip from them; I could not, therefore, fasten
him to anything. I said to him, “ you will not remain
fastened to anything; how, then, can I pull you to pieces ‘Pl

Being a little at a loss to know what to do, I turned
to Elder Orson Hyde, who seemed to stand by, and said,
“Brother Orson, see those wide jaws and that small
neck; it is an excellent hold; seize him by the neck and
hold him fast, and, in the name of J csus, I will give an
almighty pull. He did so, and I pulled; the serpent then
dwindled down to the size of a small snake half a yard
in length, and crawled oil‘ and hid among the grass.

I awoke under the strong impression that the great
beast and the serpent represented Mr. Caird; and that
the rock was the true gospel, to which he pretended to
be fast. This impression was so different from the opinion
I had formed of the man, that I felt greatly disappointed.
I was not willing to believe the vision; I exclaimed in
the bitterness of sorrow and disappointment: “Is it pos 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 177

sible that this is Mr. Caird, so beloved, so revered as
a great and good man? I hardly dare believe it. “O
Lord, if this vision is of thee and its application, please
show me the interpretation of it in plainness, that I may
not err." I immediately fell asleep again and dreamed as
follows:

I thought I took steamer and arrived in Kingston at
early dawn. I thought I took up one of the principal
streets, directly northward from the water, and put up at
a house of entertainment. I then inquired for Mr. Caird,
and was told that he was on the same street near to
me. I saw him, and tried to tell him of the glorious fulness of the gospel. He immediately rejected, and refused
to hear me, and commenced to speak reproachfully of me
and the cause. I replied to ljm in the language of the
New Testament: “ Doth our law judge a man before it
hear him W He answered with a sneer: “I am perfectly
willing to judge Mormonism without hearing it; I would
not break my shins to hear it anyhow? I awoke a
swond time, feeling satisfied in regard to Mr. Caird.

I arose next morning and told the people that I now
knew Mr. Caird, that he was false, and would bitterly
and utterly refuse to investigate or hear the truth. I
told them I had no desire to go to see him, for ‘the Lord
had shown him to me in a dream, and I knew more about
him than all of them. This, however, they could not
realize; they assured me that he was no such man; and,
as they had found me the means to go and see'him, and
had chosen a man to go with me, they rather insisted
on my going. “ Wellfl said I, “I will go, but you will
find the matter just as I tell youil So I went, accompanied by a Mr. Goodson.

We landed in Kingston at early dawn, went up the
street as I had dreamed, took lodgings, and then inquired
for Mr. Caird, and was answered that he was near us

on the same street. I wrote him a line seeking an in12

 

178 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

terview. No answer was returned. We waited all day,
and then attended his meeting at evening. He preached
well, and showed great intelligence. I could detect nothing to condemn. As he was about closing, I prayed the
Lord to cause him to show himself, that I might discern
his spirit. On a sudden he broke oil‘ from his subject,

. and commenced railing against Mormonism at a most horrible rate. He said he had that day received a line from
one of these imposters, calling him brother, and professing to be of the new church, which had been lately organized in England by the spirit of revelation; “ by this
false professionfl he said, “they had deceived some of his
friends in Toronto? Now all these things were lies.

I arose in the meeting and asked to speak, but did
not obtain privilege. I, Jiowever, told the people that
Mr. Caird had lied; he had received no line from an
Elder of the Church of the Saints calling him brother, or
professing to be of his new church, prganized in England; I defied him to produce such a line. All the answer. the multitude returned to this was to hiss, and to
cry, “Gold Bible! Gold Bible !—New Revelation P etc.

Next morning we published a printed handbill with a
statement of his lying, a copy of the line I had really
sent to him, and a statement of our doctrine as LatterDay Saints. This we circulated freely in his next meeting, challenging him to refute the charge, or to meet us
in debate.

We could draw no answer from him. We circulated
the handbills in the streets by hundreds, and then sent
plenty of them by mail to our friends in Toronto. The
bill was headed: “ Doth our law judge a man before it hear
him W Our friends in Toronto were astonished» above
measure at the confirmation of the dream, in which God
by his servant had revealed a mauls spirit, and clearly
exposed the heart of a wicked man whom his best acquaintances were unable to discern. Mr. Oaird, on being

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 179

exposed at Kingston, fled to Toronto, and there commenced preaching to crowds in the Court House; but
there the newsboys met him in the face, and circulated
the handbills which we had sent, showing him to be a
liar, and he utterly unable to refute or gainsay it. He
threatened prosecution; but the boys, nothing daunted,
continued to offer the bills gratis in his face to those
who went in to hear.

We returned to Toronto, and his old friends urged him
to meet me; but he could not be prevailed on to do so,
although his discourses were full, of opposition, and misrepresentation of the principles of the Saints. I now
applied to Wm. Lyon McKenzie, a printer and editor, in
King street, for some large public halls or rooms of his,
which would hold hundreds of people. He gave us the
use of them, and we put out a bill, advertizing two
meetings, and pledging to the public that we would prove
to a demonstration that Mr. Caird, who was now preaching in this city, was a false teacher, whom God had never

sent, and that no believer in the Bible, who listened with
attention, should go away unconvinced of that fact, or the

truth of the doctrine of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-Day Saints. In the handbill Mr. Caird was again
invited to attend. Long before the. hour of the first appointment had arrived the house was thronged to that degree that ten
dollars was in vain urged upon any one who would
vacate their seat, even on the stairs which led to the hall.
I took for a text the saying of the Apostle John: “ Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of
Christ, the same hath not God." I then reviewed the
doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles in detail, showing
what were the ordinances, gifts, powers, precepts, promises
and commandments of Jesus Christ-, as contrasted with the
public teachings and doings of this man, Caird.

The people were astonished at the review and contrast,

180 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

and were apparently all satisfied that we had fuljllled the
pledge to a demonstration. The next evening the house
was as crowded as the first; all listened with profound
attention. We opened the Scriptures of the prophets, and
many were enlightemul. In these two meetings Elder
Hyde was present, and presided as chairman. Thus was
fulfilled to the letter this strange and wonderful double
dream. And thus the truth prevailed over the counterfeit, while the peoplels minds were settled as to which
was the Moses and which was the magician.

Mr. Caird retired from the country, returned home to
Scotland, where I found him ten years afterwards living
in private life and of no notoriety.

The truth had now triumphed in Canada, as was predicted on my head on starting from Kirtland, Ohio. Several branches of the Church had been organized, and
Elders had been ordained to take care of the flocks
and to continue the work. I took an affectionate leave
of my friends in that country, and, with my wife, returned home. Where I had labored, the Lord had opened
the hearts of the Saints suiiiciently to pay up my debts,
as had been predicted; and at the turn of the season,
less than a twelvemonth from the date of brother Kimballls prophecy, my wife bore me a son, and we called
his name Parley. He was born early in the morning
or March 25th, 1837.

 

 

CHAPTER XX.

Two Items of Prophecy :—Death of my Wife :—An Open Vision Forewarning Her of Her Death :—Burial :—Description of Her Person and
Character :—Reflections :—Return to Canada :—Se1ection for an English
Mission :—Jarrings in the Church :—Apostacy :—Temptation :—De1iverance :—Mission to New York City :—The Voice of Warning :—Its
Success :—Eng1ish Mission :—Remarkable Prophecy :—Sevcral Instances
of Healing :—Spread of the Work in the City and Country.

HERE were but two points in this extraordinary
prophecy which now remained unfulfillal. One of
these was that from the results of this Canada Mission
the work should spread into England, and a great work
there would be the consequence. The other was that I
should eventually be so rich and have so much money
that I would loath the counting thereof. ‘

My dear wife had now lived to accomplish her destiny; and when the child was dressed, and she had
looked upon it and embraced it, she ceased to live in
the flesh. Her death happened about three hours after
the birth of this child of promise. A few days previous
to her death she had a vision in open day while sitting
in her room. She was overwhelmed or immersed in a
pillar of tire, which seemed to fill the whole room, as if
it would. consume it and all things therein; and the
Spirit whispered to her mind, saying: “Thou art baptized
with tire and the Holy Ghost!‘ It also intimated to her
that ‘she should have the privilege of departing from this
world of sorrow and pain, and of going to the Paradise
of rest as soon as she had fultilled the prophecy in re 

l32 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

lation to the promised son. This vision was repeated on
the next day at the same hour, viz. :—twelve o?clock.
She was overwhelmed with a joy and peace indescribable,
and seemed changed in her whole nature from that time
forth. She longed to be gone, and anticipated the time
as a hireling counts the days of his servitude, or the
prisoner the term of his imprisonment.

She was buried in the churchyard near the Temple in
Kirtland, Ohio. Many hundreds attended the funeral and
wept sorely, for she was extensively known. Her trials,
for the gospel's sake, while her husband had been absent
from time to time on distant missions, her lingering sickness of years, her barrenness, her miraculous cure, her
conception of the promised child, were all matters of
note in the Church far and near. But she had gone
behind the veil to rest, where the wicked cease from
troubling and the weary are at rest; while I was left
to toil and struggle alone. My grief, and sorrow, and
loneliness I shall not attempt to describe.

My son was put to nurse on the breast of a sister
Allen, who had just then lost an infant. For the satisfaction of our posterity I will here attempt some description of my wifels person and qualities.

She was tall, of a slender frame, her face of an oval
form, eyes large and of a dark color, her forehead lofty,
clear complexion, hair black, smooth and glossy. She was
of a mild and affectionate disposition and full of energy,
perseverance, industry and cheerfulness when not borne
down with sickness. In order, neatness and refinement of
taste and habit she might be said to excel. She was an
atfectionate and dutiful wife, an exemplary Saint, and,
through much tribulation, she has gone to the world of
spirits to meet a glorious resurrection and an immortal
crown and kingdom.

Farewell, my dear Thankful, thou wife of my youth, and‘
mother of my first born; the beginning of my strength 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 183

farewell. - Yet a few more lingering years of sorrow, pain
and toil, and I shall be with thee, and clasp thee to my
bosom, and thou shalt sit down on my throne, as a queen
and priestess unto thy lord, arrayed in white ‘robes of
dazzling splendor, and decked with precious stones and
gold, while thy queen sisters shall minister before thee and
bless thee, and thy sons and daughters innumerable shall
call thee blessed, and hold thy name in everlasting remembrance.

In the spring of 1837, soon after the death of my wife,
I returned to Canada, to visit the Saints, and to confer
on the subject of a mission to England. Several of the
Saints in Canada were English, who had friends in England. Letters had already been sent to them with information of the rise of the Church, and of its principles.
Several of the Canadian Elders felt a desire to go on a
mission to their friends in that country.

At length, Joseph Fielding, Isaac Russell, John Goodson
and John Snider, of the Canada Elders, were selected
for a mission to England. Elders H. C. Kimball and
Orson Hyde, of the quorum of the Twelve, were selected
to go at the head of the mission, and Elder Willard
Richards was appointed to accompany them.

.About this time, after I had returned from Canada, there
were jarrings and discords in the Church at Kirtland, and
many fell away and became enemies and apostates. There
were also envyings, lyings, strifes and divisions, which
caused much trouble and sorrow. By such spirits I was
also accused, misrepresented and abused. And at one‘
time, I also was overcome by the same spirit in a great
measure, and it seemed as if the very powers of darkness

_which war against the Saints were let loose upon me.

But the Lord knew my faith, my zeal, my integrity of
purpose, and he gave me the victory.

I went to brother Joseph Smith in tears, and, with a
broken heart and contrite spirit, .-confessed wher. in I had

 

134 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

erred in spirit, murmured, or done or said amiss. He
frankly forgave me, prayed for me and blessed me. Thus,
by experience, I learned more fully to discern and to
contrast the two spirits, and to resist the one and cleave
to the other. And, being tempted in all points, even as
others, I learned how to bear with, and excuse, and succor
those who are tempted.

Late in July I arrived in the City of New York, on a
mission, took lodgings, and commenced to preach and write.
My first production in that city was a book of upwards
of two hundred pages, entitled the “ Voice of Warning."
The first edition of this work consisted of four thousand
copies; it has since been published and re-published in
America and Europe, till some forty or ilfty thousand
copies have not been suiiicient to supply the demand.
Thousands date their conversion to the fulness of the
gospel to the reading of that book.

While I was thus engaged, the English mission, under
brothers Kimball and Hyde, began to prosper exceedingly.
It first commenced in Preston, where some of the friends
of the Canada Elders had already had some information
of it by letters from Canada. From this beginning it
spread, till now, 1854, it shows for itself whether brother
Kimballls prophecy was fulfilled, which said to me the
year before, that a great work should be done in Canada
under my hand, and that from thence it should spread
into England, and a great work should be done there.

Thus is completed, all but one item, a chain of prophecy, which may, perhaps, be set down as one among the
most extraordinary in the annals of history. It is extraordinary, whether we look at the varied scenery, the
wide and complicated ileld of action, the clearness and
precision of its numerous items and specifications, the lack
of natural probability of its fuliilment, or the precision
and exactness with which it was progressively fulfilled in
every item. Having thus proved the merits of brother

 

AUTOBIOG-RAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 185

Kimball as a prophet, I look for the time when I shall
possess great riches, and even handle money till the
counting thereof will be a burthen. I look for this with
all the certainty with which any person can anticipate
anything in the future.

But to return to my own narrative. Of all the places
in which the English language is spoken, I found the City
of New York to be the most difficult as to access to the
minds or attention of the people. From July to January we
preached, advertised, printed, published, testified, visited,
talked, prayed, and wept in vain. To all appearance there
was no interest or impression on the minds of the people in regard to the fulness of the gospel. There was
one member of the Church of the Saints living there,
whose name was Elijah Fordham; he was an Elder, and
assisted me. We had baptized about six members, and
organized a little branch, who. were accustomed to meet
in a small upper room in Goerck street; sometimes two
or three others met with us. We had hired chapels and
advertised, but the people would not hear, and the few
who came went away without being interested. So we
had been forced to give them up, after spending our
money and strength in vain.

We had retired to our private room up stairs with the
few members we had, to hold a last prayer meeting, as I

 

was about taking leave for New Orleans. We had prayed _

all round in t-iu-n, when, on a sudden, the room was filled
with the Holy Spirit, and so was each one present. We
began to speak in tongues and prophecy. Many - marvellous things were manifested which I cannot write ; but the
principal burthen of the prophecyings was concerning New
York city, and our mission there.

The Lord said that he had heard our prayers, beheld our
labors, diligence, and long suffering towards that city; and
that he had seen our tears. Our prayers were heard, and
our labors and sacrifices were accepted. We should tarry

186 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. ‘PRATT.

in the city, and go not thence as yet; for the Lord had
many people in that city, and he had now come by the
power of His Holy Spirit to gather them into his fold.
His angels should go before us and cooperate. with us.
His Holy Spirit should give the people visions and dreams
concerning us and the work of the Lord; and He would
make bare his arm to heal the sick and confirm the Word
by signs following; and from that very day forward we
should have plenty of friends, money to pay our debts
with the publishers; means to live, and crowds to hear
us. And there should be more doors open for preaching
than we could fill; crowds, who could not get in, should
stand in the streets and about the entrance to try to
hear us; and we should know that the Almighty could
open a door and no man could shut it.

As these things were manifested in power and the
demonstration of the Spirit, we could not doubt them.
So we gave up going to New Orleans, and concluded to
stay; but we were almost ready to say in our hearts, like
one of old: “If the Lord should make windows in Heaven
could these things be Vi

Now there was in this little meeting a man named David
Rogers, whose heart was touched. He, being a chairmaker, fitted up a large room, and seated it with the chairs
of his warehouse, and invited us to preach in the same.

.This room was crowded. He then joined with one of our

members, who was a joiner, and rented a small place, and
seated it for a regular place of meeting; this was generally
crowded. In the meantime, a Methodist clergyman came
to hear me, whose name was Cox. He invited me to his
house to preach, near East River; he and household were
obedient to the faith, with many of the members of his
society. VVhile preaching, a lady solicited me to preach in
her house in Willett street; “forfl said she, “I had a dream
of you and of the new Church the other night." Another
lady wished me to preach in her house, in Grand street.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 187

In the meantime I was invited by the Free Thinkers to
preach, or give a course‘ of lectures, in Tammany Hall. In
short, it was not three weeks from the delivery of the prophecies in the upper room till we had iifteen preaching
places in the city, all of which were tilled to overflowing.
We preached about eleven times a week, besides visiting
from house to house. VVe soon commenced baptizing, and
continued doing so almost daily during the winter and
spring. One lady, who had been four years under the
doctorls care with a crippled leg, arose and walked, with
her leg instantly restored whole, even as the other. Her
physician was immediately dismissed, and was very angry,
because we had spoiled his patronage. He even threatened
to sue us. Another lady, who had lain in her bed four
years with the dumb palsy, arose and walked. She had
not, previous to our laying hands on her, been able to stir
a finger, or a toe, on her right side for about four years ';
so said the family, and so she herself testified. In this
case her physician, and also some religious ministers, who
called to see her, glorified God, acknowledged His hand,
and exhorted her to persevere in the faith.

A child of Mr. Wandle Mace, of No. 13 Bedford street,
was healed of brain fever in the last stage, when the
doctors had given it over, and the kindred and neighbors
had gathered in to see it (lie. I laid my hands on it,
in the presence of them all, and it was ‘healed, and in a
few hours took nourishment, and commenced to play and
run about the floor. In the same house, in an upper
chamber, lay a woman, by the name of Dexter, sick, who
had not left her room, nor scarcely her bed, for some six
months; she was at the point of death, and her babe also,

. who had taken the disease from her. Her mother, who had

the care of her, was present when the child was healed,
and she ran up stairs and told the woman that there were
men below who healed the sick, as in days of old, by the
laying on of hands in the name of Jesus. The woman

 

188 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

exclaimed: “ Thank God, then I can be healedf She sent
for us, and was from that hour restored to health, and the
child also. She walked about two miles to the East River
and was baptized, and then walked home again—it being a
very wet day with snow and rain, and the sidewalks about
shoe deep in snow and mud. After these three miracles
of healing had been witnessed in that house in Bedford
street, six persons who witnessed them were baptized, viz.:
Wandle Mace and wife, Theodore Curtis and wife, and the
sick woman and her mother, before named.

During our stay in New York I made frequent visits to
the country, and to other towns. Branches of the Church
were formed at Sing Sing, and in Jersey, and also in
Brooklyn and various other parts of Long Island. Some
members were also baptized in Holiston, Mass.

On May 9th I received the hand of Mary Ann Frost,
daughter of Aaron Frost, of Bethel, Oxford County, Maine,
in marriage. She was the widow of Nathan Steams,
and had one daughter, about four years of age. 9

 

 

CHA-PTER XXI.

Remove to Missouri :—National Anniversary at Far West :—Corner Stone of
a Temple :—Insurrections :—Del'ence :—Attack on De Witt, Carroll
County :—Mob Chaplain :—Surrender and Flight of the Citizens of De
Witt :—Action of the Governor :—General Defence :—Battle of Crooked
River :—Death of Colonel Patten :—Defeuce Construed into Murder and
Treason :—Muster of State Forces Against the “. Mormons," with Orders
for Extermination :—General Lucas, with Four Thousand Men, Menaces
Far West.

N April, 1838, I took leave of New York, and, with a
small colony, emigrated once more to Missouri. We settled in Caldwell County in May. Here I again commenced
anew; built a house and made a farm. I also devoted
much of my time to the ministry; I visited many di1i'erent neighborhoods, and was everywhere received with hospitality, and listened to with interest and attention.

On the 4th of July, 1838, thousands of the citizens who
belonged to the Church of the Saints assembled at the
City of Far West, the county seat of Caldwell, in order to
celebrate our nationls birth. We erected a tall standard,
on which was hoisted our national colors, the stars- and
stripes, and the bold eagle of American liberty. Under its
waving folds we laid the corner stone of a Temple of God,
and dedicated the land and ourselves and families to Him
who had preserved us in all our troubles. An address‘ was
then delivered by S. Rigdon, in which was portrayed in lively colors the oppression which we had suffered at the hands
of our enemies. We then and there declared our constitutional rights as American citizens, and manifested our deter190 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

mination to resist, with our utmost endeavors from that
time forth, all oppression, and to maintain our rights and
our freedom, according to the holy principles of liberty, as
guaranteed to every person by the Constitution and laws of
our country.

This declaration was received with shouts of hosannah to
God and the Lamb, and with many long cheers by the
assembled thousands, who were determined to yield their
rights no more, unless_ compelled by superior power.

Soon after these things the war clouds began again to
lower with dark and threatening aspect. Those who had combined against the laws in the adjoining counties, had long

watched our incrusin g power and prosperity with jealousy,
and with greedy and avaricious eyes. It was‘ a common
boast that, as soon as we had completed our extensive improvements, and made a plentiful crop, they would drive
us from the State, and once more enrich themselves with
the spoils.

Accordingly, at an election held in Davies County, a
portion of these bandits undertook to prevent the members
of the Church of the Saints from voting—forcin g them
from the poll box, and threatening to kill whoever should
attempt to vote. As some voters were attacked they defended themselves, knocked down several of their opponents,
gained the victory, and cast in their votes.

This was a pretext for a general rising of the insurrectionists in all the adjoining counties. They were alarmed
for ‘fear the “ Momnonsf as they called them, should become
so formidable as to maintain their rights and liberties, insomuch that they could no more drive and plunder them.
Public meetings were held in Carroll, Saline, and other
counties; in which resolutions were passed and published,
openly declaring the t-reasonable and murderous intention
of driving the citizens belonging to the Church from their
counties, and, if possible, from the State.

Resolutions to this effect were published in the journals

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 191

of Upper Missouri, and this without a single remark of
disapprobation. Nay, more: this murderous gang, when
assembled in arms and painted like Indian warriors, and
when openly committing murder, robbery, house burning, and
every crime known to the laws, were denominated citizens,
whites, etc., in most of the journals of the State. While
those who stood firm to the laws of the land, and only
defended themselves, and their homes and country, were
denominated “ Mormons/l in contradistinction to the appellation of “ citizens/l “ whites," etc., as if we had been some
savage tribe, or some colored race of foreigners.

In pursuance of the resolutions thus passed and published, a formidable banditti were soon assembled under
arms, to the amount of several hundred, and rendezvoused
in Davies County. Here they commenced tiring upon our
citizens, plundering, and taking peaceable citizens prisoners.
The people of the Church made no resistance, except to
assemble on their own ground for defence. They also made
oath before the District Judge, Austin A. King, to the above
outrages.

One thousand men were then ordered into service, under
the command of Major-General Atchison and BrigadierGenerals Parks and Doniphan. These marched to Davies
County and remained in service thirty days. But, judging
from the result, they had no intention of coming in contact
with the mob, but only to make a show of defending one
neighborhood, while the mob were allowed to attack another.
The gang now withdrew from Davies County and proceeded
to De Witt, Carroll County. Here they laid siege for several days, and subsisted by plunder and robbery, watching
every opportunity to tire upon our citizens.

At this time they had one or more pieces of artillery,
in addition to small arms and ammunition in abundance. A
Presbyterian priest, “ Rev} Sashel Woods, served as chaplain to the gang, and said prayers in the camp evening
and morning. They succeeded in killing a number of citi192 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

zens in and about De Witt. They also turned a gentleman,
named Smith Humphrey, and his wife and children out of
doors, when sick, and setting fire to the house, burned it
to ashes before their eyes. At length they succeeded in
driving every citizen from the place, at the sacrifice of
everything which they could not take with them.

This happened during a cold, stormy time in October;
and, as many of the citizens were sickly, and robbed of
shelter and everything comfortable, they came near perishing. Some of them, in fact, did perish before they arrived
in Caldwell, a distance of sixty miles. Here the survivors
were hospitably taken in by their brethren. The militia,
under General Parks, made some show of trying to prevent these outrages; but all in vain. At length the
General informed the citizens that his forces were so small,
and many of them so much in favor of the insurrectionists, that it was useless to look any longer to them
for protection. '

Several messages were also sent to the Governor, Lilburn W. Boggs, the old mob-leader, imploring protection.
But he was utterly deaf to everything which called for
the protection of the “ Mormom/i as he called us. But,
on the ‘contrary, he harkened to the insinuations of the
mob which were without shadow of foundation. At one
time he called out an army, and put himself at their
head to march against the “ Mormons? But, as he approached the upper country with this formidable force of
several thousand men, he was oilicially notified that the
“ Mormons ll were not in a state of insurrection, but were
the victims of those who were so, and that they needed
his help.

His Excellency then disbanded his forces, and returned
to J eiferson City, to await till the mobs should compel the
“Mormonsli to some act which might be considered illegal,
which would give him some pretext for driving them from
the State.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 193

After the evacuation of De Witt, when our citizens were
oilicially notified that they must protect themselves, and
expect no more protection from any department of the
State Government, they assembled in Far West to the
number of one thousand men, or thereabout, and resolved
to defend their rights to the last. A call was made upon
every person who could bear arms to come forward in
defence of our houses, homes, wives and children, and the
cause of our country and our God. In the meantime the
bandits, elated with success and emboldened by the negligence of every department of the State Government, were
increasing in numbers daily. They were concentrating in
Davies County, with artillery and military stores, with
open threats that they would now drive the citizens from
Davies and Caldwell Counties. '

In their maruading expeditions they took a number of
citizens prisoners. Among these was Mr. Amasa ‘Lyman,
a minister of the gospel, and an excellent citizen of
Caldwell County. They kept him prisoner for a number of
days, while his family were in suspense and knew not his
fate. They abused him in various ways, and held frequent
consultations to kill him; but at length he was set at
liberty.

The people of Davies County assembled several hundred men for defence. Several parties of the banditti
were met, disarmed and dispersed. A detachment under
Colonel D. W. Patten, marched against their main body
with a posse of about one hundred men, met and dispersed them, with the loss of their artillery and some
military stores. Another party were ' dispersed and disarmed by the Sheriff of Caldwell County and his posse,
as they were on the march through that county to reinforce the banditti of Davies.

While these transactions were going forward, small parties of the enemy were busily engaged among the settlements, in plundering and burning houses; driving women
13

 

19-1: AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

and children from their homes to perish with hunger and
cold, and robbing them of beds, bedding, furniture, wearing apparel, etc., etc. Hundreds were thus compelled to
iiee to the cities and strongholds. Many women and
children came in at the dead hours of the night, and
in the midst of dreadful storms of rain and snow, in
which they came near perishing.

While these things were transpirin g in Davies, Caldwell was threatened from every quarter. Her citizens were
driven from her frontiers, and came pouring into the town
of Far West, from day to day, with women, children,
goods, provisions, etc.; in short, with everything moveable
which they had time to bring. Lands and crops were
abandoned to the enemy. The citizens were under arms
from day to day, and a strict military guard was maintained every night. Men slept in their clothes, with arms
by their sides, and ready to muster at a given signal at
any hour of the night.

During this state of alarm guns were tired and the
signal drum beat in the middle of a dark and gloomy
night of October. The citizens came running together with
arms in hand. An express had arrived from the south
part of the county, stating that a party of the enemy
were plundering houses, carrying off prisoners, killing cattle, and ordering families out of their houses, on pain of
having them burned over their heads. A portion of the
militia, under Captain Durphy, went with a deputy sheriff
to the scene of riot. I was one of the posse, the whole
consisting of about sixty men.

This company was soon under way, having to ride
through extensive prairies a distance of some twelve miles.
The night was dark, the distant plains far and wide were
illuminated by blazing fires, immense columns of smoke
were seen rising in awful majesty, as if the world was
on fire. This scene of grandeur can only be comprehended
by those acquainted with scenes of prairie burning; as

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 195

the fire sweeps over millions of acres of dry grass in
the fall season, and leaves a smooth, black surface divested
of all vegetation. v

The thousand meteors, blazing in the distance like the
camp-fires of some war host, threw a iltful gleam of light
upon the distant sky, which many might have mistaken
for the Aurora Borealis. This scene, added to the silence
of midnight, the rumbling sound of the tramping steeds
over the hard and dried surface of the plain, the clanking of swords in their scabbards, the occasional gleam of
bright armor in the flickering flrelight, the gloom of sufrounding darkness, and the unknown destiny of the expedition, or even of the people who sent it forth; all combined to impress the mind with deep and solemn thoughts,
and to throw a romantic vision over the imagination,
which is not often experienced, except in the poetls dreams,
or in the wild imagery of sleeping fancy.

In this solemn procession we moved on for some two
hours, when it was supposed we were in the neighborhood
of danger. We were then ordered _to dismount and leave
our horses with a guard. This done, we proceeded on foot
for a mile or two in search of the enemy. We had not
procecxled far when, as we entered the wilderness, we
were suddenly fired upon by an unknown enemy in ambush. One of our little number fell at the first fire,
being mortally wounded; his name was Obanyon. At a
short distance we could now behold the camp-fires of the
enemy.- It was now dawn of day in the eastern horizon,
but darkness still hovered over the scenes of conflict.
Orders were issued to form in the brush, and under cover
of the trees, which was instantly done. The tire now
became general on both sides, and the whole wilderness
seemed one continued echo of the report of the deadly
rifle. After a few rounds of discharges, orders were given
to charge the enemy in the camp. As we rushed upon
them the strife became deadly, and several fell on both

 

196 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

sides. At this instant a ball pierced the brave Colonel,
David Patten, who was then at my side, and I saw him
fall. Being on the eve of victory, I dared not stop to
look after his fate, or that of others, but rushed into the
enemy's camp. This was located on the immediate banks
of Crooked River, which was here several rods wide, and
not fordable. The enemy, being hard pushed, ilung themselves into the stream, and struggled for the other shore.
Those who reached it soon disappeared.

The firing now ceased, and the wilderness resounded with
the watchword, “ God and Liberty?

Our little band, which had been thrown into some disorder, were instantly formed, and their pieces reloaded.
This done, a detachment surveyed the field, to look after
the wounded. I turned Gideon Carter, who was lying
on his face, and saw him die. His face was so marred
and disfigured with Wounds and blood that I did not
recognize him then, but learned afterwards that we had
mistaken him for one of the enemy, and left him on the
ground in mistake. I next found David Patten, whom,
a few minutes previously, I had seen fall. He could
speak, but was lying on his side, pale and almost dying,
a ball having pierced the lower part of his body. Many
others were wounded, and some dangerously.

The enemy had left their horses, saddles, camp and
baggage, in the confusion of their flight. We harnessed
some of their horses and placed them before a wagon,
arranged blankets therein, on which we laid those who
were not able to mount a horse; this done, our whole
troop mounted the horses we had taken and formed in
front and rear of the wagon which bore the wounded.
We then moved slowly back to the guard and horses we
had left. Here we halted and readjusted the wounded.
It was an awful sight to see them pale and helpless, and
hear their groans. There were about six of our men
wounded, and one left dead on the ground. The enemy

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PLRLEY P. PRATT. 197

suffered a similar loss, besides their camp, and many of
their arms and military stores.

We ascertained from the prisoners whom we rescued, that
the enemy consisted of about sixty marauders, headed by a
Methodist preacher, named Bogart. Our posse who were
actually engaged, could not have been more than fifty.
At the commencement of the engagement there were three
of our fellow citizens held as prisoners in their camp;
they had been kidnapped from their peaceful homes the
day previous. Two of these made their escape at the
commencement of the engagement; the third was shot
through the body in attempting to run to our lines, but
fortunately recovered.

Having now arranged everything to the best advantage
for the wounded, we made slowly on towards Far West.
When we came within five miles of the city our express
had reached there with the news of the battle, and we
were met by a surgeon and others for our relief. Among
those who met us here was the wife of the pale and
dying Patten. Our wounded were now taken into a
house, and their wounds dressed. As Mrs. Patten entered
the room, and cast her eyes upon the pale and ghastly
features of her husband, she burst into tears, exclaiming‘:
“O God! 0 my husband! How pale you look W

He was still able to speak, but he died that evening
in the triumphs of faith. The young Obanyon also died
about the same time. The others recovered of their
wounds, but one of them named Hendrix is still a cripple.
Patten and Obanyon were buried together, under military
honors; a whole people, as it were, followed them to the
grave. All wept, whose feelings were not too intense to
find vent in tears. He was the only member of the
quorum of the Twelve who had as yet found a martyrls
grave. He was a great and good man, and one who
chose to lay down his life for the cause of truth and
right; for this privilege he had diligently sought and

198 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

prayed; “for,ll said he, “ I had rather die than live to
see it thus in my countryll

But, to return to the main thread of my narrative:
having conveyed the wounded to their place of hospitality, the posse hastened to Far West, and delivered the
spoils of the enemy to the colonel of the regiment, who
afterwards delivered them to the higher civil or military
authorities of the State. _

These several defeats of the insurrectionists in Davies
County, as well as in Caldwell County, checked for a
time their ruinous ravages. They saw that it was impossible to conquer a people who were lighting for their
homes, their wives and children, as well as for their
country and conscience, unless they could come against
them with some show of authority; for it had become an
established fact that the people of the Saints never resisted authority, however abused.

The next exertion of the enemy was to spread lies and
falsehoods of the most alarming character. All our acts
of defence were construed into insurrection, treason, murder and plunder. In short, the public were deceived by
bigotry, priestcraft, and a corrupt press, and made to
look upon all our acts of defence precisely as they would
look upon the same acts performed, without cause or
provocation, upon peaceable citizens. Murderous gangs
were construed into peaceable militia in the State. service,
and .to resist them was, on the part of the Saints, murder, treason and robbery. And, finally, the whole was
treated abroad as the “Mormon z'n.9*urrection,"—-“ Mormon
warfl etc. ,

And, as if this were not enough, parties set lire to their
own houses, or that of their neighbors, and then laid it
to the Saints. VVhole neighborhoods were falsely alarmed,
or rather really alarmed, by the doings of these bandits;
and in their fright they tied to more distant places of
security, and clamored loudly to the State authorities for

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 199

protection from the “ Mormon.s,l' whom they represented as
burning, plundering, and destroying all before them. While
they were simply standing on their own ground and maintaining the defensive, and this, too, in the last extreme,
and not till they were abandoned by every department of
the State Government.

This flame was greatly assisted by several dissenters
from the Church through fear, or for love of power and
gain. These dissenters became even more false, hardened,
and bloodthirsty than those who had never known the
way of righteousness. Many of them joined the enemy,
and were the leaders in all manner of lying, murder and
plunder. The Governor and ex-mobber, Lilburn W. Boggs,
who had long sought some opportunity to destroy us, and
drive us from the State, now issued an order for some
ten thousand troops to be mustered into service and
marched to the tield against the “ Mormons." He gave the
command of this formidable force to General Clark, who
lived, perhaps, a hundred and fifty miles or more from
the scene of trouble. The order was expressly to exterminate the “ Mormonsfl or drive them from the State.

It said nothing of criminals; it made no allusion to
punishing crime and protecting innocence; it was sufficient
to be called a “Mormotnil A peaceable family just emigrating, or passing through the country; a missionary going
or coming on his peaceable errand of mercy; an aged
soldier of the American revolution on his death bed, or
leaning on his staif in the chimney corner; a widow with
her babes; the tender wife, or helpless orphan; all were
included in this order of wholesale extermination or banishment. It was enough that they believed as Mormon did;
or that they were members of the Church of the Saints.

So did the order read, and so it was construed by the
oiilccrs and soldiers entrusted with its execution. On the
other hand, all the bandits, murderers, robbers, thieves, and
house burners who had mobbed our people for the five years

 

200 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

previous, were now converted into orderly, loyal, patriotic
State militia, and mustered into service under pay, or suffered to murder people of every age and sex, and plunder
them on their own hook wherever they choose, provided
they were considered “ Mormons."

While General Clark was mustering his forces for this
wholesale murder and treason, Major General D. Lucas and
Brigadier General Moses Wilson, who were well known as
the old leaders of the former outrages in Jackson County,
under this same Boggs—being nearer the scene of action,
and wishing to share the plunder and immortalize their
names-—put themselves at the head of all the old mobbers
of Jackson County they could muster, and all those bandits who had more lately infested the counties of Carroll,
Davies and Caldwell, and such other militia as they could
muster, and marched directly for the City of Far VVest,
where they arrived while General Clark and his forces
were several days journey from the scene of action. The
army of Lucas, thus mustered and marched, consisted of
some three or four thousand men.

In the meantime the Governofs orders and these military
movements were kept an entire secret from the citizens of
Caldwell and Davies, who were suffering all this oppression
from lawless outrages; even the mail was withheld from
Far West. We had only heard that large bodies of armed
men were approaching from the south, and we had sent
a hundred and fifty men with a flag of truce to make
inquiries. While they were absent on this mission an
alarm came to town that the whole county to the south
was filled with armed men, who were murdering, plundering, and taking peaceful citizens prisoners in their own
houses. On the receipt of this intelligence every man flew
to arms for the protection of our city.

It was now towards evening, and we had heard nothing
from the reconnoitering company who went south in the
morning. While we stood in our armor, gazing to the

 

AUTC-BIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 201

south in anxious suspense, we beheld an army of cavalry,
with a long train of baggage wagons advancing over the
hills, at two miles distance. At first we conjectured it
might be our little troop with the flag of truce; but we
soon saw that there were thousands of them. Our next
thought was that it might be some friendly troops sent
for our protection; and then again we thought it might
be a concentration of all the bandit forces combinal for
our destruction.

At all events, there was no time to be lost; for, although
our force then present did not exceed five hundred men,
yet we did not intend that they should enter the town
without giving some account of themselves. We accordingly marched out upon the plains on the south of the city
and formed in order of battle. O11r line of infantry extended
near half a mile. A small company of horse was posted on
our right wing on a commanding eminence, and another
small company in the rear of our main body, intended as
a kind of reserve.

By this time the sun was near setting, and the advance
of the unknown army had come within plain view, at less
than one mile distant. On seeing our forces presenting
a small but formidable front, they came to a halt, and
formed along the borders of a stream called Goose Creek.

Both parties sent out a white flag, which met between
the armies. Our messenger demanded to know who they
were, and what were their intentions! The reply was:
“We want three persons out of the city before we massacre the rest W This was a very alarming and unexpected answer. But they were soon ' prevailed on to suspend hostilites till morning, by which time we were in
hopes to receive some further and more satisfactory information. The enemy, under the command of Major
General D. Lucas, of Jackson County mob memory, then
commenced their encampment for the night. Our troops
continued under arms during the night. The company of

202 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

a hundred and fifty soon returned from the south, informing us that they had been hemmed in by the enemy
during the day, and only escaped by their superior
knowledge of the ground.

We also sent an express to Davies County, and by
morning were reinforced by quite a number of troops,
under the command of Colonel L. White. In the mean
time a noted company of banditti, under the command of
Cornelius Gillum, who had long infested our borders, and
been notorious for their murders and daring robberies, and
who painted themselves as Indian warriors, came pouring
in from the west to strengthen the camp of the enemy.

Another company of murderers came in from Carroll
County, and were taken into the ranks of Lucas, after
murdering some eighteen or twenty of our citizens (men,
women and children) at Haun's Mill, of which particulars will be given hereafter. Thus both parties were
considerably reinforced during the night. The citizens of
Far West being determined, if attacked, to defend their
homes, wives and children to the last, spent the night
in throwing up a temporary breastwork of building timber, logs, rails, floor plank, etc.

In the morning the south side of the city was thus fortified, and also a considerable portion of the east and

west sides—thc whole line extending a mile and a. half.

..\'-__x,\ \  ''—‘;'-‘.'x- __ /7  , , /if} 11*‘ If
...-/,:;s. W F '1 I./*" - J"-3 K‘ *‘/-".‘_-.'-~.=-‘.—- ‘I ~ ‘~*“,~ ".::«—-~ 4 ‘rs  . ‘*~ :T~ , "9
__.__ __ ‘Ni __ - 1 '3 _I_ ' I ‘:.l - J ‘u_‘_" I
.«r 43.1,; .J —— _ A AU ~. $4
1', 1-4 mu} *7 P_;-— T \ I V  L I l :1"; i\\
 '*// —' \ \ ux‘ -- W _‘1-3'-“----43; ‘E ‘H “Y. )5‘? I H 'a- ..

iii -u-_|f \‘/..._ /‘kg ....r-——-..,_;‘ Y 30 J ;-‘§_:f":(‘J' ‘* 3%‘

 

CHAPTER XXII.

Exterminating Order :—Betrayal and Imprisonment of Joseph Smith and
Others :—-Camp of the Enemy :—Howlings of the Damned :—The Enemy Beast of the Highest Crimes :—Secret Inquisitory Trial of the
Prisoners :—Sentence of Death l—-How Reversed :—A Judas :—-Surrender of Far West :—Attempt to Assassinate the Prisoners :--Farewell
Scenes :—Captives Removed to Jackson County :—-General Clark Demands the Prisoners :—Remsal to Surrender Them :—Cross the Missouri
River :—Visitors :—P1-eaching in Camp by President Smith —Arrive at
Independence :—Public Exhibition of the Prisoners.

CTOBER 31, 1838.—-In the afternoon we were informed
that the Governor had ordered this force against
us, with orders to exterminate or drive every “Mormon "
from the State. As soon as these facts were ascertained we determined not to resist anything in the
shape of authority, however abused. ‘\Ve had now nothing to do but to submit to be massacred, driven, robbed
or plundered, at the option of our persecutors.

Colonel George M. Hinkle, who was at that time the
highest otiicer of the militia assembled for the defence
of Far West, waited on Messrs. J. Smith, S. Rigdon,
Hyrum Smith, L. Wight, George Robinson and myself,
with a request from General Lucas that we would
repair to his camp, with the assurance that as soon as
peaceable arrangements could be entered into we should
be released. We had no confidence in the word of a

 

murderer and robber. but there was no alternative but to _

put o1u'selves into the hands of such monsters, or to have
the city attacked, and men, women and children massacred.

We, therefore, commended ourselves to the Lord, and

204 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

voluntarily surrendered as sheep into the hands of wolves.
As we approached the camp of the enemy General Lucas
rode out to meet us with a guard of several hundred
men.

The haughty general rode up, and, without speaking to us, instantly ordered his guard to surround us.
They did so very abruptly, and we were marched into
camp surrounded by thousands of savage looking beings,
many of whom were dressed and painted like Indian
warriors. These all set up a constant yell, like so many
bloodhounds let loose upon their prey, as if they had
achieved one of the most miraculous victories that ever
graced the annals of the world. If the vision of the infernal regions could suddenly open to the mind, with
thousands of malicious fiends, all clamoring, exulting, deriding, blaspheming, mocking, railing, raging and foaming
like a troubled sea, then could some idea be formed of
the hell which we had ‘entered.

In camp we were placed under a strong guard, and
were without shelter during the night, lying on the
ground in the open air, in the midst of a great _ rain.
The guards during the whole night kept up a constant
tirade of mockery, and the most obscene blackguardism
and abuse. They blasphemed God; mocked Jesus Christ;
swore the most dreadful oaths ; taunted brother Joseph and
others; demanded miracles; wanted signs, such as:
“Come, Mr. Smith, show us an angelf “Give us one
of your revelations? “Show us a miraclefi “Come, there
is one of your brethren here in camp whom we took
prisoner yesterday in his own house, and knocked his
brains out with his own ritle, which we found hanging
over his iireplace; he lays speechless and dying; speak

' the word and heal him, and then we will all believell

“ Or, if you are Apostles or men of God, deliver yourselves, and then we win he Mormonsll Next would be
a volley of oaths and blasphemies; then a tumultuous ti 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 205

rade of lewd boastings of having defiled virgins and wives
by force, etc., much of which I dare not write; and, indeed, language would fail me to attempt more than a
faint description. Thus passed this dreadful night, and
before morning several other captives were added to our
number, among whom was brother Amasa Lyman.

We were informed that the general otlicers held a secret
council during most of the night, which was dignified by
the name of court martial; in which, without a hearing,
or, without even being brought before it, we were all sentenced to be shot. The day and hour was also appointed
for the execution of this sentence, viz.: next morning at
8 dclock, in the public square at Far West. Of this we
were informed by Brigadier-General Doniphan, who was one
of the council, but who was so violently opposed to this
cool blooded murder that he assured the council that he
would revolt and withdraw his whole brigade, and march
them back to Clay County as soon as it was light, if they
persisted in so dreadful an undertaking. Said he, “ It is
cold blooded murder, and I wash my hands of it? His
firm remonstrance, and that of a few others, so alarmed
the haughty murderer and his accomplices that they dare
not put the decree in execution.

Thus, through a merciful providence of God our lives
were spared through that dreadful night. It was the common talk, and even the boast in the camp, that individuals lay here and there unburied, where they had shot
them down for sport. The females they had ravished; the
plunder they had taken; the houses they had burned; the
horses they had stolen; the iields of grain they had laid
waste, were common topics; and were dwelt on for mere
amusement, or, as if these deeds were a stepstone to ofiice; and it is a fact that such deeds were so considered.

No pen need undertake to describe our feelings during
that terrible night, while there contlned—-not knowing the
fate of our wives and children, or of our fellow Saints,

 

206 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

and seeing no way for our lives to be saved except by the
miraculous power of God. But, notwithstanding all earthly
hopes were gone, still we felt a calmness indescribable. A
secret whispering to our inmost soul seemed to say: “Peace,
my sons, be of good cheer, your work is not yet done; therefore I will restrain your enemies, that they shall not have
power to take your lives."

While thus confined, Wm. E. MeLel1in, once my fellow
laborer in the gospel, but now a Judas, with hostile weapon
in hand to destroy the Saints, came to me and observed:
“ Well, Parley, you have now get where you are certain
never to escape; how do you feel as to the course you
have taken in religion W I answered, “that I had taken
that course which I should take if I had my life to live
over again? He seemed thoughtful for a moment, and
then replied: “ Well—I think, if I were you, I should die
as I had lived; at any rate, I see no possibility of escape
for you and your friends."

Next morning Gen. Lucas demanded the Caldwell militia
to give up their arms, which was done. As soon as the
troops who had defended the city were disarmed, it was
surrounded by the enemy and all the men detained as prisoners. None were permitted pass out of the city——although
their families were starving for want of sustenance; the
mills and provisions being some distance from the city.

The brutal mob were now turned loose to ravage, steal,
plunder and murder without restraint. Houses were rifled,
women ravished, and goods taken as they pleased. The
whole troop, together with their horses, lived on the grain
and provisions. While cattle were shot down for mere
sport, and sometimes men, women and children fared no
better. On the third morning after our imprisonment we
were placed in a wagon, in order for removal. Many of
the more desperate then crowded around, cocked their riiles,
and singling us out presented them to our breasts, and
swore they would blow us through. Some guns were

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 

snapped, but missed fire, and the rest were in a small degree restrained by the officers, and we still lived.

We were now marched to Far West, under the conduct
of the whole army; and while they halted in the public
square, we were permitted to go with a guard for a change
of linen and to take final leave of our families, in order
to depart as prisoners to Jackson County, a distance of
sixty miles.

This was the most trying scene of all. I went to my
house, being guarded by two or three soldiers; the cold
rain was pouring down without, and on entering my little
cottage, there lay my wife sick of a fever, with which she
had been for some time confined. At her breast was our son
Nathan, an infant of three months, and by her side a little girl of five years. On the foot of the same bed lay a
woman in travail, who had been driven from her house in
the night, and had taken momentary shelter in my hut of
ten feet square—my larger house having been torn down.
I stepped to the bed; my wife burst into tears; I spoke
a few words of comfort, telling her to try to live for my
sake and the childrenls; and expressing a hope that we
should meet again though years might separate us. She
promised to try to live. I then embraced and kissed the
little babes and departed.

Till now I had refrained from weeping; but, to be forced
from so helpless a. family, who were destitute of provisions
and fuel, and deprived almost of shelter in a bleak prairie,
with none to assist them, exposed to a lawless banditti who
were utter strangers to humanity, and this at the approach
of winter, was more than nature could well endure.

I went to Gen. Moses Wilson in tears, and stated the
circumstances of my sick, heart-broken and destitute family
in terms which would have moved any heart that had a
latent spark of humanity yet remaining. But I was only
answered with an exultant laugh, and a taunt of reproach
by this hardened murderer.

208 AUTomoGRA1>HY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

As I returned from my house towards the troops in
the square, I halted with the guard at the door of Hyrum Smith, and heard the sobs and groans of his wife,
at his parting words. She was then near confinement;
and needed more than ever the comfort and consolation
of a husbandls presence. As we returned to the wagon
we saw S. Rigdon taking leave of his wife and daughters,
who stood at a little distance, in tears of anguish indescribable. In the wagon sat Joseph Smith, while his aged
father and venerable mother came up overwhelmed with
tears, and took each of the prisoners by the hand with
a silence of grief too great for utterance.

In the meantime, hundreds of the brethren crowded
around us, anxious to take a ‘parting look, or a silent
shake of the hand; for feelings were too intense to allow
of speech. In the midst of these scenes orders were given,
and we moved slowly away, under the conduct of Gen.
Wilson and his whole brigade. A march of twelve miles
brought us to Crooked River, where we camped for the
night. Here Gen. Wilson began to treat us more kindly;
he became very sociable; conversing very freely on the
subject of his former murders and robberies committed
against us in Jackson. He did not pretend to deny anything; but spoke upon the whole as freely as if he had
been giving the history of other ages or countries, in
which his audience had no personal concern. Said he:

“W'e Jackson County boys know how it is; and, therefore, have not the extremes of hatred and prejudice which
characterize the rest of the troops. ‘We know perfectly
that from the beginning the Mormons have not been the
aggressors at all. As it began in l33 in Jackson County,
so it has been ever since. You Mormons were crowded
to the last extreme, and compelled to self-defence; and
this has been construed into treason, murder and plunder.
We mob you without law; the authorities refuse to protect you according to law; you then are compelled to proAUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 209

tect yourselves, and we act upon the prejudices of the
public, who join our forces, and the whole is legalized,
for your destruction and our gain. Is not this a shrewd
and cunning policy on our part, gentlemen?

“ When we drove you from Jackson County, we burned
two hundred and three of. your houses; plundered your
goods; destroyed your press, type, paper, books, office and
all-—tarred and feathered old ‘Bishop Partridge, as exemplary an old man as you can find anywhere. We shot
down some of your men, and, if any of you returned the
fire, we imprisoned you, on your trial for murder, etc.
Damnld shrewdly done, gentlemen; and I came damnld
near kicking the bucket myself; for, on one occasion,
while we were tearing down houses, driving families, and
destroying and plundering goods, some of you good folks
put a ball through my sonls body, another through the
arm of my clerk, and a third pierced my shirt collar and
marked my neck. No blame gentlemen; we deserved it.
And let a set of men serve me as your community have
been served, and P11 be damnld if I would not fight till
I died.

“It was repeatedly insinuated, by the other officers and
troops, that we ‘should hang you prisoners on the first
tree we came to on the way to Independence. But P11
be damnld if anybody shall hurt you. We just intend to
exhibit you in Independence, let the people look at you,
and see what a damnld set of fine fellows you are. And,
more particularly, to keep you from that G——d damnld
old bigot of a Gen. Clark and his troops, from down
country, who are so stuffed with lies and prejudice that
they would shoot you down in a momentil

Such was the tenor of the conversation addressed by
Gen. Wilson to his prisoners. Indeed, it was now evident
that he was proud of his prey, and felt highly enthusiastic in having the honor of ret1u'ning in triumph to Independence with his prisoners, whom his superstition had
14.

 

210 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.
U‘

magnified into something more than fellow citizens—something noble or supernatural, and worthy of public exhibition.

As we arose and commenced our march on the moming of the 3d of November, Joseph Smith spoke to me and
the other prisoners, in a low, but cheerful and confidential
tone; said he: “Be of good cheer, brethren ,- the word of the
Lord came to me last night that our lives should be given us,
and that whatever we may safer during this captivity, not
one of our lives should be taken? Of this prophecy I testify in the name of the Lord, and, though spoken in
secret, its public fulfilment and the miraculous escape of
each one of us is too notorious to need my testimony.
In the after part of the day we came to the Missouri River,
which separated us from Jackson County. Here the brigade was halted and the prisoners taken to a public
house, where we were permitted to shave, change our
linen, and partake of some refreshment. This done, we
were hurried to the ferry and across the river with the
utmost haste in advance of the troops. This movement
was soon explained to us. The truth was, Gen. Clark
had now arrived near the scene of action, and had sent
an express to take us from Gen. Wilson and prevent us
from going to Jackson County—both armies being competitors for the honor of possessing the wonderful, or, in
their estimation, royal prisoners.

Clark and his troops, from a distance, who had not arrived in the city of Far West till after our departure,
were desirous of seeing the strange men whom it was
said had turned the world upside down and of possessing
such a wonderful trophy of victory, or of putting them
to death themselves. On the other hand, Wilson and his
brigade were determined to exhibit us through the streets of
Independence as a visible token of their own achievements.
Therefore, when demanded by Gen. Clarkis express, they
refused to surrender us; and hurried us across the ferry

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 211

with all possible despatch. Marching about a mile, we
encamped for the night in the wilderness, with about fifty
troops for our gua.rd—-the remainder not crossing the ferry
till the next morning.

Some of the neighboring citizens visited us next morning—it being Sunday. One of the ladies came up and
very candidly inquired of the troops which of the prisoners the “Mormons ii worshipped? One of the guards
pointing to Mr. Smith with a significant smile, said,
“ This is he? The woman, then turning to Mr. Smith,
inquired whether he professed to be the Lord and Saviour? '

Do not smile, gentle reader, at the ignorance of these
poor innocent creatures, who, by the exertions of a corrupt press and pulpit, are kept in ignorance and made
to believe in every possible absurdity in relation to the
Church of the Saints. Mr. Smith replied, that he professed to be nothing but a man, and a minister of salvation, sent by Jesus Christ to preach the gospel. After
expressing some surprise, the lady inquired what was the
peculiar nature of the gospel, as held by himself and
his Church? At this the visitors and soldiers gathered
around, and Mr. Smith preached to them faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, repentance towards God, reformation
of life, immersion in water, in the name of Jesus Christ,
for remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost by
the laying on of hands.

All seemed surprised, and the lady, in tears, went her
way, praising God for the truth, and praying aloud that
the Lord would bless and deliver the prisoners.

At ten o‘clock the brigade had all crossed the river,
and come up with us. We were then marched forward
in our carriages, while the troops were formed into a
.front and rear guard, with quite a martial appearance.
As we passed along through the settlements hundreds of
men, women and children flocked to see us. General W.

212 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

often halted the whole brigade to introduce us to the
populace, pointing out each of us by name. Many shook
us by the hand, and, in the ladies at least, there appeared
some feelings of human compassion and sympathy.

In this way we proceeded till we arrived at Independence. It was now past noon, and in the midst of a
great rain; but hundreds crowded to witness the procession, and to gaze at us as we were paraded in martial
triumph through the principal streets, the bugles sounding
a blast of triumphant joy.

 

 

CHAPTER XXIII

Treatment of the Prisoners :—Visit the Temple Lot '.—Gain my Freedom :—
Temptation :—Voluntary Return to Bondage :—Leave Independence :—Conduct of the Guards :-—Fall into the Hands of CoL Price and Guards :—
Arrive at Richmond:—Chains:—Interview with Gen. C1ark:—-Dialogue:—Ineonceivable Absurdities.

. HIS ceremony being finished, a vacant house was prepared for our reception, into which we were ushered
through the crowd of spectators which thronged every
avenue.

The troops were then disbanded. In the meantime We
were kept under a small guard, and were treated with
some degree of humanity, while hundreds docked to see
us day after day. We spent most of our time in preaching and conversation, explanatory of our doctrines and
practice. Much prejudice was removed, and the feelings
of the populace began to be in_ our favor, notwithstanding
their former wickedness and hatred. In a day or two
we were at liberty to walk the streets without a guard.
We were finally removed from our house of confinement
to a hotel, where we boarded at the public table, and
lodged on the floor, with a block of wood for a pillow.
We no longer had any guard; we went out and came in
when we p1eased—a certain keeper being appointed merely
to watch over us, and look to our wants.

With him we walked out of town to the westward, and

 

visited the desolate lands _of the Saints, and the place.
which, seven years before, we had dedicated for the build-.
ing of a Temple. This was a beautiful rise of ground,

214 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

about half a mile west of Independence centre. When we
saw it last it was a noble forest, but our enemies had
since robbed it of every vestige of timber, and it now
lay desolate, or clothed with grass and weeds.

0, how many feelings did this spot awaken in our
bosoms! Here we had often bowed the knee in prayer,
in bygone years. Here we had assembled with hundreds
of happy Saints in the solemn meeting, and offered our
songs, and sacraments, and orisons. But now all was
solemn and lonely desolation. Not a vestige remained to
mark the spot where stood our former dwellings. They
had long since been consumed by fire, or removed and
converted to the uses of our enemies.

While at Independence we were once or twice invited to
dine with General Wilson and some others, which we did.

While thus sojourning as prisoners at large, I arose one
morning when it was very snowy, and passed silently and
unmolested out of the hotel, and as no one seemed to
notice me, or call me in question, I thought I would try
an experiment. I passed on eastward through the town;
no one noticed me. . I then took into the fields, still unobserved. After travelling a mile I entered a forest; all
was gloomy silence, none were near, the heavens were
darkened and obscured by falling snow, my track was
covered behind me, and I was free. I knew the way to
the States eastward very well, and there seemed nothing
to prevent my pursuing my way thither; thoughts of
freedom beat high in my bosom; wife, children, home,
freedom, peace, and a land of law and order, all arose in
my mind; I could go to other States, send for my family,
make me a home and be happy.

On the other hand, I was a prisoner in a State where
all law was at an end. I was liable to be shot down
at any time without judge or jury. I was liable to be
tried for my life by murderous assassins, who had
already broken every oath of oiiice and trampled on every

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 215

principle of honor or even humanity. Hands already
dripping with the blood of aged sires, and of helpless
women and children, were reaching out for my destruction.
The battle of Crooked River had already been construed
into murder on the part of the brave patriots who there
defended their lives and rescued their fellow citizens from
kidnappers and land pirates, while the pirates themselves.
had been converted into loyal militia.

To go forward was freedom, to go backward was to be
sent to General Clark, and be accused of the highest
crimes, with murderers for judge, jury and executioners.

“ Go free Pl whispered the tempter.

“ No Pl said I, “ never, while brother Joseph and his
fellows are in the power of the enemy. What a storm of
trouble, or even of death, it might subject them toll

I turned on my heel, retraced my steps, and entered
the hotel ere they had missed me. As I shook the
snow off my clothes the keeper and also brother Joseph
inquired where I had been. I replied, just out for a little
exercise. A walk for pleasure in such a storm gave rise
to some pleasantries on their part, and there the matter
ended.

There was one thing which buoyed up our spirits continually during our captivity: it was the remembrance of
the word of the Lord to brother Joseph, saying, that our
lives should all be given us during this captivity, and not
one of them should be lost. I thought of this while in
the wilderness vacillating whether to go or stay, and the
thought struck me: “ He that will seek to save his life shall
lose it ; but he that will lose his life for my sake shall jind it

‘ again, even life eternal." I could now make sure of my part

in the first resurrection, as I had so intensely desired
when about eleven years old. But, 0, the path of life!
How was it beset with trials!

At length, after repeated demands, we were sent to
General Clark, at Richmond, Ray County. Generals Lucas

216 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

and Wilson had tried in vain for some days to get a
guard to accompany us. None would volunteer, and when
drafted they would not obey orders; for, in truth, they
wished us to go at liberty. At last a colonel and two
or three officers started with us, with their swords and
pistols, which were intended more to protect us than to
keep us from escaping. On this journey some of us rode
in carriages and some on horseback. Sometimes we were
sixty or eighty rods in front or rear of our guards, who
were drinking hard out of bottles which they carried in
their pockets.

At night, having crossed the Missouri River, we put up
at a private house. Here our guards all got drunk, and
went to bed and to sleep, leaving us their pistols to defend
ourselves in case of any attack from without, as we were
in a very hostile neighborhood. Next morning we rode a
few miles, and were met by an express from General
Clark, which consisted of one Colonel Sterling Price and
a guard of soldiers. This company immediately surrounded
us with poised pieces, in regular military order, as if we
had been Buonaparte and stall‘ on the way to St. Helena;
thinking, perhaps, that if we should escape, the whole
United States and all Europe would be immediately overthrown.

In this manner we were escorted to Richmond, the headquarters of General Clark and his army of three or four
thousand men. Here, as usual, we had to endure the
gaze of the curious, as if we had been a caravan of

- animals for exhibition. Troops were paraded to receive

us, which, as we approached, opened to the right and
left, thus forming a long avenue, through which we passed
into a block house, and were immediately put in chains,
under a strong guard, who stood over us continually with
poised pieces, cocked and primed. Colonel Price continued
in the superintcndence of the prisoners and the guards.
General Clark at length called to see us. He seemed

AUTCBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 217

more haughty, unfeeling, and reserved than even Lucas or
Wilson had been when we first entered their camp. We
inquired of the general what were his intentions concerning us. I_ stated to him that we had now been captives
for many days, and we knew not wherefore, nor whether
we were considered prisoners of war or prisoners of civil
process, or “prisoners of hope}! At the same time remarking, that all was wrapt in mystery; for, as citizens of the
United States and of Missouri, in time of peace, We could
in nowise be considered as prisoners of war; and, without civil process, we were not holden by civil» authority;
and as to being “prisoners of hope}! there was not much
chance to hope, from our present appearances!

He replied that “ we was taken to be tried)!

“ Tried I By what authority W

-“ By court martial?

“What! Ministers of the gospel tried by court martial!
Men who sustain no office in military affairs, and who are
not subject by law to military duty ; such men to be tried
by court martial! And this in time of peace, and in a
republic where the constitution guaranteed to every citizen
the right of trial by jury ‘P!

“Yes. This is in accordance with the treaty of stipulations entered into at Far West at the time of the surrender, and as agreexl to by Colonel Hinkle, your com.manding officer?

“ Colonel H inkle, our commanding oiiicerl What had he
to do with our civil rights! He was only a colonel of a
regiment of the Caldwell County Militia}!

“ Why! was he not the commanding omc-er of the fortress of Far VVest, the headquarters of the Mormon forces 2"

“ We had no ‘fortress! or ‘Mormon forces] but were part
of the State militia}!

At this the general seemed surprised, and the conversation ended.

We were astonished above measure at proceedings so

218 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

utterly ignorant and devoid of all law or justice. Here was
a Major-General, selected by the Govemor of Missouri, and
sent to banish or exterminate a religious society. And then,
to crown the whole with inconceivable absurdity, said religious society is converted by this officer and his associates
into an independent government, or foreign nation. And
last, and equally absurd, the State of Missouri assumed her
independence of the Federal Government so far as to treat
with this imaginary “Mormon Empire," or foreign nation.
A colonel of militia, subordinate to the general then in
the field, is converted into a foreign minister, an envoy
extraordinary, in behalf of the “ Mormon Empirefl to enter
into treaty stipulations with his Missouri majestyls forces,
under Generals Lucas, Wilson and Clark!

The City of Far West, the capital of “ Mormom'af is
the “ Ghentfl where this treaty of peace is ratified. The
standing army of the conquered nation stack their arms,
which are carried in triumph to Richmond. Preachers of
the gospel are converted into “ noble ll or “ royal prisoners,"
chained to the car of the victorious champions to be led
captive as sport for the Philistines, or to be shot or
hung at pleasure, while the residue of the inhabitants ‘of
the fallen empire—men, women and children—are to have
their real estate and all other goods confiscated, and themselves banished the State on pain of death. A few, however, are selected from among these exiles to be imprisoned or executed at the mere dictation of a Nero or
a Nicholas. '

Was this in America, in the nineteenth century? Were
these scenes transacted in a constitutional republic! Yes,
verily, and worse,—a tale of horror, of woe, of long
years of lawless outrage and tyranny is yet to be told,
of which this is a mere stepping stone or entering wedge.

 

CHAPTER XXIV.

MASSACRE AT numls mu.
I

E here introduce the testimony of Joseph Young,

an eye witness of one of the most awful scenes
which ever stained the annals of history in any age or
country.

“ The following is a short history of my travels to the
State of Missouri, and of a bloody tragedy enacted at
Haunls Mill, on Shoal Creek, October 30, 1838:

“On the 6th of July last I started with my family
from Kirtland, Ohio, for Missouri—the county of Caldwell,
in the upper part of the State, being the place of my
destination. On the 13th of October I crossed the Mississippi at Louisiana, at which place I heard vague
reports of the disturbances in the upper country, but

nothing that could be relied on.
“ I continued my course westward till I crossed Grand

River, at a place called Comptonls. Ferry, where I heard
for the first time that if I proceeded any further on my
journey I would be in danger of being stopped by a
body of armed men.

“ I was not wining, however, while treading my native
soil and breathing republican air, to abandon my object,
which was to locate myself and family in a fine, healthy
country, where we could enjoy the society of our friends
and connections. Consequently, I prosecuted my journey
till I came to Whitneyls Mills, situated on Shoal Creek,
in the eastern part of Caldwell County. After crossing
the creek and going about three miles we met a party

220 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

of the mob, about forty in number, armed with rifles and
mounted on horses, who informed us that we could go
no further west, threatening us with instant death if we
proceeded any further.

“I asked them the reason of this prohibition, to which
they replied that ,we were ‘Mormons; and that every one
who adhered to that. religious faith would have to leave the
State within ten days, or renounce their religion. Accordingly, they drove us back to the mills above mentioned.

“ Here we tarried three days, and on Friday, the 26th,
we recrossed the creek, and, following up its banks, we
succeeded in eluding the mob for the time being, and
gained the residence of a friend in Myersl Settlement.
On Sunday, October 28, we arrived at Haunls Mill, where
we found a number of our friends collected, who were
holding a council and deliberating upon the best course
for them to pursue to defend themselves against the mob
who were collecting in the neighborhood under the command of Colonel Jennings, of Livingston, and threatening
them with house burning and killing.

“The decision of the council was that the neighborhood should put itself in a state of defence. Accordingly
about twenty-eight of our men armed themselves, and
were in constant readiness for an attack, if any small
body of mobbers might come upon them.

“The same evening, for some reason best known to
themselves, the mob sent one of their number to enter
into a treaty with our friends, which was accepted on the
condition of mutual forbearance on both sides, and that
each party, as far as their influence extended, should
exert themselves to prevent any further hostilities.

“ At this time, however, there was another mob collecting. on Grand River, at William Mannis, which was
threatening us; consequently, we remained under arms on
Monday, the 29th, which passed away without molestation
from any quarter.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 221

“ On Tuesday, the 30th, that bloody tragedy was enacted,
the scenes‘ of which I shall never forget.

“ More than three fourths of the day had passed in
tranquillity as smiling as the preceding one. I think there
was no individual of our company that was apprised of
the sudden and awful fate which hung over our heads
like an overwhelming torrent, and which was to change
the prospects, the feelings and sympathies of about thirty
families.

“The banks of Shoal Creek, on either side, teemed
with children sporting and playing, while their mothers
were engaged in domestic employments. Fathers or husbands were either on guard about the mills or other
property, or employed in gathering crops for winter consumption. The weather was very pleasant, the sun shone
clearly, all was tranquil, and no one expressed any apprehension of the awful crisis that was near us, even at our
doors.

“It was about 4 dclock, P. M., while sitting in my cabin
with my babe in my arms, and my wife standing by my
side, the door being open, I cast my eyes on the opposite
bank of Shoal Creek, and saw a large body of armed men
on horses directing their course towards the mills with
all possible speed. As they advanced through the scattering trees that bordered the prairie they seemed to form
themselves into a three square position, forming a vanguard
in front. At this moment, David Evans, seeing the superiority of their numbers (there being two hundred and forty
of them, according to their own account), gave a signal
and cried for peace. This not being heeded they continued
to advance, and their leader, a man named Comstock, fired
a gun, which was followed by a solemn pause of about
ten or twelve seconds; when all at once they discharged
about one hundred rifles, aiming at a blacksmithls shop,
into which our friends iled for safety. They then charged
up to the shop, the crevices of which, between the logs,

222 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

were sufficiently large to enable them to aim directly at
the bodies of those who had there tied for refuge from
the fire of their murderers. There were several families
tented in the rear of the shop whose lives were exposed,
and, amid showers of bullets, fled to the woods in dijferent
directions.

“After standing and gazing at this bloody scene for a
few minutes, and finding myself in the uttermost danger,
the bullets having reached the house where I was living,
I committed my family to the protection of Heaven; and,
leaving the house on the opposite side, I took a path
which led up the hill, following in the trail of three of
my brethren that had fled from the shop.

“ W'hile ascending the hill we were discovered by the
mob, who immediately fired at us, and continued so to do
till we reached the summit. In descending the hill I secreted myself in a thicket of bushes, where I lay till
8 olclock in the evening. At this time I heard a voice
calling my name in an undertone. I immediately left the
thicket and went to the house of Benjamin Lewis, where
I found my family—who had fled there in safety—and two
of my friends, mortally wounded, one of whom died before
morning. Here we passed the painful night in deep and
awful reflections on the scenes of the preceding evening.
After daylight appeared some four or five men, with myself, who had escaped with our lives from this horrid
massacre, repaired as soon as possible to the mills to learn
the condition of our friends, whose fate we had but too
truly anticipated.

“ When we arrived at‘ the house of Mr. Haun, we found
Mr. Merrickis body lying in the rear of the house; Mr.
McBridels in front, literally mangled from head to foot. We
were informed by Miss Rebecca Judd, who was an eye witness, that he was shot with his own gun after he had‘
given it up, and then cut to pieces with a corn cutter by
a man named Rogers, of Davies County, who keeps a ferry

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 223

on Grand river, and who has since repeatedly boasted of
this act of savage barbarity. Mr. Yorkls body we found in
the house. After viewing these corpses we immediately
went to the blacksmithls shop, where we found nine of our
friends, eight of whom were already dead—the other, Mr.
Cox, of Indiana, in the agonies of death, who soon expired.

“ We immediately prepared and carried them to the place
of interment. This last oilice of kindness due to the
remains of departed friends was not attended with the customary ceremonies nor decency; for we were in jeopardy,
every moment expecting to be fired on by the mob, who,
we supposed, were lying in ambush, waiting the first opportunity to despatch the remaining few who were providentially preserved from the slaughter of the preceding
day. However, we accomplished without molestation this
painful task. The place of burial was a vault in the
ground, formerly intended for a well, into which we threw
the bodies of our friends promiscuously.

“Among the slain I will mention Sardius Smith, son of
Warren Smith, about nine years old, who, through fear,
had crawled under the bellows in the shop, where he
remained till the massacre was over, when he was discovered by one Glaze, of Carroll County, who presented a rifle
near his head and literally blew off the upper part of it.
Mr. Stanley, of Carroll County, told me afterwards that
Glaze boasted of this fiend like murder and heroic deed all
over the country.

“ The number killed and mortally wounded in this wanton slaughter was eighteen or nineteen, whose names, as
far as I can recollect, were as follows: Thomas McBride,
Levi Merrick, Elias Benner, Josiah Fuller, Benjamin Lewis,
Alexander Campbell, Warren Smith, Sardius Smith, George
Richards, Mr. Napier, Mr. Harmer, Mr. Cox, Mr. Abbott,
Mr. York, Wm. Merrick (a boy eight or nine years old),
and three or four others whose names I do not recollect,
as they were strangers to me.

 

224 AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT.

“ Among the wounded who recovered were Isaac Laney,
Nathan K. Knight, Mr. Yokum, two brothers by the name
of Myers, Tarlton Lewis, Mr. Haun and several others.
Miss Mary Stedwell, while fleeing, was shot through the
hand, and, fainting, fell over a log, into which they shot
upwards of twenty balls.

“ To finish their work of destruction, this band of murderers composed of men from Davies, Livingston, Ray,
Carroll and Chariton Counties, led by some of the principal men of that section of the upper country (among
whom, I am informed, were Mr. Ashby, from Chariton,
member of the State legislature; Col. J ennings, of Livingston County; Thos. OlBryon, Clerk of Livingston County;
Mr. Whitney, Dr. Randall and many others), proceeded to
rob the houses, wagons and tents of bedding and clothing;
drove otf horses and wagons, leaving widows and orphans
destitute of the necessaries of life, and even stripped the
clothing from the bodies of the slain!

“ According to their own account they iired seven rounds in

 

this awful butchery; making upwards of sixteen hundred T

shots, at a little company of men about thirty in number.
“ I hereby certify the above to be a true statement of
facts, ‘ according to the best of my knowledge.

“ Josnpn rYoUNGJ'
“STATE or ILL1No1s,}

County of Adams.

“ I hereby certify that Joseph Young this day came
before me, and made oath in due form of law, that the
statements contained in the foregoing sheets are true, according to the best of his knowledge and ' belief. In
testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand, and
aiiixed the seal of the Circuit Court at Quincy, this
fourth day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and thirty-nine.

“ C. M. Woons,
“ Clerk of Circuit Court of Adams Co., 111?

CHAPTER XXV.

Speech of Major-General Clark, Delivered at Far West while its Citizens
were held as Prisoners, November, 1838.

“ ENTLEMEN: You, whose names are not on this

list, will now have the privilege of going to your
fields to obtain grain for your families—wood, etc. Those
that compose the list will go from thence to prison, to be
tried, and receive the due demerits (if their crimes. But
you are now at liberty, all but such as charges may hereafter he preferred against. It now devolves upon you to ,

fulfil the treaty that you have entered into—the leading
items of which I now lay before you. _

“The first of these items you have already complied
with—which is, that you deliver up your leading men to
be tried according to law. Second, that you deliver up
your arms-—this has been attended to. The third is, that
you sign over your property to defray the expenses of
the war; this you have also done. Another thing yet
remains for you to comply with; that is: that you leave
the State forthwith; and, whatever your feelings concerning this affair, whatever your innocence, it is nothing to
me. General Lucas, who is equal in authority with me,
has made this treaty with you. I am determined to see
it executed.

“ The orders of the Governor to me, were, that you
should be exterminated, and not allowed to remain in the
State. And had your leaders not been given up, and
the treaty complied with before this, you and your families would have been destroyed and your houses in ashes.
15

226 ~~ AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY r. PRATT.

 

“ There is a discretionary power resting in my hands, »

which I shall try to exercise for a season. I did not
say that you must go now, but you must not think of
stopping here another season, or of putting in crops; for
the moment you do the CITIZENS WILL BE UPON YOU.
I am determined to see the Governors orders fulfilled, but
shall not come upon you immediately. Do not think
that I shall act as I have done any more; but if I have
to come again because the treaty which you have made
is not complied with, you need not expect any mercy, but
extermination; for I am determined that the Govemorls
order shall be executed.

“ As for your leaders, do not think, do not imagine for
a moment, do not let it enter your mind that they will
be delivered, or that you will see their faces again, for
their fate is fixed, their die is cast, their doom is sealed.

“I am sorry, gentlemen, to see so great a number of
apparently intelligent men found in the situation that you
are. And, oh! that I could invoke the Spirit of the unknown God to rest upon you, and deliver you from that
awful chain of superstition, and liberate you from those
fetters of fanaticism with which you are bound. I would

- advise you to scatter abroad and never again organize

with bishops, presidents, etc., lest you excite the jealousies of the people, and subject yourselves to the same calamities that have now come upon you. ,

“ You have always been the aggressors; you have
brought upon yourselves these diiiiculties by being disa&'ected, and not being subject to rule; and my advice is,
that you become as other citizens, lest by a recurrence
of these events you bring upon yourselves inevitable ruin."

 

CHAPTER XXVI.

The Prisoners :—Seeond Interview with General Clark :—Inquisition :—Sick.
ness of Elder Rigdon :—Oolonel Price and Guards :—Their Conduct :—
Rebuke by Joseph Smith:—Trial :—Similarity between King Herod and
Governor Boggs :—-Judge Austin A. King in Open Court Threatens
a Wholesale Extermination of the “ Mormons :"—-Other Prisoners Obtained by Stratagem ——Advice of General Doniphan, Attorney for the
Prisoners :——Decision :-—Disposal of the Prisoners :—Flight of the Church
to 1l1inois:—Conduct of the Outlaws :——My Family Visits me in Prison.

MUST not forget to state that when we arrived in

Richmond as prisoners there were some fifty others,
mostly heads of families, who had been marched from
Caldwell on foot (distance 30 miles), and were now penned
up in a cold, open, unfinished court house, in which situation they remained for some weeks, while their families
were suiferin g severe privations.

The next morning after our dialogue with General Clark
he again entered our prison and informed us that he had
concluded to deliver us over to the civil authorities for an
examining trial. He was then asked why he did not do
away with the unlawful decree of banishment, which was first
ordered by General Lucas, in compliance with the Governor-ls order, and which compelled thousands of citizens to
leave the State. Or upon what principle the military
power aided the civil law against us, while at the same
time it caused our families and friends to be murdered,
plundered and driven, contrary to all law!

He replied that he approved of all the proceedings of
General Lucas, and should not alter them. I make this

228 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

statement because some writers have commended Clark for
his heroic, merciful, and prudent conduct towards our
society, and have endeavored to make it appear that Clark
was not to be blamed for any of the measures of Lucas.

The Court of Inquiry now commenced, before Judge
Austin A. King. This continued from the 11th to 28th
of November, during which we were kept most of the time
in chains, and our brethren, some fifty in number, were
penned up in the cold, dreary court house. It was a very
severe time of snow and winter weather, and we suffered
much. During this time Elder Rigdon was taken very
sick, from hardship and exposure, and final] y lost his
reason; but still he was kept in a miserable, noisy and
cold room, and compelled to sleep on the floor with a
chain and padlock round his ankle, and fastened to six
others. Here he endured the constant noise and confusion
of an unruly guard, the ofiicer of which was Colonel Sterling Price, since Governor of the State.

These guards were composed generally of the most noisy,
foul-mouthed, vulgar, disgraceful rabble that ever defiled
the earth. While he lay in this situation his son-in-law,
George W. Robinson, the only male member of his family,
was chained by his side. Thus Mrs. Rigdon and her
daughters were left entirely destitute and unprotected.
One of his daughters, Mrs. Robinson, a young and delicate
female, with her little infant, came down to see her husband, and to comfort and take care of her father in his
sickness. When she first entered the room, amid the clank
of chains and the rattle of weapons, and cast her eyes on
her sick and dejected parent and sorrow worn husband, she
was speechless, and only gave vent to her feelings in a
flood of tears. , This faithful lady, with her little infant,
continued by the side of her father till he recovered from
his sickness, and till his fevered and disordered mind
resumed its wonted powers.

In one of those tedious nights we had lain as if in

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 229

sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears
and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for
hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful
blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel
Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their
deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the “ Momwus" while at Far West and
vicinity. They even boasted of detlling by force wives,
daughters and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the
brains of men, women and children.

I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horriiied, and so filled with the spirit of indignant justice
that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and
rebuking the guards; but had said nothing to Joseph, or
any one else, although I lay next to him and knew he
was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke
in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as
near as I can recollect, the following words:

“ SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of
Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still ; I will
not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such
talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANTP

He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty.
Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruiiled and dignitied as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards,
whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground;
whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a
corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and
remained quiet till a change of guards.

I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life
was suspended on a breath, in the Courts of England; I
have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws
to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal
courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled

 

to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty

230 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight,
in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri.

In this mock Court of Inquiry the Judge could not be
prevailed on to examine the conduct of the murderers and
robbers who had desolated our society, nor would he
receive testimony except against us. By the dissenters
and apostates who wished to save their own lives and
secure their property at the expense of others, and by
those who had murdered and plundered us from time to
time, he obtained abundance of testimony, much of which
was entirely false. Our Church organization was converted
by such testimony into a temporal kingdom, which was to
fill the whole earth and subdue all other kingdoms.

This Court of Inquisition inquired diligently into our
belief of the seventh chapter of Daniel concerning the
kingdom of God, which should subdue all other kingdoms
and stand forever. And when told that we believed in
that prophecy, the Court turned to the clerk and said:
“ Write that dozen ,- it is a strong point for treasonil Our
lawyer observed as follows; “Judge, you had better make
the Bible treason." The Court made no reply.

These texts and many others were inquired into with all
the eagerness and apparent alarm which characterized a
Herod of old in relation to the babe of Bethlehem, the
King of the Jews.

The ancient Herod, fearing a rival in the person of
Jesus, issued his exterminating order for the murder of
all the children of Bethlehem from two years old and
under, with a view to hinder the fulillment of a prophecy
which he himself believed to be true.

The modern Herod (Boggs), fearing a rival kingdom in
“the people of the Saints of the Most High," issued his exterminating order for the murder of the young children
of an entire people, and of their mothers as well as fathers, while this Court of Inquisition inquired as diligently
into the one prophecy as his predecessor did into the

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 231

other. These parallel actions go to show a strong belief
in the prophecies on the part of the actors in both cases.
Both believed, and feared, and trembled; both hardened
their hearts against that which their better judgment told
them was true. Both were instigated by the devil to
cause innocent blood to be shed. And marvellously striking is the parallel in the final result of the actions of
each.

The one slew many young children, but failed to destroy the infant King of the Jews.

The other slew" many men, women and children, but failed
to destroy the Kingdom of God.

The one found a timely refuge in Egypt.

The other in Illinois.

Jesus Christ fulfilled his destiny, and will reign over the
Jews, and sit on the throne of his father, David, forever.

The Saints are growing into power amid the strongholds
of the mountains of Deseret, and will surely take the
Kingdom, and the greatness of the Kingdom, under the
whole Heaven.

Who can withstand the Almighty, or frustrate his purposes! Herod died of a loathsome disease, and transmitted
to posterity his fame as a tyrant and murderer. And
Lilburn W. Boggs is dragging out a remnant of existence
in California, with the mark of Cain upon his brow, and
the fear of Cain within his heart, lest he that iindeth him
shall slay him. He is a living stink, and will go down
to posterity with the credit of a wholesale murderer.

The Court also inquired diligently into our missionary
operations. It was found, on investigation, that the Church
had sent missionaries into England and other foreign
countries. This, together with our belief in the Bible,
was construed into treason against the State of Missouri,
while every act of defence was set down as murder, etc.

 

The Judge, in open court, while addressing a witness, pro— '

claimed, that it‘ the members of the Church remained on

232 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

their lands to put in another crop they should be destroyed indiscriminately, and their bones be left to bleach
on the plains without a burial. Yes, reader, the cultivation of lands held by patents issued by the United States
land office, and signed by the President of the Republic,
was, by Judge Austin A. King, in open court-, pronounced
a capital offence, for which a whole community were prejudged and sentenced to death. While those who should
be the instruments to execute this sentence were called by
the dignified name of citizens, and these. good citizens
afterwards elected that same Judge for Governor of the
State.

The Judge inquired of the prisoners if they wished to
introduce any witnesses for the defence. A list of names
was supplied by the prisoners, when, who should be selected to go to Far West to obtain and bring them before the Court, but the identical bandit, Bogart, and his
gang, who were defeated by us in the battle of Crooked
River, after they had become famous for kidnapping, plundering and murdering!

Of course, every man in Caldwell would ilee from such
a gang if they could; but he succeeded in capturing a
few of our friends, whose names were on the list, and
bringing them before the Court, when, instead of being
sworn, they were immediately ordered to prison to take
their trial. Others were sent for, and, as far as found,
shared the same fate. This manoeuvre occupied several
days, during which the Court was still in session, and
the fate of the prisoners suspended.

At length the Judge exclaimed to the prisoners : “ If you
have any witnesses bring them forward; the Court cannot delay forever—it has waited several days already."
A member of the Church, named Allen, was just then
seen to pass the window. The prisoners requested that
he might be introduced and sworn. He was immediately
called in and sworn. He began to give his testimony,

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 233

which went to establish the innocence of the prisoners,
and to show the murders, robberies, ete., committed by
their accusers. But he was suddenly interrupted and cut
short by cries of “ Put him out ;" “Kick him out ,-ll “ G—d
d—n him, shoot him fl “Kill him, d-—n him, kill him ,-ll
“Hols a d——d Mormon."

The Court then ordered the guard to put him out,
which was done amid the yells, threats, insults and violence
of the mob who thronged in and around the court house.
He barely escaped with his life. Mr. Doniphan, attorney
for the defence, and since famed as a general in the
Mexican war, finally advised the prisoners to offer no
defence; “ for," said he, “though a legion of angels
from the opening heavens should declare your innocence,
the Court and populace have decreed your destruction?
Our Attorney offered no defence, and thus the matter of
our trials was finally submitted.

By the decision of this mock Court some twenty or
thirty of the accused were dismissed, among whom was
Amasa Lyman. Some twenty others were suffered to be
bailed out, and themselves and hail both forced to leave
the State, thus forfeiting the bail bonds, while Joseph
Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Caleb
Baldwin and Alexander McRay (all heads of families) were
committed to the jail of Clay County on the charge of treason; and Morris Phelps, Lyman Gibbs, Darwin Chase, N orman Shearer and myself were committed to the jail of
Richmond, Bay County, for the alleged crime of murder,
said to be committed in the act of dispersing the bandit,
Bogart, and his gang.

This done, the civil and military authorities dispersed,

and the troubled waters became a little more tranquil.

As our people were compelled by the memorable “Treaty

 

of Far West ii to leave the State by the following spring, _

they now commenced moving by hundreds and by thousands
to the State of Illinois, where they were received in the

234 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

most humane and friendly manner by the authorities, and
by the citizens in general. In the meantime bands of
murderers, thieves and robbers were roaming unrestrained
among the unarmed and defenceless citizens, committing
all. manner of plunder, and driving off cattle, sheep and
horses, abusing and insulting women.

My wife and children soon came to me in prison, and
spent a portion of the winter in the cold, dark dungeon,
where myself and fellow prisoners were frequently insulted and abused by our dastardly guards, who often
threatened to shoot us on the spot, and who made
murder, robbery and whoredoms with negro slaves their
daily boast.

 

CHAPTER XXVII.

LEGISLATIVE ACTION ON THE SUBJECT.

HE State legislature were soon in session; and from
this body, so high in responsibility, we had hoped

for some redress and protection. Memorials and petitions
from those aggrieved, and others, were addressed to the legislature, praying for an investigation Of the whole matter,

and for redress and protection against the criminal prO- .

ceedings Of the Governor and his troops, in seizing our property, murdering Our citizens, kidnapping our leaders and
others, and driving us from the State.

Yes, in fact, American citizens petitioned a republican
legislature for the privilege of occupying and cultivating
their own lands, purchased of the Government of the
United States, and for the privilege Of dwelling in the
houses built by their Own hands, on their Own real estate.
How strange! How incredible, in the nineteenth century!
Who can realize it? and yet it must stand on record, and
go down to posterity as a fact, a stubborn, undeniable public fact.

The following extract of a petition addressed to the legislature of Missouri, dated Dec. 10, 1838, Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri, and signed by a committee appointed
by the citizens, will show for itself the foregoing to be
true. It was signed by

EDWARD Pmrnmen, JOHN M. BURK,

HEBER C. KIMBALL, BRIGHAM YOUNG,

JOHN TAYLOR, Isuc MORLEY,

THEODORE TURLEY, GEORGE W. Hmms,
JOHN MURDOCK.

236 , AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

It read as follows:

“ The last order of Governor Boggs, to drive us from
the State or exterminate us, is a thing so novel, unlawful,
tyrannical and oppressive that we have been induced to
draw up this memorial and present this statement of our
case to your honorable body, praying that a law may be
passed rescinding the order of the Governor to drive us
from the State; and also, giving us the sanction of the
Legislature to inherit our lands in peace. "' "' " In
laying our case before your honorable body we say that we
are willing, and ever have been, to conform to the Constitution and laws of the United States and of this State.

“ VVe ask, in common with others, the protection of the
laws. VVe ask for the privilege guaranteed to all free citizens of the United States and of this State to be extended
to us, that we may be permitted to settle and live where
we please, and worship God according to the dictates of
our conscience without molestation. And while we ask for
ourselves this privilege, we are willing all others should
enjoy the same?

If the necessity for such a petition seems strange, how
much more strange appears the fact, that such petition
was denied by the Legislature of a State‘! And to crown
the whole, all investigation was utterly refused; nay more,
the Legislature itself became accessory to these crimes, by
appropriating two hundred thousand dollars to pay the
murderers and robbers for committing these crimes.

This last act of outrage sealed Wlth eternal infamy .the
character of the State of Missouri. She fell to rise no
more. She should be looked upon by her sister States as
a star fallen from the American constellation; a mined
and degraded outcast from the family of States. The whole
civilized world will detest and abhor her as the most infamous of tyrants. Nay, tyranny itself will blush to hear
her deeds mentioned in the annals of history.

The most cruel persecutors of the Christians or Reform 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 237

ers in pagan or papal Rome will start with astonishment
from their long slumbers, ilnd, with a mixture of envy and
admiration, yield to her the palm. As a State she has
acted the part of a pirate, a wholesale murderer and robber. Every department—civil, military, executive and legislative-—tramples all law under foot, and plunges into crime
and blood.

Many of the State journals have tried to hide the iniquity of the State by throwing a covering of lies over her
atrocious deeds. But, can they hide the Governors cruel
order for extermination or banishment! Can they conceal
the facts of the disgraceful treaty of the generals with a
portion of their own oiilcers and men at Far West? Can
they conceal the fact that ten or twelve thousand citizens,
of all ages and of both sexes, have been banished from
the State without trial or ‘condemnation? Can they conceal
the fact that the State Legislature appropriated two hundred thousand dollars to pay the criminals for committing
these crimes; and this while the petitions of the sufferers
lay on the table before them, praying for investigation,
redress and protection? Can they conceal the fact that
citizens have been kidnapped and imprisoned for many
months, while their families, friends and witnesses have
been driven from the State?

Can they conceal the blood of the murdered husbands
and fathers, or. stifle the cries of widows and orphans‘!

Nay, the rocks and the mountains may cover them in
unknown depths; the awful abyss of the fathomless deep
may swallow them up, and still their horrid deeds will
stand forth in the broad light of day, for the wondering
gaze of angels and of men—they cannot be bid.

 

 

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Joseph Smith and his Fellow Prisoners in Clay County :—Mock Trial in
the County of Davies :—Final Escape :—Their Arrival in Illinois.

HIS chapter is an extract from the statement of Hyrum

Smith, one of the prisoners, given under oath, before
the Municipal Court of the city of Nauvoo, Illinois, in the
summer of 1843.

“ The next morning after the close of this mock court
(held at Richmond, Judge Austin A. King presiding), a
large wagon drove up to the door of our prison house,
and a blacksmith entered with some chains and handcufs. He said his orders from the Judge were to handcuif and chain us together. He informed us that the
Judge made out a mittimus and sentenced us to jail
for treason; he also said that the Judge had done
this that we might not get bail. He also said that the
Judge had stated his intention to keep us in jail until
all the Mormons were driven from the State; and that
the Judge had further stated that if he let us out before the Mormons had left the State there would be another d—d fuss kicked up. I also heard the Judge say
myself, while he was sitting in his pretended court, ‘that
there was no law for us, or any of the Mormons in the
State of Missouri; that he had sworn to see them. exterminated, and to see the Governorls order executed to the
very letter, and he would do so}

“However, the blacksmith proceeded to put the irons
upon us. We were then ordered into the wagon and

drove oil‘ for Clay County. As we journeyed along on

 

HYRUM SMITH.

coviisn ram: “I.l\'I-IRPOOL ROUTE."

Digitized by C-OO IQ

 

 

Digitized by C:-00813
 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 239

 

the road, we were exhibited to the inhabitants. This_

public exhibition lasted until we arrived at the town of
Liberty, Clay County. There we were thrust into prison
again, and locked up; and were held there in confinement for the space of six months.

“Our place of lodging was the square side of hewed
white oak logs, and our food was anything but good
and decent. Poison was administered to us three or four
times. The effect it had upon our systems was, that it
vomited us almost to death, and then we would lay some
two or three days in a _ torpid, stupid state, not even
caring or wishing for life.

“The poison would inevitably have proved fatal had
not the power of Jehovah interposed in our behalf, to
save us from their wicked purpose. We were also subjected to the necessity of eating human jieshl for the space
of five days, or go without food, except a little coifee or
a little corn bread. I choose the latter alternative. None
of us partook of the flesh except Lyman Wight. We also
heard the guard which was placed over us, making sport
of us. saying that ‘ they had fed us upon Mormon
beefJ ,

“ I have described the appearance of this flesh to several experienced physicians, and they have decided that
it was human iiesh. We learned afterwards through one of
the guards that it was supposed that such acts of cannibalism as feeding us with human flesh would be considered a popular deed. But those concerned, on learning
that it would not take, tried to keep it secret; but the
fact was noised abroad before they took that precaution.

“While we were incarcerated in prison we petitioned
the Supreme Court of the State of Missouri for habeas
corpus twice, but we were as often refused by Judge
Reynolds, who is now Governor of that State.

“ We also petitioned one of the county judges for a writ
of habeas coojpus. This was granted in about three weeks

240 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

afterwards; but we were not permitted to have any trial.
We were only taken out of jail, and kept out for a few
hours, and then remanded back again. In the course of
three or four days after that time Judge Turnham came
into the jail in the evening, and said he had permitted
Mr. Rigdon to get bail; but said he had to do it in the
night, and had also to get away in the night, and unknown to any of the citizens, or they would kill him;
for they had sworn to kill him if they could iind him.
And, as to the rest of us, he dare not let us go for fear
of his own life, as well as ours.

“ He said it was hard to be confined under such circumstances, for he knew we were innocent men, and the
people also knew it; and that it was only persecution
and treachery, and the scenes of Jackson County acted
over again, for fear we would become too numerous in
that upper country. He said, ‘ the plan was concocted from
the Governor down to the lowest judge, and that that
wicked Baptist priest, Riley, was riding into town every
day to watch the people—-stirring up the minds of the
people against us all he could—exciting them, and stirring up their religious prejudices against us, for fear they
would let us go)

“ Mr. Rigdon, however, got bail and made his escape
to Illinois. The jailor, Samuel Tillory, told us also ‘ that
the whole plan was concocted from the Governor down
to the lowest judge in that upper country early the previous spring; and that the plan was more fully matured
at the time General Atchison went down to J eiferson
County with Generals Wilson, Lucas and Gillumi This

 

was sometime in September, when the mob was collected '

at De Witt. He also said that the Governor was now
ashamed enough of the whole transaction, and would be
glad to set us at liberty if he dared to do it; ‘but,l
said he, ‘you need not be concerned, for the Governor
has laid a plan for your release! He also said that MrAUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 241

Birch, the Statds Attorney, was appointed to be Circuit
Judge in the district including Davies County, and that
he (Birch) was instructed to fix the papers so that we
would be clear from any encumbrance in a very short
time. I

“Sometime in April we were taken to Davies County,
as they said, to have a trial; but when we arrived at that
place, instead of finding a court or a jm'y, we found another Inquisition; and Birch, who was the District Attorney,
the same man who was one of the ‘ court martial i when
we were sentenced ‘to death, was now the Circuit Judge
of that. pretended court, and the Grand Jury that were
cmpannelled were at the massacre at Haunls Mill, and
lively actors in that awful, solemn, disgraceful, cool-blooded
murder. All the pretence they made of excuse was ‘they
had done it because the Governor ordered it done!

“The same jury sat as a jury in the day time, and
were over us as a guard by night. They tantalized and
bclasted over us of their great achievements at Haunls

Mill and at other places; telling us how many houses‘

they had burned, and how many sheep, cattle and hogs
they had driven off belonging to the ‘Mormons ,-i and how
many rapes they had committed, etc. ' ' '

“These 1i'ends of the lower region boasted of these
acts of barbarity and tantalized our feelings with them
for ten days. We had heard of these acts of cruelty
previous to this time; but We were slow to believe that
such acts had been perpetrated.

“This Grand Jury constantly celebrated their achievments with grog and glass in‘ hand, like the Indian
warriors at the war dances, singing and telling each of
their exploits in murdering the ‘ Mormons} in plundering
their houses, and carrying 011' their property. All this
was (lone in the presence of Judge Birch, who had previously said in our hearing: ‘That there was no law for

the Mormons in the State of Mi880%1‘i.,
16

242 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

“After all these ten days of drunkenness we were informed that we were indicted for ‘ treason! murder! arson!
larceny! theft and stealing! P We asked for a change of
venue from that county to Marion County; but they
would not grant it. But they gave us a change of venue
from Davies to Boone County, and a mittimus was made
out by the pretended Judge Birch, without date, name or
place. They fitted us out with a two horse wagon and
horses, and four men, besides the Sheriff, to be our guard
—there were live of us.

“We started from Gallatin, the sun about two hours
high, P. M., and went as far as Diahman that evening,
and I stayed till morning. There we bought two horses of
the guard, and paid for one of them in clothing which we _
had with us, and for the other we gave our note.

“ We went down that day as far as Judge Morinls—-a
distance of some four or live miles. There we stayed until
morning, when we started on our journey to Boone County,
and travelled about twenty miles. There was bought Ca»
jug of whiskey, of which the guard drank freely. While
there the Sheriii‘ showed us the mittimus, before referred
to, without date or signature, and said that Judge Birch
told him never to carry us to Boone County, and to show
the mittimus ; and, said he, I shall take a good drink of
grog and go to bed, and you may do as you have a
mind to. Three others of the guard drank pretty freely
of whiskey sweetened with honey; they also went to bed
and were soon asleep. The other guard went with us
and helped us to saddle our horses. Two of us mounted
the horses and the other three started on foot, and thus
we took our change of venue for the State of Illinois.

“ In the course of nine or ten days we arrived safely
in Quincy, Adams County, where we found our families in
a state of poverty, although in good hea1th—they having
been driven out of the State previously by the murderous
militia under the exterminating order of the Executive of

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 243

Missouri. And now the people of that State, or a portion
of them, would be glad to make the people of this State
believe that my brother Joseph has committed treason,
and this they seek to do for the purpose of keeping up
their murderous and hellish persecution. They seem to be
unrelenting in thirsting for the blood of innocence, for I
do know most positively that my brother Joseph has committed no treason, nor violated one solitary item of law
or rule in the State of Missouri.

“But I do know that the Mormon people, en. masses,
were driven out of that State, after being robbed of all
they had, and that he barely escaped with his life. And
all this in consequence of the exterminating order of
Governor Boggs; the same being coniirmed by the Legislature of that State.

“And I do know, so does this Court and every rational
man who is acquainted with the circumstances, and every
man who shall hereafter become acquainted with the particulars thereof, will know that Governor Boggs and
Generals Clark, Lucas, Wilson and Gillum, also Austin A.
King, have committed treasonable acts against the citizens

of Missouri, and did violate the Constitution of the United.

States, and also the Constitution and laws of the State
of Missouri, and did exile and expel, at the point of the
bayonet, some twelve or fourteen thousand inhabitants of
the State, and did murder some three or four hundred
of men, women and children in cold blood in the most
horrid and cruel manner possible. And the whole of it
was caused by religious ‘-bigotry and persecution, and because the Mormons dared to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own conscience and agreeably
to His Divine Will, as revealed in the Scriptures of eternal
truth; and had turned away from following the vain
traditions of their fathers and would not worship according to the dogmas and commandments of those men
who preach for hire and divine for money, and teach for

244 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

doctrines the commandments of men, expecting that the
Constitution of the United States would have protected
them therein.

“ But, notwithstanding the Mormon people had purchased
upwards of two hundred thousand dollars worth of land,
most of which was entered and paid for at the Land
Office of the United States, in the State of Missouri, and
although the President of the United States has been
made acquainted with these facts and the particulars of
our perscxzutions and oppressions by petitions to him and
to Congress, yet they have not even attempted to restore
the Saints to their rights, or given any assurance that we
may hereafter expect redress from them.

“And I do also know, most positively and assuredly,
that my brother, Joseph Smith, Junior, has not been in the
State of Missouri since the spring of the year 1839. And

further this deponent saith not.
“ HYRUM SMITH."

._  I I ,.g''-. /1,
 - 1 F i'::‘—‘.'r:.-'\§‘___‘_‘_ ‘    '.'.\_r,;E/_:':'/%./ \-‘£‘_/ 3 I
'- 1'-53‘_h\ +. .1 T‘ if "~\.__‘/-' \—-0...-' / _  ‘'‘‘1v— 1 x.._.
.___-._‘_}./  .  L_H_~__!-rh ‘ \  / _ . Eh‘. .SI‘:V\.--\:_-‘.
.\ _. . _ ‘ _ _ ._
‘.~*"""',-A er,» =1 ~ 1Q; «J  *4» -he
3.‘. ' .-J r- ' "/‘=4. . J ‘=** 5* A.:.-v H». Lisa‘
I 1 "" “ \

 

CHAPTER XXIX.

Farewell Scenes :—Departure of the Last Remnant of the Exiles :—Court:
—Release of Two of the Prisoners :—Reflections in Prison.

N the 17th of March, 1839, my wife took leave of the
prison with her little children, and, with a broken
heart, returned to Far West, in order to get passage with
some of the brethren for Illinois. She tarried in Far
West a month. All the Society had gone from the State,
but a few of the poor and widows, and the Committee
who tarried behind to assist them in removing. About the
middle of April a gang of robbers entered Far West armed,
and ordered my wife, and the Committee, and the others to
be gone by such a time, or they would murder them.
This gang destroyed much furniture and other property.

Thus my wife was driven away according to the Governorls previous order, while I was still detained in a

filthy dungeon. My family were conveyed to Quincy, Illinois, distance two hundred and eighty miles, by David W.
Rogers, of New York, who is a descendant of the celebrated martyr, John Rogers, of Smithfield celebrity, England.

On the 20th of April, 1839,. the last of the Society departed from Far West. Thus had a whole people, variously estimated at from ten to fifteen thousand souls,
been driven from houses and lands and reduced to poverty, and had removed to another State during one short
winter and part of a spring. \ The sacriiice of property
was immense-—including houses, lands, cattle, sheep, hogs,
agricultural implements, furniture, household utensils, cloth246 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

I

ing, money and grain. One of the most ilourishing counties in the State and part of several others were reduced
to desolation, or inhabited only by marauding gangs of
murderers and robbers.

On the 24th of April our cases came before the Grand
Jury of the county of Bay; which Grand Jury, the reader
is aware, would be naturally composed of our persecutors and their accessories; and at whose head was the
same Judge King who had presided in the former mock
trial and Inquisition which committed us to prison.

Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer were dismissed, after
being imprisoned near six months. This release happened
just as Mr. Shearer came to visit his son for the last
time before he left the country. He came into the
prison and took an aifectionate leave of his son, who
wept as if his heart would break; but while he yet
lingered in town his son was called before the Court,
and, together with Mr. Chase, was told that he might go
at liberty. The father and son then embraced each other,
almost overcome with joy, and departed.

At the same time my brother, Orson Pratt, whom I had
not seen for a year, came from Illinois to see me, but was
only permitted to visit me for a few moments, and then
was ordered to depart.

Mrs. Phelps who had waited in prison for some days, in
hopes that the Court would release her husband, now
parted with him, overwhelmed with sorrow and tears, and,
with her infant, went away to remove to Illinois.

Thus our families wander in a strange laud, without our
protection, being robbed of house and home. 0 Lord! how
long?

Our number in prison were now reduced to four-one
having been added about the middle of April. His name
was King Follett ; he was dragged from his distressed
family just as they were leaving the State, being charged
with robbery, which meant that he was one of a posse

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 247

who took a keg of powder from a gang of ruftlans who
were out against the'Mormons. Thus, of all the Mormon
prisoners first kidnapped, only two remained in the 'State
—Mr. Gibbs having denied the faith to try and regain his
1iberty—these were Morris Phelps and myself.

All who were liberated on bail were forced to leave the
State, together with those who bailed them, thus forfeiting
many thousands of dollars to the coffers of the State.

Is it possible! Have I been recording the history of
realities as the scenes transpired in the broad light of the
nineteenth century—in the boasted land of liberty—and in
the most renowned republic now existing on the globe!
Alas! it is too true; would to God it were a dream—a
novel—-—a romance that had no existence save in the wild
regions of fancy. But the prison door yet grating on
its hinges,—the absence of my wife and little ones,-—
the gloom of the dungeon where I yet repose,—these and
ten thousand other things cause me to think that my
almost incredible narrative is no fiction, but an awful
rea.1ity——a fact more truly distressing than my feeble tongue
or pen can find words to set forth.

How often in my sleeping visions I see my beloved wife,
or my playful children surrounded with the pleasures of
home in my sweet little cottage, or walk with them in
some pleasant grove or flowery field, as in years past.
How often I see myself surrounded with listening thousands,
as in bygone years, and join with them in the sacred song
and prayer, or address them with the sound of the everlasting gospel. But, alas! I soon awake, and, to my inexpressible grief and sorrow, find myself still in my lonely
dungeon.

0 Liberty!

0 sound once delightful to every American ear!
0 sacred privilege of American citizenship!

Once sacred; now trampled under foot.

‘When shall I and my injured family and friends again

 

248 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

I

enjoy thy sweets‘! When shall we repose beneath thy
bower, or bask in thy boundless ocean of felicity ‘I. When
shall we sit again under our vine and under our fruit

trees, and worship our God, with none to molest or make us

afraid 3

Awake, 0 Americans!
Arise, 0 sons and daughters of freedom]

Restore a persecuted and injured people to their rights,
as citizens of a free republic. Down with tyranny and
oppression, and rescue your liberties from the brink of
ruin. Redeem your much injured country from the awful
stain upon its honor; and let the cries of helpless orphans
and the tears of the sorrowing widow cease to ascend up
before the Lord for vengeance upon the heads of those
who have slain, plundered, imprisoned and driven the
Saints. And let the news go forth to the wondering
nations that Columbia still is free.

0 tell it not in Britain; nor let the sound be heard in
Europe that Liberty is fallen; that the free institutions of
our once happy country are now destroyed, lest the sons
and daughters of Britannia rejoice and laugh us to seem ;
lest the children of monarchy triumph and have us in deri81011.

0 freedom, must thy spirit now withdraw

From earth, returning to its native heaven,

There to dwell, til], armed with sevenfold vengeance,
It comes again to earth with King Messiah,

_An<l all His marshalled hosts, in glory bright,

To tread the winepress of Almighty God,

And none escape ? Ye powers of Heaven, forbid;
Let freedom linger still on shores of time,

And in the breasts of thine afflicted saints,

Let it tlnd a peaceful rctirement— _

A place of rest, till o‘er the troubled earth,

Mercy, justice and eternal truth,

While journeying hand in hand to exalt the humble
And debase the proud; shall find some nation,

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Poor, oppressed, amicted and despised;

Cast out and trodden under foot of tyrants

Proud; the hiss, the byeword, and the scorn of lmavesAnd there let freedom's spirit wide prevail,

And grow and flourish ‘mid the humble poor-—
Exalted and enriched by virtue,

Knowledge, temperance and love; till o'er the earth
Messiah comes to reign; the proud consumed,

N o more oppress the poor,

Let freedom‘s eagle then (forthcoming, like

The dove from Noahis ark) on lofty pinions soar,

And spread its wide domain from end to end,

O*er all the vast expanse of this wide earth;

While freedom's temple rears its lofty spires

Amid the skies, and on its bosom rests

A cloud by day and flaming fire by night!

But stay my spirit, though thou fain wouldlst soar

On high, ‘mid scenes of glory, peace and joy;

From bondage free, and bid thy jail farewell.
Stop!—wait awhile l—let patience have her perfect work.
Return again to suEering scenes, through which

The way to glory lies, and speak of things

Around thee ;—Thou‘rt in prison stilll

But spring has now returned; the wintry blasts

Have ceased to bowl through prison crevicesThe soft and gentle breezes of the South

Are whistling gaily past, and incense sweet,

On zephyr‘s wing, with fragrance fills the air,

Wafted from blooming flowrets of the spring;

While round my lonely dungeon oft is heard

Melodious strains, as if the birds of spring,

In anthems sweet, conspired to pity and

Console the drooping spirits there confined.

All things around me show that days, and weeks,
And mdhths have fled, although to me not mark‘d

By Sabbaths, and but faintly marked by dim

And sombre rays of light, alternate lmid

The gloom of overhanging night, which still

Pervades my drear and solitary cell.

Where now those helpless ones I left to mourn?
Have they perished? No. What thenl
Elijah eallld and found them in the last

Has some

 

250

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Extreme, and multiplied their meal and oil?
Yes, verily; the Lord has filled the hearts
01 his poor saints with everlasting love,
Which, in proportion to their poverty,
Increased with each increasing want, till all
Reduced unto the widowls mite, and then,
Like her, their living they put in; and thus
0‘er1lowed the treasury of the Lord with more
Abundant stores than all the wealth of kings.
And thus supported, fed and clothed, and moved
From scenes of sorrow to a land of peace,
They live! and living still, they do rejoice

In tribulation deep-—

Well knowing their redemption drsweth nigh.

 

 

CHAPTER XXX.

LEITEB TO JUDGE AUSTIN A. KING.

“RICHMOND PRISON, May 13th, 1839.

“ Hon. Sir—Having been confined in prison near seven
months, and the time having arrived when a change of
venue can be taken in order for the further prosecution
of our trials, and the time when I can speak my mind
freely, without endangering the lives or liberties of any
but myself, I now take the liberty of seriously objecting
to a trial anywhere within the bounds of this State, and
of earnestly praying to your honor and to all the authori 

ties, civil and military, that my case may come within _

the law of BANISHMENT! enacted by Governor Boggs, and
so vigorously enforced upon from ten to fifteen thousand
of our Society, including my wife and little ones, together
with all my witnesses and friends.

“My reasons are obvious, and founded upon notorious
facts which are known to you, sir, and to the people in
general of this republic, and, therefore, need no proof; some
of them are as follows :

“ First: I have never received any protection by law,
either of my person, property or family, while residing in
this State, to which I first emigrated in 1831.

“Secondly: I was driven by force of arms from Jackson County, wounded and bleeding, in 1833, while my
house was burned, my crops and provisions robbed from
me or destroyed, and my land and improvements kept
from me until now, while my family was driven out, without shelter, at the approach of winter.

252 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

“ Thirdly: These crimes still go unpunished, notwithstanding I made oath before the Hon. Judge Ryland, then
acting District Judge, to the foregoing outrages, and afterwards applied in person to his excellency, Daniel Dunklin,
then Governor of the State, for redress and protection of
myself and friends, and the restoration of more than a
thousand of our fellow citizens to our homes.

“ Fourthly : My wife and children have now been driven
from our house and improvements in Caldwell County, and
banished the State on pain of death, together with about
ten thousand of our society, including all my friends and
witnesses, and this by the express orders of his excellency,
Lilburn W. Boggs, Governor of the State of Missouri, and
by the vigorous execution of this order by Generals Lucas
and Clark, and followed up by murders, rapes, plunderings, thefts and robberies of the most inhuman character,
by a lawless mob who had, from time to time, for more
than five years past, trampled upon all law and authority,

' and upon all the rights of man.

“ Fifthly: All these inhuman outrages and crimes go
unpunished, and are unnoticed by you, sir, and by all the
authorities of the State. Nay, rather, you are one of the
very actors. You, yourself, threatened in open court the
extermination of the ‘Mormoml if they should ever be
again guilty of cultivating their lands.

“ Sixthly: The Legislature of the State has approved
of and sanctioned this act of banishment, with all the
crimes connected therewith, by voting an appropriation of
two hundred thousand dollars for the payment of - troops
engaged in this unlawful, unconstitutional and treasonable
enterprise.

“In monarchial governments the banishment of criminals
after their legal trial and condemnation has been frequently
resorted to, but the banishment of innocent women and

. children from house, and home, and country, to wander

in a strange land, unprotected and unprovided for, while

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 253

their husbands and fathers are retained in dungeons, is
an act unknown in the annals of history, except in this
single instance, in the nineteenth century, when it has actually transpired in a republican State, where the Constitution guarantees to every man the protection of life,
liberty and property, and the right of trial by jury.

“ These, sir, are outrages which would put monarchy to
the blush, and from which the most despotic tyrants of
the dark ages would turn away with shame and disgust.
In these proceedings, sir, Missouri has enrolled her name
on the list of immortal fame. Her transactions will be
handed down the stream of time to the latest posterity,
who will read with wonder and astonishment the history
of proceedings which are without a parallel in the annals
of time.

“Why should the authorities of the State strain at a
gnat and swallow a camel?

“Why be so strictly legal as to compel me to pass
through all the forms of a slow and pretended legal
prosecution (previous to my enlargement), out of a pretence of respect to the laws of the State, which have
been openly trampled upon and disregarded towards us
from first to last?

“Why not include me in the general wholesale banishment. of our Society, that I. may support my family,
which are now reduced to beggary in a land of strangers 1

“But, sir, when the authorities of the State shall redress all these wrongs, shall punish the guilty according
to law, and shall restore my family and friends to all
our rights, and shall pay all the damages which we, as
a people, have sustained, then I shall believe them sincere in their professed zeal for law and justice; then
shall I be convinced that I can have a fair trial in the
State.

“But until then I hereby solemnly protest against being
tried in this State, with the full and conscientious con 

 

254 AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT.

viction that I have no just grounds to expect a fair and
impartial trial.

“ I, therefore, most sincerely pray your honor, and all
the authorities in the State, to either banish me without further persecution, or I freely consent to a trial before the Judiciary of the United States.

“With sentiments of consideration and due respect, I
have the honor to subscribe myself,

“Your prisoner,
“ P. P. PRATT?

 

CHAPTER XXXI.

The Prison :—Fare :—-Conduct of the Guards :—A Strange Couple :—My
Wife Visits the Prison :—Fasting and Prayer :—An Important Question:
Vision :—A  Spirit :—The Question Answered :—Visit from
Judge King:—Change of Venue :—Handcu1Ts :—Departure from the Prison:
—Journey :——Arriva1 in Columbia, Boone County :—Enter Another Prison:
—Treatment :—Arrivnl of Friends :—News from my Family :—Impressions of the Spirit :—Plan and Preparations for Escape :—Fourth of
July Celebration :—Flag :—Public Dinner:—Now‘s the Day :—Our Friends
take Leave :—Rendezvous.

HE four following chapters are extracted from the
Millennial Star, published in Liverpool, England, Numbers 9, 10 and 11, Vol. VIII. I give them in full,
with some little revision, although they contain a repetition of some of the things recorded in the foregoing
chapters:

At the end of this extraordinary mock trial or inquisition, which lasted over two weeks, I was unchained
from Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and the others, and being
separated from them, was conducted to a gloomy, dark,
cold and filthy dungeon in Richmond, Ray County, where
I was doomed to spend the winter and spring, and await
a further trial; while they shared a similar fate in a
place called Liberty, in Clay County.

When I first entered the dungeon there were some
twenty men, mostly heads of families, who had been torn
from their families in those awful times, and thrust into
prison. It was not only crowded to suffocation, without a
chair, stool, bench, bed, furniture or window light, but

 

256 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

just then completely iilled with smoke by a fire which was
lighted in a stove without a pipe, or any conductor for
the smoke to pass out, except at the crevices between
the timbers, where the winter storm was passing in.
When my guard conducted me to the door of this miserable cell it grated on its huge hinges and opened like
the .pit yawning to receive me; a volume of thick smoke
issued forth and seemed to forbid my entrance; but,
urged in my rear by bayonets and loaded pistols in the
hands of savage beings, I endeavored to enter, but was
forced to retreat again outside of the door to breathe
for a moment the free air. At this instant several pistols were cocked and presented at my head and breast,
with terrible threats and oaths of instant death if I did not
go in again. I told them to fire as soon as they pleased,
for I must breathe a moment or die in the attempt.
After standing a few moments, I again entered the prison,
and threw myself down, my face to the iioor, to avoid
the smoke. Here I remained for some time, partly in a
state of insensibility ; my heart sickened within me, and a
deathlike feeling came over me, from which I did not
wholly recover for several days.

I arose, however, as soon as I was able, and began to
speak to and recognize my fellow prisoners—most of whom
were my neighbors and acquaintances. The door was now
locked, bolted and barred, and several guards placed before
it. The fire died away, and the smoke gradually cleared
away from the dungeon; but the floor formed a hard and
cold winter lodging.

In a few days all those in our prison, except five, were
released on bail, and themselves and bail banished from
the State, with the rest of the Society; thus compelling
them to forfeit their bail bonds, which .amounted in all to
many thousand dollars. The five who remained were Morris
Phelps, Darwin Chase, Norman Shearer, Luman - Gibbs and
myself. Two of these were finally dismissed—being boys

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 257

scarcely out of their teens. But another was soon added
by the name of King Follet.

This made our final number four. One of this number,
viz.: Luman Gibbs, denied the faith and turned a traitor
to the others; becoming their most inveterate enemy.
This was in order to save his life and gain his liberty.
However, he was still kept in prison as a spy upon us,
lest it should be said that it was wholly a religious
persecution; but he was treated very well, and went out
to dine with the Sheriff or others, or to spend a day with
his wife whenever it pleased him to do so. Our food was
of the most unwholesome kind, and scant at that; consisting of bones and remnants of meat, coarse corn bread, and
sometimes a little coffee. We generally partook of our
meals in a standing position, using our lingers instead of
knives, forks or plates. A tin cup served us for our coffee.
We were guarded very strictly, both by night and day, by
two or three men with loaded pistols.

These consisted of the most unprincipled, profligate villains that could be found anywhere. They would swear,
drink, gamble, and sing the most obscene and disgusting
songs. They would boast of shooting the Mormons; robbing
and plundering them; committing rapes, etc. They would
also insult every female slave or black woman who might
happen to come within hearing, and then boast of their
criminal connections with them. The blasphemy; the noisy
grumbling; the blackguard chit chat; doleful lullaby and
vulgar songs of these guards grating daily upon our ears,
seemed like the howls and Wailings of the damned, or like
wandering spirits and demons hovering around to torment
us. What greatly added to our affliction, as if to complete
our hell, the old apostate, Gibbs, became very quarrelsome
and noisy—-not only to us, but with his wife also, who
sometimes came into the prison to spend a few days with
him. He was a hard faced, ill formed man, of about fifty

years of age; full of jealousy, extremely seltlsh, very weak
17

 

258 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

minded, and, withal, a little love cracked; and, I may say,
that he seemed not to possess one redeeming quality.

His wife was about the same age, and withal, a coarse,
tall, masculine looking woman, and one of whom he had no
reason to complain or be jealous. True, she did not love
him—for no female could possibly do that; but then no
one else would love her, nor was she disposed to court
their affections. However, he was jealous of her, and, therefore, abused her; and this kept a constant and noisy
strife and wrangling between them whenever she was
present.

VVho1e nights were spent in this way, during which no
one in or about the prison slept. After a quarrel of some
two or three days and nights between them, he would attempt to regain her love, and a conversation like the following would ensue. Luman, drawing down his face and
drawling his words with a loud and doleful tone, commenced as follows:

“Now, Phila, wonlt you love me? Come; herels my

‘watch, and herds all the money Pve got P Then turning

to us, he would exclaim: “Boys, Pll tell you all about
it; the fact is, she never did love me; she only married
me out of pity—we being members of the Baptist church
together in Vermont? Then again addressing his wife:
“Come now, Phila; wonlt you love me? O, that I had
been born a rich man! I would give you a dollar a minute to love me?

Phila would then laugh and call him “ a silly old fool?
Whereupon he would turn away in a rage, and exclaim:
“ Go along away, you —, you! Nobody wants your love,
no how P

On one occasion they had quarreled and kept us awake
all night, and just at break of day we heard a noise like
a scutile and a slamming against the wall; next followed
a womanls voice, half in a laugh and half in exultation:
—“ Te-he-he-he, Luman, whatls the matter? Whatls the

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 259

matter, Luman W Then a pause, and afterwards a mans
voice in a grum, sorry, and rather a whining tone was
heard at a distance from the bed, exclaiming: “Now,
I swan, Phila, thatls tu badf

The truth of the matter was this: She had. braced her
back against the wall, and with both her feet placed
against his body, had kicked him out of bed, and landed
him upon the opposite side of the room.

Such scenes as these and all the folly of the guards
served to enhance the misery of imprisonment, and to render our sufferings complete. We tried to keep them quiet,
but tried in vain. Neither threats nor persuasion, coaxing
nor reasoning had any influence over them. This miserable
specimen of humanity was a peculiar favorite of the SheriE
and guards, and other citizens of Richmond. He was considered by them as the only honest, good, deserving man
in the prison. They often expressed pity for him, and
wished he was at liberty. He, in turn, Watched our movements closely, and was ready to betray us on the least
show, on our part, of any meditated plan of escape.

Under these painful circumstances we spent a long and
dreary Winter. Our whole community, who were not in
prison, were forced out of the State, with the loss of
homes, property, and many lives. They fled by thousands
to Illinois.

My wife visited me several times in prison ; but at length
the period expired that the State authorities had stipulated
for every Mormon to be gone, and my wife and children,
and a few others who remained behind, were obliged to
fly or be exterminated, as bands of armed men were roaming amid the deserted settlements, robbing, plundering,
destroying property, and threatening all who remained.

My fellow prisoners, who had been separated from me
and sent to the prison at Liberty, had also effected their
escape, and had fled to Illinois to join their families. In
short, all were gone, except King Follett, Morris Phelps

 

260 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

and myself, and the old apostate, who was left to torment us

Alone in a State which was wholly governed by an open
banditti of murderers and robbers, we seemed abandoned to
our fate, and doomed to su&'er that full weight of vengeance and fury which seemed in reserve for an entire
people; but that people were now beyond their reach; all
the fury of the storm, therefore, seemed now to beat upon
our heads. We were daily threatened with assassination,
without the form of a trial ; and were repeatedly told that
we never should escape alive from the State Our guards
were doubly vigilant, while the Sheriff took every possible
precaution. Luman,. the apostate, was also in constant
watchfulness, and busy in forming plans -for escape; then
accusing us and pretending to reveal wonderful things to
our keepers in regard to our plans ; which, in fact, only existed in his lying brain. This increased the severity of our
confinement, and seemed to preclude the possibility of escape.

To be tried without friends or witnesses, or even with
them, by a set of “ Gadianton robbers ii and murderers,
who could drive out and murder women and children, was
but to be condemned and executed; to tarry there and

. drag out a miserable life, while o11r wives and children

wandered abroad in a land of strangers, without the protection of husbands and fathers, was worse than to die ten
thousand deaths.

Under these circumstances, and half way between hope
and despair, I spent several days in fasting and prayer,
during which one deep and all absorbing inquiry, one only
thought, seemed to hold possession of my mind. It seemed
to me that if there was a God in Heaven who ever spake
to man on earth I would know from him the truth of this
one question. It was not how long shall I suffer; it was
not when or by what means I should be delivered; but
it was simply this: Shall I ever, at any time, however
distant it may be, or whatever I may suffer first; shall I

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 261

ever be free again in this life, and enjoy the society of
my dear wife and children, and walk abroad at liberty,
dwell in society and preach the gospel, as I have done in
bygone years 1

Let me be sure of this and 1 care not what I suifer.
To circumnavigate the globe, to traverse the deserts of
Arabia, to wander amid the wild scenes of the Rocky
Mountains to accomplish so desirable an object, would
seem like a mere trifle if I could only be sure at last.
After some days of prayer and fasting, and seeking the
Lord on the subject, I retired to my bed in my lonely
chamber at an early hour, and while the other prisoners
and the guard were chatting and beguiling the lonesome
hours in the upper apartment of the prison, I lay in silence,
seeking and expecting an answer to my prayer, when suddenly I seemed carried away in the spirit, and no longer
sensible to outward objects with which I was surrounded.
A heaven of peace and calmness pervaded my bosom; a
personage from the world of spirits stood before me with a
smile of compassion in every look, and pity mingled with
the tenderest love and sympathy in every expression of the
countenance. A soft hand seemed placed within my own,
and a glowing cheek was laid in tenderness and warmth
upon mine. A well known voice saluted me, which I
readily recognized as that of the wife of my youth, who
had for near two years been sweetly sleeping where the
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest. I
was made to realize that she was sent to commune with
me, and answer my question.

Knowing this, I said to her in a most earnest and
inquiring tone: Shall I ever be at liberty again in this
life and enjoy the society of my family and the Saints,
and preach the gospel as I have done? She answered
definitely and unhesitatingly: “YES W I then recollected
that I had agreed to be satisfied with the knowledge of
that one fact, but now I wanted more.

 

262 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Said I: Can you tell me how, or by what means, or
when I shall escape? She replied: “THAT THING Is NOT
MADE KNOWN TO ME Ymvl I instantly felt that I had
gone beyond my agreement and my faith‘ in asking this
last question, and that I must be contented at present
with the answer to the iirst.

Her gentle spirit then saluted me and withdrew. I came
to myself. The doleful noise of the guards, and the wrangling and angry words of the old apostate again grated on
my ears, but Heaven and hope were in my soul.

Next morning I related the whole circumstance of my
vision to my two fellow prisoners, who rejoiced exceedingly.
This may seem to some like an idle dream, or a romance
of the imagination; but to me it was, and always will be,
a reality, both as it regards what I then experienced and
the fulfilment afterwards. * * * * * * "

In order to show some pretence of respect for some of
the forms of law, Judge Austin A. King now entered our
prison and took our testimony, preparatory to a change of
venue. I shall never forget this interxiew. There stood
our Judge, face to face with those who, by his cruelty and
injustice, had lived a cold half year in a dungeon. He
refused to look us in the eye; hung his head and looked
like a ' culprit before his betters about to receive his doom.
The looks of guilt and misery portrayed in his countenance
during that brief interview bespoke more of misery than
we had suffered during our confinement. I actually pitied
him in my heart. With an extraordinary effort and a
voice scarcely audible, he administered the oaths and withdrew.

By means of this change we were finally to be removed
one hundred miles down the country, and confined in the
prison at Columbia, Boone County, to await a final trial.

A long, dreary winter and spring had now passed away,
and the time drew near for our removal. We looked forward to the change with some degree of hope and expecAUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 263

tation, for it could not be for the worse, and might, perhaps, be for the better. At any rate, the journey would
give us a chance to leave our dark and loathsome dungeon,
and look upon the light of day, the beauties of nature,
and to breathe the untainted air.

The morning of the departure at length arrived. Mr.
Brown, the Sheriii‘, entered our prison with a fierce and
savage look, and, bidding us hold out our hands, coupled
us together in pairs, with irons locked on our wrists, and
marched us out; and, amid a throng of people, placed us
in a carriage. Accompanied with four other guards on
horseback, with loaded pistols, we bid farewell to Richmond.

It was a pleasant morning in early summer, when all the
freshness and beauty of spring seemed blended in rich profusion, with the productions peculiar to the season as it
advanced towards maturity. The leaves on the trees were
full grown, and the forest presented a freshness of beauty
and loveliness which reminded me of Paradise. The plains
were covered with a coat of green, and the wild flowers
of the prairie, blooming in all their variety, sent forth a
perfume which mingled with every zephyr, and wafted
sweet odors on every breeze. To prisoners who had
breathed only a tainted air for half a year the very
ground itself seemed to send forth a sweetness which was
plainly perceptible to the senses. We enjoyed our ride
through that delightful country more than any being could
who had never been confined for weary months in a dreary
dungeon.

The day at length closed, and we were taken into a
house and stretched upon our backs on the floor, all fastened together with wrist and ankle irons in such a manner that we could not turn nor change our position. The
doors and windows were then made fast, and the sentinels
on duty guarded us by turns until morning. This was our
nightls rest after forty miles travel.

264 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

The next day proved extremely rainy, with heavy thunder; but still we travelled. In the course of the day we
came to a stream which was swollen by the rains to that
degree that we had to swim over it and stem a swift current. This hindered us for some hours-—in crossing over
with horses, wagons, baggage, etc.; and as all of us were
engaged in this business, our chains were taken oil‘ for the
time.
When we had crossed over, put on our clothes, and
replaced the baggage, saddles, arms, etc., ready for a
start, it was night, and we were very weary and hungry,
having had no refreshments during the day. The rain was
also pouring in torrents, and the night setting in extremely
dark. Four miles of wild country, partly covered with
forests and underwood, still lay between us and the nearest
house. Through the hurry of the moment, or for some
other reason, they neglected to replace our irons, and our
limbs were free. The carriage drove through a thick forest
during the extreme darkness, and was several times on the
eve of upsetting. This caused us to assume a position for
saving ourselves by rising upon our feet, ready to jump out
in case of the carriage upsetting.

The Sheriff and guards seeing this, rode close on ‘each
side, and, cocking their pistols, swore they would shoot us
dead if we attempted to leave the carriage, and that if it
upset they would shoot us anyhow, for fear we might
attempt to escape.

After two days more ‘of rain, hail and travel, we arrived
at Columbia, where we were immediately thrust into a
gloomy dungeon filled with darkness, iilth and cobwebs;
the naked iloor was our lodging. We had travelled hard,
through rain and fatigue, for several days, and on the last
day had rode till sundown without refreshment. We were
extremely hungry and weary, but received no refreshment,
not even a drink of water, till late in the evening, when
our new keeper, Mr. John Scott, visited us with some but 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 265

termilk and bread; but we were now too much exhausted
and too low spirited to eat. We thanked him for his
kindness, and sank down exhausted on the floor, where we
rested as well as we could till morning. We saw no more
of Sheriff Brown or his guards, and will now take final
leave of them, merely observing that they made it a point
to insult every black woman they met on the way, frequently turning aside with them into the woods and fields. '

On returning to the company they would boast and glory
in their criminal intercourse with them.

After spending one night in our new dungeon we were called on by the Sheriff to come up into a more comfortable
apartment, and were treated with some degree of humanity.
We were no longer troubled with guards, and even Luman
and Phila behaved much better. We had been in our new
situation something like a month, when we were visited by
some friends from Illinois, from whom we learned the fate
of our families and friends.

The wife of Mr. . Phelps rode one hundred and sixty
miles on horseback, accompanied by her brother, a young
man named Clark. They arrived in Columbia and paid
us a visit in prison about the 1st of July. My brother
Orson also arrived on horseback about the same time.
‘With these friends we had a good visit for some daysthey being permitted to stay in the prison with us. They
also brought a letter from my wife, by which I learned
that she made her escape from Far West to Quincy,
Illinois, with her children and some of her goods, by the
aid of Mr. David Rogers, of New York. During this
journey they were much exposed to hardships and trouble,
having to camp by the way, in company with other women
and children who were in a like condition. On crossing
a swollen stream, Mrs. Pratt had left the carriage to cross
on a foot bridge, leaving the children to ride through it-.
She had just crossed over and turned to look back, to see
whether the carriage came through in safety, when she

266 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

discovered a little girlls bonnet floating down the stream,
and, on examination, as the carriage rose the bank, her
daughter, a girl of six years old, was missing from the
carriage. The next moment she saw her floating down
the swift current. She gave the alarm to Mr. Rogers, the
driver, who instantly dropped the reins and sprang after
her into the stream.

At this instant the horses, being high spirited and active,
began to run, and would probably have dashed themselves
and the carriage, goods, and the other child to pieces
but for the timely interference of a large prong of a
tree, which caught the carriage with such a strong hold
that all was brought to a stand. In the meantime Mr.
Rogers succeeded in rescuing the child and bringing her
safe to shore.

She had, as she stated, pitched head foremost out of
the carriage into the water. One of the wheels ran over
her, and crushed her fast into the mud at the bottom of
the stream; but as it rolled over she caught the spokes
with her hands, and by this means the same weight that
crushed her down brought her to the surface and saved
her life. On examination the marks of the wheel was
distinctly seen on both her thighs, which were seriously
injured and nearly broken.

After a Wearisome ‘journey and various toils and dangers, they at length arrived at Quincy, Illinois, where Mrs.
Pratt rented a. small house, and by the sale of a few
books, with the use of her two cows, which some of the
brethren had brought from Missouri for her, she was making shift to live from day to day. She still expressed some
faint hopes of seeing her husband again in a land of liberty,
although at present there was little ground to hope, and
she was sometimes nearly in despair.

Such was the news brought us by the arrival of our
friends in the prison at Columbia on the 1st of July,
1839, after eight months of weary coniinement. Previous

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 267

to their arrival the Lord had shown me in a vision of
the night the manner and means of escape. And, like
Pharaohls dream, the thing had been doubled—-that is
shown to me on two occasions in the same manner.

Mrs. Phelps had the same thing shown to her in a
vision previous to her arrival; my brother, Orson Pratt,
also came to us with a firm impression that we were
about to be delivered. He even predicted that we should
go to Illinois, when he should return there. As we sat
pondering upon these things, and comparing our visions
and manifestations of the spirit on this subject, my brother
Orson opened the Book of Mormon, when the first sentence that caught his eye was the words of Ammon to
King Lamoni: “ Behold, my brother and my brethren are
in prison, in the land of Middoni, and I go to deliver
them W This was indeed a similar instance to ours. Am- mon, on that occasion had an own brother in prison, and

also brethren in the ministry, and did deliver them. Our
case was exactly similar, not in Middoni, but in Missouri.
And, what was still more strange, in a book of six hundred pages, this was the only sentence which would have
fitted our case.

He now began in earnest to make arrangements for our
escape. If there had been no strong bolts and bars to
overcome, still there was one serious obstacle which a miracle alone could immediately remove, which was this: I
was then very sick and scarcely able to stand on my
feet, or to go up and down from the upper room, where
we were in the day time, to the dungeon where we slept.

It was the second of July, and our friends could only
make an excuse for staying to spend the great national
holiday with us (the 4th) before they must leave or excite
the suspicions and ill will of the people; and, as that
day had been a lucky one for our fathers and our nation,
we had determined on that time as the proper one to
bid farewell to bondage and gain our liberty. In short,

268 AUTOBIOGRAPHY cF PARLEY P. PRATT.

we had determined to make that notable day a jubilee
to us, or perish in the attempt. VVe, therefore, prayed
earnestly to the Lord, that if he had determined to favor
our plan, he would heal and strengthen me, and give us
all courage to act well our part. Through the ministration of the ordinance appointed for healing, I was instantly
healed, and from that moment began to feel as strong
and fearless as a lion.

Our plan was this: My brother, Orson Pratt, was to
wait on the Judge and Attorney, and obtain various
papers and arrangements for summoning witnesses from
Illinois to attend our trial, which had just bwn adjourned
for some months to come. He was also to procure an
order from the Court to take affidavits in Illinois, in case
the witnesses should object to come to the State from
which they had been banished, in order to attend the
trials.

These active preparations on our part to defend our
case, together with engaging a lawyer or two, and paying a part of their fees before hand, served as a sufficient
blindfold to cover our real intentions. This done, and the
papers all prepared in the hands of my brother, he and
Mrs. Phelps and her brother were to stay with us until
the 4th, and after celebrating the day with a dinner in
the prison (which we obtained leave to do), he and the
young Mr. ‘Clark were to take leave with their horses, and
also with the horse and saddle on which Mrs. Phelps
had ridden, on pretence of taking him home with them
to Illinois, while she stayed with her husband a few
weeks in the prison; in the meantime engaging her board
in the family of the keeper, who occupied part of the
building in connection with the prison.

This measure, on the part of Mrs. Phelps, served the
double purpose of lulling them into serenity, and also of
furnishing a third horse; as there were three of us.
These three horses were to be stationed in a thicket, or

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 269

forest, about half a mile from the prison, and there the
two friends were to await, in readiness for us to mount,
should we be so fortunate as to reach the thicket alive.

 

Sundown, on the evening of the fourth, was the mo- ment agreed upon, and if we did not then appear they
were to give us up for lost, and make the best of their

way to Illinois and inform our friends that we had gone
to Paradise in attempting to come to them. The reason
for appointing this hour was this: Our door would be
opened at sundown to hand in our supper, and we must
then make the attempt as our only chance; for it was
customary to lock us up in the lower dungeon as soon as
the shades of evening began to appear.

This plan all matured, and the arrangements completed
with the court and the lawyers, the fourth of July dawned
upon us with hope and expectation. VVhi1e the town and
nation were alive with the bustle of preparation for the
celebration of the American Jubilee, and while guns were
firing and music sounding without, our prison presented a
scene of scarcely less life and cheerfulness; for we were
also preparing to do proper honors to the day. We had
prevailed on the keeper to furnish us with a long pole,
on which to suspend a ilag, and also with some red stripes
of cloth. We then tore a shirt in pieces, and took the
body of it for the ground work of a iiag, forming with
the red stripes of cloth an eagle and the word ‘* Izibertyf
in large letters. This rude flag of red and white was suspended on the pole from the prison window, directly in
front of the public square and court house, and composed
one of the greatest attractions of the day. Hundreds of
the people from the country, as well as villagers who were
there at the celebration, would come up and stare at the
flag, and reading the motto, would go swearing or laughing
away, exclaiming, “Liberty! Liberty! What have the Mormons to do with celebrating liberty in a damned old
prison P

270 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

In the meantime active preparations were in progress
for our public dinner; and with the contributions of our
friends who were to partake with us, and a portion served
from the public table of the citizens of the town, we had
a plentiful supply. And, as we considered it was to be a
day of release, we partook of our feast with much cheer,
and with thankful as well as social feelings, which I think
have been seldom if ever surpassed.

0 ye sons of Columbia, at home and abroad! Think
back to the fourth of July, 1839; call to mind your feast
in honor of national freedom, and ask yourselves the question, whether in all your pomp and show of joy and social
glee, you felt anything compared with our feelings, or the
interest excited during that feast.

Eight months and four days we had been deprived of
the sweets of that liberty which a whole nation was then
engaged in celebrating; and we felt that:

Now‘s the day, and now's the hour,
To trample on a 'cyrant's power;

To burst at once the prison‘s gloom,
Or find a martyr‘d hero's tomb.

The dinner over, our brethren took a final leave of us
and our prison, loaded with love, respects, compliments and
messages to our families and friends in Illinois. All these,
together with the goodbyes and farewells, were heard and
witnessed by the keepers family, and served the purpose
for which they were intended, viz.: To lull them into security, and to remove all possible ground of suspicion as
to our intentions.

After riding out of town a mile or two in the forest,
on the road towards Illinois, they turned off into the thick
leaved wilderness, and made their way in secret, as best as
they could, to the thicket agreed upon, within about half
a mile of the prison; where, with horses saddled and bridle
reins in hand, they awaited in anxious suspense the slow
progress of the setting sun.

 

CHAPTER XXXII.

Description of the Prison :—Ladies in the Prison :—Evening of a Public Day;
—Song:—0bstinate Coffee Pot :—Order of Attack :—Escape:—Raee :Great Excitement:—Our Friends in the Thicket :—Prisoners Gain the
Thicket :—Flight :—Encounter :—-Climb a Tree :—Faint :-—Prayers :—Night
Favors us at Last :—Loss of my Horse :—Jonrney on Foot :—
Reflections.

HE prison at Columbia was situated in the same

square with the court house, being on the north edge
of the town. Between it and the wilderness, where our
friends held the horses in waiting, there were several
fields and fences, say for the distance of half a mile,
consisting of meadow and pasture land, and all in full
view of the town. The prison consisted of a block
house, two stories high, 'with two ' rooms below and two
above. The keeper and his family occupied one end, and
the other was used as the prison—the only entrance
being through the lower room of the dwelling part, which
was occupied by the family, and then up a steep flight
of stairs,- at the head of which was a heavy oaken door,
ironed, locked and bolted as if to secure a Bonaparte or a
Samson. On the inside of this was still another door,
which was but slender, with a square hole near the top,
of suflicient size to hand in the food and dishes of the
prisoners.

The large, heavy door had always to be opened when
food, drink, or other articles were handed in; and while
open, the inner door served as a temporary guard to prevent prisoners from escaping, and was not always opened

272 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

on such occasions, the food being handed through the hole
in the top of the door, while the door itself remained
locked. However, as a fortunate circumstance for us, the
coffee pot when filled would not easily slip through the
hole in the door, and, rather than spill the coffee and
burn his fingers, the keeper would sometimes unlock and
open the inner door, in order to set in this huge and obstinate pot; and once in, the door would immediately
close, and the key be turned, while the outer door would
perhaps stand open till the supper was finished, and the
dishes handed out. _

Now, our whole chance of escape depended on the question, whether the inner door would be opened that evening, or the coffee pot squeezed in at the hole in the top.
Mrs. Phelps and Mrs. Gibbs were in the upper room of
the keeperls apartment, near the head of ' the stairs, and
only a log or timber partition between us and them, and
several open crevices in the same, so that we could easily
communicate with them. One of them was waiting the
issue of the great scene about to be enacted with almost
breathless interest and feverish anxiety, as on the good
or ill success of that moment depended her future hopes
through life, while the other was totally ignorant of the
whole affair. In a far corner of our prison sat Luman,
the old apostate, entirely ignorant of the whole plan, and
with no other anxiety than a slight wish for the sun to
go down, that he might enjoy his supper and the society
of his dear “ Philall in his curtained bed in the upper
room, while we were locked in the dungeon below to
sleep on an oak floor, amid cobwebs and filth.

The citizens of the town were now some of them gathering in small groups outside of their doors to enjoy the
quiet of a summer evening, to smoke a cigar or chat
over the merits of the celebration; while others were on
horseback, to enjoy an eveningls ride or to return to their
homes. Bands of music, or rather an occasional beat of

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 273

the drum, or blast of the bugle, was still to be heard in
the distance; while a few soldiers, or rather militia in
uniform, were hurrying to and fro. Groups of boys were
playing about the square, and last, though not least, our
flag was still on high, with “ Liberty ii and the eagle in
bold colors waving to the night breeze. This had so attracted the attention of the little fellows that once and
again they begged of us to make them a present of it;
but we told them we could not spare it till the next
moming—the fact is, we were not willing to surrender
our castle before the time, or till we made good our
retreat.

As the sun began to decline behind the long range of
forest which bounded the western horizon, and the
lengthened shadows of the tall trees were thrown over
our prison, we called upon the Lord to prosper us and
open our way, and then sang aloud the following lines:

Lord, cause their foolish plans to fail,
And let them faint or die:

Our souls would quit this poor old jail,
And fly to IllinoisTo join with the embodied Saints,
Who are with freedom blestz
That only bliss for which we pant,

With them awhile to rest.

Give joy for gt-ief—give ease for pain,
Take all our fees away;

But let us find our friends again
In this eventful day.

These lines were sung several times over, with the spirit
and with the understanding also, and very loud and distinct-—being heard by the old apostate and his wife, and
by the keepers of the prison; but the doctrine of spiritualizin g had become so prevalent that neither this, nor

the flag of liberty, nor any other Scripture seemed to them
' 18

 

274 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

‘to have any literal meaning, till they found too late the

true interpretation by the fulfilment.

The sun was now setting, and the footsteps of the old
keeper were heard on the stairs—the key turned, the
outer door grated on its huge hinges, while at the same
moment we sprang upon our feet, hats and coats on
(rather an unusual dress for a hot day in J uly—for, by
the bye, my hat proved to be a fur cap, which I were
when first taken in November previous), and stood by the
door to act the part of waiters in receiving the dishes
and food for supper, and placing them on the table. Dish
after dish was handed in through the small aperture in
the door, and duly received and placed upon the table
by us, with as much grace and as calm countenances as
if we thought of nothing else but our suppers. And I
will now venture to say that famishing men never watched
the movements of a coffee pot with more anxiety than we
did on this occasion. At length the other dishes all
being handed in, the huge pot made its appearance in the
hole in the top of the door, but one of us cried out to
the keeper—“ Colonel, you will only spill the coffee by
attempting to put it through, besides, it burns our fingers;
it will be more convenient to unlock and hand it in at
the door! With this it was lowered down again, and
the key turned on the inner door.

In this, as in most other fields of battle, where liberty
and life depend on the issue, every one understood the

part assigned to him and exactly filled it. Mr. Follett
was to give the door a sudden pull, and fling it wide

open the moment the key was turned. Mr. Phelps being
well skilled in wrestling was to press out foremost, and
come in contact with the jailer; I was to follow in the
centre, and Mr. Follett, who held the door, was to bring
up the rear, while sister Phelps was to pray.

No sooner was the key turned than the door was seized
by Mr. Follett with both hands; and with his foot placed

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 275

against the wall, he soon opened a passage, which was
in the same instant tilled by Mr. Phelps, and followed
by myself and Mr. Follett. The old jailer strode across
the way, and stretched out his arms like Bunyan-‘s Apollion, or like the giant Despair in Doubting Castle, but all
to no purpose. One or two leaps brought us to the bottom of the stairs, carrying the old gentleman with us
headlong, helter skelter, while old Luman sat and laughed

in his corner of the prison, and Mrs. Phelps exclaimed,,

“ O Lord God of Israel, thou canst help? Old Mrs. Gibbs
looked on in silent amazement, while the jailefs wife
acted the part of the giant Despairls wife, Diilldence, and
not only assisted in the scume, but cried out so loud that
the town was soon alarmed. In the mean time we found
ourselves in the open air, in front of the prison and in
full view of the citizens, who had already commenced to
rally, while Mr. Phelps and the jailer still clinched fast
hold of each other like two mastiifs. However, in another
instant he cleared himself, and we were all three scampering oil‘ th_rough the fields towards the thicket.

By this time the town was all in‘ motion. The quietness of the evening was suddenly changed into noise and
hustle, and it was soon evident that the thrilling scenes
of the great drama of the 4th of July, and of the Columbian celebration of liberty were yet to be enacted. The
streets on both sides of the fields where we were running
were soon thronged with soldiers in uniform, mounted riflemen, footmen with fence stakes, clubs, or with whatever
came to hand, and with boys, dogs, etc., all running,
rushing, screaming, swearing, shouting, bawling and looking, while clouds of dust rose behind them. The cattle
also partook of the general panic and ran bellowing away,
as if to hide from the scene. The fields behind us also
presented a similar scene. Fences were leaped or broken
down with a crash 3 men, boys and horses came tumblingover hedge and ditch, rushing with the fury of a whirl-276 AUTOBIOGRAPHY‘ OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

wind in the chase; but we kept our course for the thicket,
our toes barely touching the ground, while we seemed to

leap with the ileetness of a deer, or as the young hart
upon the mountains.

ESCAPE FROM PRISON.

Our friends who had stood waiting in the thicket, had
watched the last rays of the sun as they faded away, and
had observed the quiet stillness of the evening as it began to steal over the distant village where we were coniincd; and had listened with almost breathless anxiety
for the first sound which was to set all things in commotion, and which would say to them in language not to
be misunderstood, that the struggle had commenced. For
some moments after the last golden beam had disappeared
they listened in vain. The occasional lowing of a cow as
she came home from the woodland pasture, impatient for

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 277

her calf and the milkmaid to ease her of her rich burthen;
the mingled sound of human voices in the distance in
common conversation, the merry laugh of the young beaux
and their sweethearts, the quiet song of the whippoorwill,
mingled with the merry notes of the violin, the thrill of
the bugle, or the soft and plaintive notes of the ilute,
stole upon the silence of the evening, and were occasionally interrupted by the clatter of hoofs, as a few of the
citizens were retiring from the enjoyments of a public day
to their own peaceful homes in the country. These, and
the beatings of their anxious and almost bursting hearts,
were the only sounds which fell upon their ear, till suddenly they heard a rumbling and confused noise, as of
footsteps rushing down othe stairs of a prison, then a shrill
cry of alarm from Mrs. Diffidence, the giantess, and soon
followed by the shouts and rush of men, dogs, horses and
prisoners towards the spot where they were located. They
then sprang forward to the edge of the iields and ran
back again to the horses, and again returned, as if the
using of their own limbs would serve to add nimbleness
to those of the prisoners, and to quicken their speed.

As soon as the prisoners drew near, they were hailed
by their friends, and conducted to the horses. They were
breathless and nearly ready to faint; but in a moment
they were assisted to mount, and a whip and the reins
placed in their hands, while the only words interchanged
were—“ Fly quickly, they are upon you P “Which way
shall we goill “ Where you can; you are already nearly
surroundedll “But what will you do? they will kill you
if they cannot catch us." “ We will take care of ourselves; fly, fly, I say, instantly? These words were exchanged with the quickness of thought, while we were
mounting and reining our horses; in another instant we
were all separated from each other, and each one was
making the best shift he could for his own individual
safety.

278 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

I had taken about the third jump with my horse when
I encountered a man rushing upon me with a rifle, and,
taking aim at my head, he said, “G—d d—n you, stop,
or P11 shoot you? He was then only a few paces from
me, and others were rushing close in his rear, but I turned
my horse quickly in another direction, and rushed with
all speed into the thickest of the forest, followed for some
minutes by him and his dog; but I soon found myself
alone, while I could only hear the sound of distant voices,
the rushing of horsemen in every direction, with the barking of dogs. What had become of my companions or
our friends I knew not. I rode on at full speed for a
mile or more, when the woods terminated, and no alternative was left for me but to go ether to the right or to
the left into one of the public highways where I would
be every moment exposed to my pursuers, or go over the
fence and pass through the open fields to the wilderness
beyond, or, on the other hand, to turn back into the heart
of the forest, partly towards the town and prison from
whence I had escaped. As horsels feet and menis voices
were already heard along the highways which lay on each
side of me, I determined upon the latter. I, therefore,
changed my course, took my back track, and plunged into
the depth of the forest. I then dismounted, tied my horse
in a thicket, walked some distance from him and climbed
a tree—intending to wait in this situation amid the concealment of the thick foliage till the darkness of evening
would enable me to proceed with safety. Seating myself
in one of its forked branches, and placing my arms in
two other similar forks, I was supported from falling, although in a moment after I had ceased my exertions I
fainted away. In this situation I remained for some time,
without the least power to change my position or help
myself; my breath was gone through over exertion, and
my mouth and throat parched with a burning thirst, my
stomach sickened, and as I began again to breathe I was

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 279

seized with vomiting, and threw up nearly all the food
which my stomach contained. I then gradually recovered
my strength till I could speak, when I began to call on
the Lord, saying, “O Lord, strengthen me this once, deliver me from my persecutors and bring me in safety to
a land of liberty, and I will praise thy name and give
thee all the glory, and the remnant of my days shall be
wholly devoted to thy service; for surely my life is now
at stake, and if preserved, it is thy gift, therefore I shall
owe it all to theell

The darkness of evening was now fast setting in, and
every moment seemed to increase my safety and security
from immediate discovery, although I could still hear the
distant sound of tramping horses, and the voices of men
and dogs in pursuit, and sometimes so near that I could
distinguish some of their words. It was a dark and moonless evening, the sky was only lighted by the glimmer of
a few stars pa.rtly obscured by the clouds, and the thick
foliage of the forest increased the gloom, and served to
render the darkness nearly complete. I now came down
from the tree and felt my way to the place where I had
tied my horse, but as good or ill luck would have it, he
had loosed himself and gone, leaving me to my fate. I
then groped my way amid‘ the dark shades of the forest
to a small stream of warm, muddy water, and, stooping
down, partly quenched my thirst. I then made my way
to the highway and commenced my journey on foot, carefully watching on either hand lest I should be surprised
and taken.

I was an entire snger to the country—having no
guide but the polar star. My road lay nearly northward,
and upwards of a hundred miles of a wild country, peopled only by enemies, still lay between me and a State
where the principles of freedom yet prevailed in a sumcient degree to insure my safety. If I could make my
way through this wilderness of enemies, on foot, after the

280 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

weakness and debility caused by eight monthsl confinement, and after the fatigues of my eveningls race, and
neither inquire the way nor make my appearance at any
house for entertainment and refreshment, then I should
still have the great Mississippi River to ferry over, and
be liable to be discovered and reta-ken in the act, while
in sight of liberty. The thoughts of these dangers, the
anxious inquiries of my mind as to what had become of
my fellow prisoners and friends, which I had no means
of satisfying, and the hopes and expectations of soon
meeting my family and friends in a land of liberty, alternately occupied my mind as I slowly pursued my solitary
way during that dark and, to me, eventful night.

 

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Dawn :—Bewildered in a Forest :—Beautiful Valley :—Escape of Phelps:—Dia—

1ogue:—His Final Escape and Arrival in lllinois:—Fatc of our Two'

Friends :—Interview between my Brother Orson and my WiIc:—She Prepares for my Reception:—Disappointment:—Excitement:—-Search :—Suspense:—Scenes at the Prison:—Treatment of Mrs. Phelps :—Mr. Follet,
Retaken:—His Return to Prison :—Chains:—Escape of Mrs. Phelps :—Finale of Luman and Phila.

AT length the morning began to dawn, but it proved

to be a cloudy day; no mark was left in the heavens to determine the point of compass, while at the same
time my road became every moment more obscure, and
finally terminated in a deer path, which wound along among

the hills and vales of a dense and entirely unsettled forest, i

and finally disappeared. It was now broad day. The wild
forest extended around far and wide, with no sign of human existence or occupation. I still wandered slowly on,
not knowing‘ whether I was every moment travelling nearer to friends, and home, and liberty, or to the place of
dreary continement. The deer and wild turkey occasionally
started up before me, and the howl of the wolf was heard
in the distance. At length I came to a beautiful clear
stream, which seemed to wind through a fine valley. The
wild flowers blooming in richest variety sent forth sweet
odors, and the birds of the forest were pouring forth in
profusion their morning songs.

I now sat down in safety, and took a small biscuit from
my pocket which sister Phelps had kindly provided, and
which was my only store of food for the journey. With a

282 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

hearty drink from the crystal stream and this buscuit I
made my first breakfast, after my imprisonment, as a free
son of Columbia. I recollect that while I sat enjoying this
solitary meal, far from friends and home, surrounded with
a scenery strange and wild, and without any guide or any
knowledge where I should claim the next refreshment, I
thought of the sweets of liberty 1 now enjoyed, and with a
thankful and joyous heart I exclaimed aloud, “ Thank God
for this hour, it is the happiest of my life; I am free,
although lost in the wilderness, and if I cannot find myself, thank God nobody else can find me? In this happy
valley the reader may leave me to rest awhile if he chooses,
while he looks after the fate of the other prisoners and
our two friends, and also, Mrs. Phelps and the aifairs of
the prison; bearing in mind at the same time that he
must return again and accompany me through the whole
dangers, toils and incidents of my journey to a land of
liberty.

At -the time we were separated in the heat of the pursuit, Mr. Phelps made his escape much in the same manner
as myself. He was at first closely pursued, but at length
he out distanced them all, and, once out of their sight, he
struck directly into the road, and rode on toward Illinois.
He had proceeded a few miles on his way, _when he was
suddenly surrounded in the darkness of the night by a
company of horsemen who were out in pursuit of the prisoners. They immediately hailed him, and cried out, “ Say,
stranger, G—d damn you, what is your name W He replied
in the same rough and careless manner, “ You damned
rascals, what is yours ill On finding he could damn as well
_as themselves, they concluded he could not be a Mormon,
while his bold and fearless manner convinced them that
he was not a man who was fleeing for his life. They then
begged his pardon for the rough manner in which they
had accosted him, “ Oh, you are one of the real breed.
By G—-d, no damned Mormon could counterfeit that lanAUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT. 283

guage, you swear real natteral; hurrah for old Kentuck.
But whar mought you live, stranger? He replied, “just
up here; you mout a knold me, and then agin you
moutnlt. I think Pve seed you all a heap oi times, but
Pve been so damned drunk at the fourth of independence,
I hardly know myself or anybody else, but hurrah for old
Kentuck; and what about the damnld Mormons W “What
about lemi egad, yould a knowld that without axinl, if yould
a seed lem run." “What! they are not out of prison, are
they P “ Out of prison! Yes, the damnld rascals raised a
flag of liberty in open ‘day, and burst out, and down‘ stars
right in the midst of the public celebration, out rassling
the damnld jailer, and outrunning the whole town in a fair
foot race. They reached the timber jist as they war overtaken, but afore we could cotch lem they mounted their
nags, and the way they cleared was a caution to Crockett.
We tuk one on lem, and seed the other two a few feet
distant, rushini their nags at full speed, but we couldnit
cotch lem nor shoot lem either; I raised my new Kentucky
rifle, fresh loaded and primed, with a good percussion, and
taking fair aim at one of their heads only a few yards
distant, I fired, but the damnld cap burst, and the powder
wouldnlt burnf “Well, now, stranger, thatls a mighty big
story and seems enemost onpossible. Did you say you
cotched one on lemi Why Pd a tholt yould a kilt him
on the spot 5 what have you done with him 1" “They
tuk him back to prison, I suppose, but it was only the
old one. If it had been one oi them tother chaps we
would a skinnld lem as quick as Crockett would a coon,
and then eat lem alive without leaving a grease spot?
This interview over, the horsemen withdrew and left
Phelps to pursue his way in peace. He rode on during
the night without further molestation; but when day appeared he found himself in rather an awkward fix for a
traveller, having lost his hat in the race the preceding
day; he was, therefore, bareheaded, besides, his face was

 

284 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

somewhat bruised and scratched in the scuiile; however,
he concluded to make the best of it, and trust to Providence for the issue. Riding up to a farm house to call for
breakfast and to have his horse fed, he began to banter
the host to sell 'him an old straw hat; “ Forfl said he,
“I got such a power of drink last evening at the big
doings that I couldnlt ride straight, and tumbled off my
horse once or twice, and finally lost my hat." Judging
from his manner, and the dirt and scratches on his face,
they readily believed his tale, and furnished him with an
old, wide-brimmed, miserable looking hat, which served as
a very good disguise during the remainder of the journey.
Himself and horse refreshed, be renewed his journey, and
finally arrived in Illinois in safety, having reached the
ferry before his pursuers, and before the news of the escape
had spread so far. By his arrival the news soon spread
far and wide that we had made our escape from prison,
and that we might be looked for soon. This news was
received with a general joy, and produced a lively sensation, not only throughout the Society, but among the
public, generally—for all parties had looked upon us as
martyrs, doomed to suifer the vengeance of a set of bloodthirsty outlaws and murderers. My brother, 0. Pratt, and
the young Mr. Clark, who furnished us with the horses,
must now be looked after.

When we parted in the thicket, as has been before described, they had only time to ilee a few paces, when they
found themselves completely surrounded on every hand, and
no possibility left them of escape by running; they, therefore, dropped down into a small ravine which had been made
by the water during some former freshet, and there lay
as close to the earth as a young quail when its nest is
disturbed. The enemy passed close by them a number of
times, and so very near that they dared not to make the
least motion—not even to look up to see whether they
were discovered.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 285

At length night came on; the pursuers retired, and they
arose and pursued their journey on foot, and arrived safely
in Illinois soon after the arrival of Mr. Phelps. My brother
immediately repaired to the residence of my wife and children, who were waiting his return in anxious suspense, in
hopes to hear some news from me, whom they considered
still in prison—not having as yet heard any news of the
escape. As he entered the door Mrs. P. raised her anxious and sorrowful eyes, and eagerly inquired:

“ Have you seen my husband 1"

“ I have?

“ Is be yet alive!"

“ Yesf

“ Is he well ill

“ He is."

“ 0, thank God for that! Is there any prospect that
he will ever get free and return alive W

“Well, I hope so; for the last time I saw him he was
astride a horse in the woods, and headed towards home
on a gallop."

I shall not attempt to describe her feelings at that moment, as the reader can best imagine them; but suiiice
it to say, after her first transports were over he sat down
and related to her the whole affair which had transpired
up to the time be last saw me. She was now full of
hope and expectation—although mingled with fear and
anxiety indescribable. If I eluded the pursuit of my
enemies and arrived in safety it was now time to look
for my arrival; but if, on the other hand, I was taken
back and chained down in a dungeon; or if I was shot
down and left without a burial to be a prey to wolves
and turkey buzzards,—Oh, dreadful thought! Oh, horrible suspense! Oh, the hope, joy, sorrow, anguish, misery,
happiness, phrenzy, and feelings undefined which agitate
and distract the bosom of a wife and mother at such a
moment! If man—ha.rd-hearted, unfeeling man-—could read

-286 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

the heart of a woman on such an occasion, he would
never more drive, imprison or kill his fellow man.

She soon set about preparing for the reception of her
husband, in case he should arrive, faint and exhausted
with hunger and fatigue. The table was spread, and food
placed upon it; the house was illuminated through the
night, during which her anxious and beatin g heart would
not suffer her for one moment to sleep. She watched
during the entire night, and on several occasions opened
the door and looked abroad; but still the morning dawned
and he came not. Surely, thought she, he is slain or
again confined in a dungeon, loaded with chains, and kept
for a sure prey to glut the vengeance of a furious mob
who have been disappointed of the rest of their victims.

The excitement now became general; friends crowded in
to inquire the news and to sympathize with her, and to
endeavor, if possible, to keep up her hopes. They argued
that the same God who had delivered him from prison, and
strengthened him in the chase, and the same God who
prevented the powder from taking fire when the deadly
rifle was aimed at him, would also stand by him, and
bring him safely to his friends and home. This, in some
measure, still kept her spirits from sinking in despair.

Armed men were now despatched in various directions
along the river, and into Missouri, to endeavor, if possible,
to meet with him and protect him home. Another day
and night at length passed away in the same suspense,
no tidings having been heard from him nor from any of
those who had gone in search. The pursuers, however,
were known to be at the ferry on the other side of the
river, watching his arrival. The same precaution was taken
by them at all the public ferries for some distance up
and down the river.

The suspense and anguish of her aching bosom now became intolerable; in vain they continued to assure her
that he would be preserved and return in safety. She

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 287

could plainly see that, while they sought to comfort her
with hope, they themselves were half in doubt and beginning to despair of his deliverance. Another long day
passed and another night set in, and still no news-—except
that the ferries on the Missouri side were all strictly
guarded, and the entire people on the lookout to take
him dead or alive. She had now kept her table spread
both day and night, and had watched for three entire
nights without sleep. “ He cannot be alive and free,"
exclaimed she, “ or I know he would fly to meet the fond
welcome of his wife and children, and relieve their aching
heartsxl ,

We must now return with our readers to the prison at
Columbia, and take a glance at the scenes which followed
our departure, and learn the fate of Mr. Follett and Mrs.
Phelps. As soon as the prisoners had cleared from the
jailer, and were fairly under way, Mrs. Phelps, who was still
an inmate of the dwelling, became the particular object of
their spite and rage. The old jailer and his wife commenced to rail and curse her as the author of all the
mischief. They threatened her with instant death, and
finally turned her out of doors in the dusk of the evening, and in the midst of a mob who had gathered in
great numbers around the prison and raging like so many
tigers disappointed of their prey. Being a stranger and
without money, friends, or acquaintances in the place, she
knew not where to go or what to do. She Ilnally sat
down in the open air in the midst of the mob, by whom
she was assailed, cursed, insulted, threatened, and abused
in the most unfeeling manner for some time. But she
still remained on the spot, and scarcely noticed the slang
and abuse of the raging rabble, so intent was she upon
the issue of the race-—not knowing from one moment to
the other whether her husband would be shot down, or
whether he would be taken and brought back in triumph.

At length, after a watchful glance towards the wilder 

288 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

ness, she heard the shout of triumph amidst the hosts of
the enemy, and next was re-echoed from crowd to crowd,
amid vollies of oaths, curses and exulting laughs, “ Welve
catched one of the damnld Mormonls and well roast him
alive over a slow fire, damn him? They now rallied
around her in great numbers, exulting and threatening,
and boasting that they had taken her husband and would
kill him on the spot. While they were thus abusing her
she saw another crowd coming and a prisoner in the
midst, on whom they were venting their rage, as if he
would be torn to pieces. As they approached nearer ‘it
proved to be Mr. Follet, on Mrs. Phelpsl horse and sidesaddle. He had been surrounded, overpowered and taken
at the time we were each separated from the other.
He was finally rescued from the mob, and thrust alive
into the lower dungeon and chained down to the iloor.
He remained in this doleful situation for a few days, till
the wrath of the multitude had time to cool a. little, and
then he was unchained by the Sheriff and again brought
into the upper apartment and treated with some degree
of kindness. i

They now laughed with him about his adventure, praised
him for his bravery, and called him a good fellow. The
truth of the matter was, they had no great desire to take
the lives of any but those whom they had considered
leaders; and since they had discovered that Mr. Follett
and Mr. Phelps were not considered religious leaders
among our Society, they were in no great danger, except
they should happen to be killed in the heat of excitement
or passion.

We now leave him in his lonesome prison, with no
other society than the old apostate, Luman, and his dear
Phila, while we get sister Phelps out of the trouble she
was in. After the fate of the prisoners seemed determined, she sank down exhausted on a block of wood in
the open air amid the surrounding darkness. Here she

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 289

was still mocked and insulted by the unfeeling rabble,
till a certain young man, more feeling than the others,
declared that he was not accustomed to see a female
treated thus in America, and that if she had no home
his father and mother would receive her kindly and give
her protection under their roof till she could return to
Illinois. He then went home, and in a few minutes returned with his mother, by whom she was kindly invited
to their dwelling. On arriving there she was treated in
the kindest manner for about two weeks, during which time
her horse was kept from her and rode in search of the
prisoners. They finally restored her horse and saddle to
her, and she rode home in peace, where she eventually
met her husband, and rejoiced that she had been, in
some measure, the means of his deliverance.

And here I might as well inform the anxious reader of
the final liberation of the two remaining prisoners. Mr.
Follett remained in confinement for several months, and
finally was dismissed and sent home to Illinois, where he
met his family, who had been expelled from the State of
Missouri, in common with others, during his confinement.
And, last of all, the old apostate came out by fair acquittal. And should any of our readers have the curiosity
to see the charming couple, whose singular courtship and
history run through and make a principal thread of our
narrative, they will call at the little town of Augusta, a
few miles from Fort Madison, Iowa Territory, and inquire
for “ Luman and Phila," who were living there in quiet
at the last accounts.

 

 

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Reminiscence :—Resume my Wanderings :—Lost Again :—-Storm ;Conversation :—-Suspicious Characters :—Lost in a. Swamp :—Strange River :—Retrace my Steps :-Cross the River :—Wild Scenery :—Stmnge Bedfellow:
—Dawn :——Reach the Mississippi :—Cross the River in a. Canoe :—Land on
an Island :—Entangled in the Thickets :—Re6mbark :—Land in Illinois:
-——An Old Acquaintance :—Arrive at Quincy.

SUPPOSE by this time the reader has either forgotten
the circumstances in which he took leave of myself, or
else is somewhat weary with the winding of the narrative
and impatient for it to come to a. close. ‘The only
apology I have to offer for the many digressions and
wanderings through which he has been led is, that I consider it impolite and disrespectful to get myself out of a
bad place until I have first "seen my friends all safely
out. True, I did not strictly observe this rule of good
breeding in the escape itself; therefore it becomes me to
take the more care to observe it now, when there is no
danger, excepting that of being deserted by some of my
readers before I am safely out. However, if you still
wish to accompany me in all the windings of my wearisome and dangerous adventure we will now turn to the
happy valley, where you recollect leaving me on the
morning of the fifth of July in the act of breakfasting
on a. small biscuit, while, to all appearances, I was lost
to myself and to all mankind.
After resting a few minutes I arose and travelled onward, without any way to determine the course I was
travelling. After some miles, I came to a house in the

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRA.'.l‘T. 291

woods, and ventured to inquire of the woman the way to
Columbia, and what course it lay from there. By this
means I learned that I was fourteen miles distant from
the prison in a northerly direction. I then took a course
directly opposite to her directions, and soon found myself
among settlements, and in a kind of road, but very indirect and winding among fields and woods, or in the language of that county, among “ clarensli and “ timber? I
paid but little respect to the road, but rather wandered
around among the forests, and made my course as well
as I could without being seen.

At last the clouds thickened and it began to  In

the meantime I had again plunged into the depths of an
unknown forest, and lost all idea of the true point of the
compass. The air now became dense with thick clouds
and mist, and the rain was pouring in torrents. At first
I thought that rather than expose myself by another inquiry, I would sit down at the bottom of a large oak
and wait patiently for the clouds to break away, so that
I could see the sun, and thus determine my course, as to
travel in uncertainty would exhaust my strength for naught.
I accordingly sat down; but after waiting for a length of
time, I found there was no prospect of seeing the sun,
moon, or stars for some days to come. In the meantime
I was becoming wet and cold, lame and stiff jointed from
the effects of my exertions the night previous. I was also
aware that hunger would soon be preying upon me, as I
already felt very much in need of refreshment. I, therefore, arose and wandered on till I saw another house in
the distance. I there ventured another inquiry, by which
I was enabled to make my way through the windings of
the forest, and finally to enter upon a vast prairie or untimbered plain without inhabitants. Through this plain
there was a direct road to" a place called Paris, which
was now some twenty miles distant and directly on my
way. Here I could travel in solitude, and have no dim 

292 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

éulty in iinding my way either by night or day; and
should I chance to meet a traveller in pursuit, I could
see him for some miles distant in the day time, and have
time to leave ‘the road and hide myself in the grass before, he could be near me.

It was now drawing towards evening, and the rain was
still pouring in torrents, while the wind blew almost to a
tempest. I was weary and exhausted with fatigue and
hunger, and chilled and benumbed with the rain and wind
which had drenched me for some hours. It had been my
intention to travel through the night, but I now saw it
was impossible. I would be obliged to rest my weary limbs
somewhere; and to sit or lie down without shelter in such
a tempest, and benumbed as I then was, would be death;
or at least it would be what I could not endure; and
to lodge at any house would expose me to be discovered
and taken by my pursuers. As night approached I hesitated for some time whether to continue to brave the
tempest and to pass the night in the rain, or to run the
risk of being taken by turning oil‘ the road and going a
mile or two through the wet grass to a settlement which
was in sight, in the borders of the wilderness, on the
left of my road. At last I was compelled by the severity
of the storm to choose the latter. I accordingly made
for a house; but how was I to account for being a traveller, and on foot—-as nearly all men in that country
travel on horseback 1 However, my ingenuity soon prepared
me a way to account for this suspicious circumstance.

As I drew near the house the owner stood in the
door looking out upon the tempest and watching my approach—it being rather strange to see a person from the
open plain amid such a tempest. As I drew near, all
wet and dripping, I cried out very sociably, saying: “ Sir,
can you entertain a drowning man here this terrible
night W The answer was, “I reckon we mout; come in,
stranger, you seem in a mighty bad Iixf I 'hobbled in as

 

-1

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 29.)

well as I could, being very lame with walking, as well as
benumbed with the storm; and without giving time for
any more inquiry, 'I began to complain of the fatigue of
walking, and how it had lamed me; at the same time
observing that my horse had played a very bad trick with
me; he had got away from me and strayed into- the
timber, where I could not find him. it Ah," said he, it how
did you happen to lose him ill it Whyf said I, if I am
from Indiana, and have been out in your wild woods
back here looking for land. I had been in the habit of
letting my horse bait a little occasionally, as he never
seemed inclined to leave till, last evening, he of a sudden wandered out of my sight in the woods, and dark
coming on, I could not track him, and finally lost him;
and, what is worse, he carried off my clothing and all the
fixings I had with me, even to my shooting irons and
ammunition. I shall now have to go clear to Paris on
foot, and then remain there a few days till I can advertise him and obtain him again?

it Oh W exclaimed he, if its a pity you should have such
a heap of trouble. Where did you stay last night W I
replied if the devil himself could hardly answer that; for
in hunting my horse I got benighted, and lost myself instead of finding him; however, I made my Way out to
the first cottage I could find, and took up with very
curious fare, I assure youil it What part of Indiana are
you fromW continued he. it From near Terre Haute," replied
I.' it What is the price of land in that country now W he
inquired. I replied that it had risen very much since the
completion of the great national road; ii indeedfl said I, iias
a specimen of the rise of property, I could now take
twenty-five dollars per acre for my little place in the
backwoods, which a few years ago only cost me three
dollars and seventy-five cents, so I thought I would just
mount my nag and ride west here, and take a look in
Illinois and Missouri, and  I could suit myself I would

 

294 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

go home and sell out, and come out here and purchase."
if Well! said he, if I reckon you must do a heap better here
than there, as welve a smart chance of land here thatls
very cheap, besidesf continued he, iiwe can make corn here
so easy; and then, agin, therels a power of range for
cattle and horses." In this kind of conversation the evening passed oif very sociably. «After eating a hearty supper I retired to bed.

In the morning I awoke much refreshed, and found the
storm had subsided, and the sun shining in his _strength.
I tarried to breakfast, which consisted of a good cup of
coffee and a fowl, with some corn bread or iidodgerfl
After breakfast I vented my spite once more, with angry
and impatient words about my poor horse; grumbled
sorely at being so lame, and regretted very much at having to go on foot all the way to Paris; if and," said 1, iiI
get so hungry and faint in walking over these lonesome

plains, where the houses are a dozen miles apart, I believe, with your leave, Pll just pocket the remainder of

the dodger and chicken. if 0, yes,ll said the good woman,
if take it and welcome. You mout want it, and then agin you
mout not; and although its coarse fare, yet weive seen a
heap oi times in this new country that we couldnlt get
as good? I thanked her, and then settled my bill with
her husband, and making her a present of a quarter of
a dollar, I took leave, and soon found my way back to
the road I had left the evening before. On arriving at
the road I found a fresh horse track had been made
since the rain, and immediately concluded one of my pursuers had passed in pursuit, which I afterwards learned
to be the fact.

I would here remark that some persons will perhaps be
disposed to censure me for saying that which was not
strictly true in all its points, in order to avoid discovery,
and make good my escape. But I can say, from the bottom of my heart, that I feel perfectly justified in so doing,

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. rnyrr. 295

not only because it accomplished a good object, and seemed
according to wisdom, but we have numerous instances in
Scripture where Godls prophets and people acted in a
similar way for a similar end. For instance, the New
Testament justifies Rahab, and even commends her, and
includes her in the sum of the faithful, because she hid
the spies under the flax and deceived their pursuers by
stating that they had left the city and fled to the mountains; and thus she became an accomplice, or an aider
and abettor of the people and purposes of God. David
also, who was the Lordls anointed, and a man after
his own heart, dissembled a number of times to save
his life. At one time he deceived the national priest,
and thus obtained both bread and armor, under pretence
of being on the kings errand, while he was in fact an
outlaw, then in the act of fleeing for his life from that
same Saul. And Jesus himself mentions this to the
Jews, and justifies it. At another time he feigned himself insane, by figuring on the wall and letting his
spittle drizzle down on his beard, in order to escape the
Philistine judges. Oh, yes, says one, but he was the
Lordls anointed, and, therefore, had a right to save his life
at all hazards to fullil Godls purposes. To this I reply,
that I am also Godls anointed, and have a greater reason
for living and a more worthy object to accomplish than he
had. That may be, says the objector, but who believes
it? I answer, one hundred people believe me in the days
of my trouble and humility where one believed David.
And well they may; for I have a greater work to accomplish than he ever had. But the world may blame unjustly. I care not a straw for their judgment. I have
one only that I serve, and him only do I fear. The
hypocrite who censures me may yet be placed under
similar circumstances, and then judge ye how he would
act.

But, to drop the argument and resume the history; I

296 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

now pursued my way until I entered upon a public road
called the Louisiana road, as it was connected with a ferry
on the Mississippi at a place called 'by that name. I had
travelled that road before, and I was not a little rejoiced
to find myself on ground I was so well acquainted with
that I could travel by night without any danger of missing my way. I was now in a part of the State which
was comparatively thickly inhabited, and, therefore, considered it unsafe to proceed in the daytime, as the news of
our escape must by this time have spread far and wide.
I, therefore, spent the day either in concealment among the
thickets, or in slowly progressing on my journey with much
caution and many deviations from the road, in order to
shun plantations and houses; but at night I pursued my
way, with all the strength I had.

On the third or fourth day after my escape from prison
I found myself in the neighborhood of a settlement where
I had formed some acquaintances years before, and where
once lived a small branch of the Church, but they had all
moved west, and, as I supposed, were driven out of the
State with the others. But I recollected a family by the
name of Ivy, who would still be living on the road, and
who had been members, but were now dissenters. I was
now very hungry and wanted a friend, but was in doubt
whether they would befriend or betray me, as they had
once been my friends, and not only so, but their near kindred had suifered in the general persecution, and had
shared the common banishment. I hesitated, prayed, and
at length came to the conclusion that I would venture past
their door in open day, and if no one discovered or recognized me I would take it as a Providence, and conclude it
was wisdom in God, as I would not be safe with them;
but if, on the other hand, I was saluted by them, then I
would think it a sign which Providence had given me as
a witness that I could trust to them. I accordingly
walked past their dwelling on Sunday evening, about two

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 297

hours before sundown. As I got nearly past, the little
children who were playing in the front door yard discovered me and cried out with surprise and joy, if there is
brother Pratt Pi At this a young man came running out
to me, who proved to be one of my acquaintances, who was
still a member of the Church, and who had been driven
from the upper country; but, instead of going to Illinois
with the rest, he had come back and settled in his old
neighborhood. I asked him where Mr. Ivy, the man of
the house, was. He replied that he and his wife had gone
to a neighboris, two or three miles distant, on a visit;
iiandfl continued he, til also am here on a visit at the same
time, and by this means I have very unexpectedly met with
you; and I am very glad, for the news has just reached
here that the prisoners had escaped, and that they burst
a cap at one, and took another and carried him back to
prison. The other two have not been found." This was
the first news I had heard either of myself or the others.
I then requested him to go and charge the children
strictly not to mention that they had seen me, and then
come with me into the woods.

He did so. I then told him I was very hungry, faint
and weary; and not only so, but so lame I could hardly
move; besides, my feet were blistered, skinned and bloody.
He said that his brother, who was also a member, and had
been driven with him from the upper country, lived in an
obscure place in the woods, some two miles distant, and
that his brotheris wife and children were as true and
genuine Mormons as ever lived. He then took me on his

horse and conducted me through a pathless wild for two

miles, and, coming in sight of his brotheris house, I dismounted and hid myself in a deep valley, whose sides were
nearly perpendicular and formed of craggy rock, while he
went to reconnoitre the house, and to get something ready
for me to eat. He soon returned, informing me that his
brother was out, and would not be in till dark; but the

298 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

family wished very much that I would come in, as _the
children would hold their tongues, and it was thought to
be perfectly safe. I declined, however, for the present, and
he brought me out some bread, milk and cream, on which
I refreshed myself till they prepared a more _ substantial
supper.

As evening came on, being pressed to come in, I
finally consented. On entering, I was received with joy
by the family, and sat down to supper. One of their
neighbors, a young man, soon came in and seemed determined to tarry till the arrival of the man of the house,
as he had some errand with him. This embarrassed me
very much, for I was fearful that he would arrive and
salute me as an old acquaintance, and call my name in
the presence of the young man. But the little children
(bless their souls) took good care for that matter, they
watched very narrowly for the arrival of their papa, and
when they saw him they whispered to him that brother P.
was there, and, being just out of prison, he must not know
him till Mr. —— had gone.

The man came in, and I looked up with a vacant stare,
or rather with a strange and distant air, and inquired if
he was the man of the house? He nodded coolly in the
aifirmative. I then inquired of him if he had seen any
stray it nags ii in his neighborhood 1 I then went on
to describe my horse which had strayed from me, and
observed that I was out in search of him, and, being
weary and hungry, I had stopped to get some refreshment
with him. He said I was welcome to his house, and to
such fare as he had; but he had not seen any nags, except
what was owned in the neighborhood.

The young man soon did his errand and withdrew. We
then shook each other by the hand most heartily, and, with
a burst of joy and smiles, inquired after each others welfare. I told him I was well nigh exhausted and worn
out, and, withal, very lame, but still I had some hopes of

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 299

making my escape out of the State, and of living to see
my friends once more in a land of liberty. I then begged
of him to exchange with me, and take my fur cap and
give me a hat in its stead, which he did, and then saddled his horse with a side saddle, as the young man who
was in had just borrowed the other saddle, and, placing
me on horseback, he ran before me and by my side on
foot, to take me on my journey. In this way we travelled
till twelve dclock at night, when I dismounted, and he bid
me farewell, in order to reach his home again before the
neighbors would arise and find him missing.

He had given me directions which would lead to the
Mississippi River much nearer than the Louisiana ferry,
and also more in the direct course towards my family, who
resided at Quincy, and, besides all these advantages, the
route was more obscure, and, therefore, safer for me. I now
pursued my course the remainder of the night with
renewed courage and strength, although so very lame, foot
sore, and so much exhausted that, in lying down to refresh
myself, I could not again rise and put myself in motion
short of extraordinary and repeated exertion, sometimes
having to crawl on my hands and knees till I could get
sufficiently limbered to arise and walk, and frequently
staggering and falling in the attempt.

At length the day began to dawn, and I must soon be
under the necessity of hiding in the thickets, or making
deviations from the road, in order to avoid discovery in
passing the settlements. I, therefore, wished to push my
way with all speed while it was yet too early for people
to be stirring; but sleep now completely overpowered me.
As I was walking along the road I could scarcely open
my eyes for a moment to look my way for a few rods
ahead, and they would then close in sleep in spite of all
my powers. I would then proceed a few paces in my
sleep till I stumbled, or till I had need to take another
look at the road before me; then I would open my eyes

300 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

and take one glance, and the lids would fall again as
powerless as if I had no life. In this way I walked on,
alternately sleeping and waking, till, I presume, I had
more than fifty naps without ceasing to walk; and each
time I opened my eyes and came to my senses I firmly

-resolved to keep them open and run no further risk; but

while this resolution was still passing in my mind sleep
would again steal over me, not exactly unawares, for I
realized it each time, but had no power to prevent it.

At length the twilight gave place to the full blaze of
the morning; the sons of the earth were again in motion;
I therefore retired, like the owl, to the thicket, and took a
morning rest. When I awoke the sun was high in the
heavens, and, feeling somewhat refreshed, I arose from
the ground and wandered slow and solitary amid the
wilds of oak, interspersed with hazel and underwood—
sometimes stopping to pick and eat a few unripe blackberries, and sometimes resting beneath the shade of a
spreading tree.

I had now great hopes of having to pass but one more
night in the land of enemies, as I could easily reach a
small town in the course of the day, which was then only
two or three miles distant; and then, if I could by any
means get on to the right track before night, I would only
have about eight or ten miles travel for the whole night,
which would bring me to a small town on the Mississippi.
I wandered on amid the wilds, but at length about half
a mile of open plain or prairie intervened between me
and the town. To pass this in a public road, in open
day, would be running a great venture, and to wait for
the cover of darkness would perhaps keep me wandering
another night, for the want of being started in the right
road from the town. before me to the landing on the
river. I, therefore, concluded to venture across the plain,
along the public highway, in the day time, and should I
be discovered I would sell my life as dear as possible

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 30.1

sooner than be taken back to prison. I, therefore, walked
boldly on. I had proceeded about to the middle of the
plain, when, on a sudden turn of the road, two men appeared on horseback, each with a ride on his shoulder.
They were then too near for me to retreat, or to make
any other shift than to meet them. As soon as they discovered me they both halted as if surprised, and one said
to the other, if there he is nowll They then rode on
towards me, and I expected every moment that they
would hail and attempt to stop me. In such a case I
felt determined to seize one of their rifles, and overpower
or frighten them, or die in the struggle.

I at length passed between them in the middle of the
road, and looked as calm and unconcerned as if I hardly
knew they were there. Either from this circumstance or
some other,\ unaccountable to me, they never spoke to me
at all, but rode on, and I saw them no more. I soon
passed the plain, and made my way into a small thicket
of trees which lay adjoining the little town. I then crept
up near the court house, which occupied a public square
in the centre, and endeavored, without being discovered
or noticed by any person, to ascertain as well as I could,
by my own judgment, which of all the roads would seem
to lead off towards the river. After reconnoitering the
town and the various bearings of the roads, I retreated
back into the wilderness, with the satisfaction that I had
not yet been discovered by the citizens; I had also the
satisfaction of seeing the highlands and the hilly, broken
country which evidently bordered on the Mississippi. The
river, therefore, could be but a few miles distant, and as
it was yet several hours to sundown I concluded that I
could take my course, and, without any particular regard
to roads, reach some spot on the river that evening, as
nothing was to be so much dreaded as a public ferry
—for there I knew my enemies would set their traps.

I immediately took my course, and after wandering for

302 AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT.

an hour or two, with great fatigue, among thickets of
brush, briars and vines almost impassable, I at length
descended a steep decline of .perhaps two hundred feet,
and then came down to what is called in that country the ii river bottom,ii covered with the growth of
thick forest, and appearing in some places somewhat
swampy and gloomy; but still I pushed on with all
speed, supposing I was not many miles from the river
Mississippi. After travelling for some distance in this disagreeable and swampy wild, what was my surprise and
disappointment, when on a sudden I came to a dark, deep,
and muddy looking river, some forty rods wide, and rolling with a swift and turbulent current. This surely could
not be the Mississippi; and yet it was something that
intervened between me and that great river, and seemed to
present an impassable barrier. I then heaved a deep sigh,
and, feeling exhausted and almost discouraged, I exclaimed
to myself half aloud, how long shall I wander and find
no rest? it does seem as though an enchanted ground lay
between me and liberty. I turned round, and with the
little strength that then remained I made my way back
to the town. When I arrived again in sight. of the town
the sun was setting, and another wearisome night was
approaching, in which I must reach the river, or I would
probably be exhausted with hunger and fatigue, so as to
be entirely disabled.

I now resolved to venture boldly into a public highway,
and to ascertain the right road before it would be too dark
to find my way or choose my course. There would not
only be danger of exposure by inquiring, but although I
knew there was a little town on the Mississippi, near the
place I was then in, yet I had never heard the name of
it; and to appear like a stranger who did not know the
country, and yet be on foot and without a parcel or
valise, or anything which travellers are accustomed to
carry, and withal a beard near a week old, together with

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 303

sweat and dirt over my clothes from lying and tumbling
on the ground, would altogether make me seem like a
very suspicious character; but yet I must venture an inquiry, which 1 determined to do the first providential opportunity which occurred. I walked along the edge of the
town and struck into a public highway which seemed to
lead the right course. I had not travelled far when I
came to a branch of the same river which I had encountered in the swampy bottom. On one side of the
road a mill was situated on its bank, and on the other
side a dwelling house. Several persons were about the
mill, and it was not yet dark.

I was now determined to pass by boldly, and if any
one passed near me to speak to them and inquire the

 

way, and then pass on so quick that they would have.

no time to have suspicion or to question me. Just as I
was passing between the house and the mill, I said,
ii Good evening, sir. How do you cross this river W He
replied, it that the teams and horsemen ford it, but a
footman may chance to cross it on the mill dam, yonder." Said I, ii is this the right road to—to—what the
plague is it you call that little town yonder—your nearest landing on the river—what is its name; I can seldom
think of it W it Oh, Saverton-—Saverton,ll replied he. ti Oh,
yes; Savertonf I repeated. it Yes,ll said he, it this is the
direct road to itll I replied, it Thank you, sir. How far
is it?" ii Nine miles, said he. By this time I was some
distance past him, and in another moment I was balancing my clumsy and worn out body on the edge of the
dam, while the waters were roaring and foaming beneath
me. O

I got safely over, and now pursued my way with increasing hope and certainty. However, I had not gone to
exceed half a mile before I came to another fork of the
river, larger and swifter than the one I had just crossed,
and, withal, neither dam nor bridge. I soon forded boldly

304 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

into it, determined either to sink, swim, or ford it. It
proved to be about a yard deep, with a strong current,
and several yards wide; but I forded it in safety, and still
pursued my way. After wandering for a mile or two
along the bottom lands, I ascended a high bluff of several
hundred feet, and thus entered upon the high, rocky and
unsettled wilds which intervened between the bed of the
river and the great Mississippi.

It was now dark, and I was fairly under way for my
nightls journey, which at most could not exceed seven or
eight miles, and feeling extremely exhausted and also at
leisure, I stepped aside from the road and laid me down
at the foot of a tree, with a block of wood for a pillow,
where I intended to sleep for an hour or two. It was a
wild scene in which to slumber; no human abode was
near, no voice or sound stole upon the stillness of the
evening. The stars shone forth in unwonted splendor in
the heavens, while wild and grassy hills, and rocky steeps
pierced with deep vales and chasms, extended far and
wide on all sides, as if reposing in eternal and undisturbed quiet and loneliness. Ah! thought I, as I lay in
silent meditation and contemplated the scene, here is
peace, here is rest, here is a solitude of grand and sacred
repose, scarcely polluted by the bloodthirsty dwellers upon
the degraded earth. And were it not for the ties of wife,
children, and duties which bind me to society, how
gladly would I seek a lone cavern or some unknown retreat amid these romantic wilds, and never more feel the
ills and suffer the evils which now distract and disturb
the peace of a poor, miserable world. As I had finished
these meditations and was about to fall asleep I turned

 

on to my side and made a slight movement in adjusting

my wooden pillow, when I heard the well known rattle of
a rattle snake (eez, eez, eez,) close by my side, as if
disturbed in his repose, or as if I had more than my portion of the bed. I then recollected the old proverb, that

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 305

it travelling makes strange bedfellows/I and also the Scripture which says, it If two lie together there is heat, but
how can one be warm alone?" Said -I, it old friend, Pll
not argue with you as. my first mother did with your
venerable ancestor, and rather than quarrel or keep you
awake, we will part! With this, I arose and very condescendingly sought out another bed, where I was so fortunate as to remain in undisturbed possession till the chill
of the night air admonished me to be again on the move.

I then arose, and, after much exertion, became at length
able to use my limbs, and thus continued my journey.
Early dawn found me standing on a height which overlooks the little village of Saverton and the broad river, i

which was the only barrier between me and safety from

my enemies. As the rays of the morning began to ex-pand with increasing light, the dark outlines of the wooded
bottoms of Illinois were distinctly visible. I had now
seen with my eyes the land of peace, and a land which
contained family, friends, and all that was dear to me;
but oh, if I should be intercepted at the ferry, and thus
lose at once my labor and my hope! I now knelt down
and prayed fervently to God for deliverance, and thanked
Him for the past, and for His mercy and providence which
had preserved me thus far.

I then descended from the height and entered the town,
the people yet being wrapt in repose. I examined the
shore and soon convinced myself that no public ferry was
kept there. I was extremely glad to learn this fact—being fully aware that by this time all the ferries would be
watched. I next tried to find some road or path up the
river bank, so as to pass along and obtain the use of

.some chance canoe, but this was impossible. Huge rocks

and mountainous steeps, with alternate ditches or patches
of mire, rendered it impossible, even for a footman, to pass
up the bank of the river. I then made my way down

along the sandy beach which lay before the town, and
20

306 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. 1>a.u1~._

just as the people were beginning to stir, I left the town
and continued down along the river for some five miles,
sometimes climbing steep and rocky spires of the bluffs,
and sometimes wading through mire and marsh.

At length I came to a dwelling on the banks of the
river, and saw several canoes lying in the water before it.
I entered the house and inquired of the lady whether I
could get a passage over the river in a canoe. She replied that her husband sometimes set people across, but
owing to the swift ciurent, and a large island several miles
in length, which lay in the middle of the river, it was a
tedious job, for which he never charged less than a dol' lar; but, however, he was very busy in the harvest iield,

about a mile distant, and owing to the hurry of the harvest, she did not think he could be prevailed on to do
it at any price. I was now ready to faint from extreme
heat, and exertion, and hunger, and to walk another mile
and back upon an uncertainty was altogether out of the
question, to say nothing of the danger of the exposure tr
which it would subject me. I

I cast my eyes towards the canoes and they looked very
tempting, and I know not but I might have been tempted to charter one without the leave of the owner, but
just then I saw a boy of ten or twelve years of age
playing about the water. I asked him if he was
accustomed to paddling a canoe. He replied, yes. I
I then oifered him a good price if he would set me
across the river. He refused to do this, saying that
his parents would whip him for so doing. it But,"
said he, til will set you over on to you big island,
which is one mile from here; you can then walk
a mile or two through the woods and come to the opposite shore of it, and then shout and make signs to the
people on the Illinois shore, who will come across their
half of the river and take you from the islandf He observed that people had often crossed over in this way. I

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 307

hardly believed him, but still I thought an uninhabited
island was preferable to staying another minute in Missouri.

The boy soon set me over and led: me on the shore of
the island, pointing out my course as well as he could. I
paid him well, and then commenced my overland journey,
among nettles, ilies, mosquitoes and heat. I was soon entangled in thickets of hazel, thorn and grape vines, which
made my progress very slow, as well as extremely laborious
and didicult. These, however, were soon intersected with
sloughs of mire and water, which could only be crossed
with the utmost dimculty, by picking my way on old logs
and wood, and sometimes wading in mire and water. After
crossing several of these I at length came to one much
larger, which I judged was navigable for a steamboat, and
I now found, to my inexpressible horror and disappointment, that he had deceived me. I had now no alternative left but to make my way back through the same
dimculties I had just passed, and to the shore where he
had just left me, and then I should have no other chance
but to call and make signs to the Missouri shore, which
I had just left with so much joy, and, as I hoped, forever. This was at length accomplished, and I had the
inexpressihle joy of seeing my sign answered by the same
boy, who soon came paddling to me. As soon as his
canoe touched the island I bounded into it, and said to
him with a determined tone and manner, " you have deceived me, my boy, so now you have to go to the opposite shore if you never went before, and I will then pay
you another dollar, which will pay you, even if your parents chasten you for going." We now headed up the
current, and, after a painful and laborious exertion of an
hour or two, we doubled the cape at the head of the island,
and shot oif across the river at a rapid rate.

VVe soon landed in the woods in a low bottom, with
no signs of inhabitants, although while crossing I had seen
some houses on the shore a mile or two below. I now

308 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

paid the boy his dollar, and he pushed off and commenced
his way back exceedingly well pleased. I immediately
stepped a few paces into the woods, and, kneeling down,
kissed the ground as a land of liberty, and then poured
out my soul in thanks to God. I then arose and made
my way down the river for some two miles through woods
and swamps, and finally came to a house. I entered it,
determined to call for something to eat; no one was in
but a little boy, but he said his mother would be in in
two or three minutes. I asked him for some milk, and he
gave me a vessel which was full, probably containing between one and two quarts. I intended only to taste of itto
keep me from fainting, and then wait till the woman
came, and ask her leave to drink the remainder, as it
was all she had; but once to my famishing mouth it
never ceased to decrease till it was all swallowed; I now
felt somewhat abashed and mortiiied at what I had done,
but concluded money would pay all damages. Hearing
the footsteps of the woman at the door, I was fixing my
mouth for an awkward apology, when I heard a sudden
scream; on looking up, Mrs. Sabery Granger stood before
me, with both hands lifted up in an ecstacy of amazement. I said to her, ii be not afraid—handJe me and see,
for a spirit hath not ilesh and bones as you see me have?
She exclaimed, iiwhy, good Lord, is that you? Why all

the world is hunting you—both friends and enemies; they'

had almost given you up? She then flew around, scolded the children, talked to the ducks and chickens to keep
out of the house and out of the garden, and not stray
off. She washed my feet, gave me some clean stockings,
got me some dinner, told me a thousand things about our
friends, asked five hundred questions, laughed, cried and
again scolded the children and chickens.

This over and dinner eaten, she on with her bonnet and
accompanied me to her husband, who was clearing a small
spot of land near by. [I had forgotten to say that this

AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT. 309

woman had been one of our nearest neighbors in Ohio for
several years.] Her husband now dropped his work, and
accompanied me as a guide for five miles across a wet,
low, untimbered bottom, covered mostly with high grass
and stagnant water, and entirely destitute of shade or refreshment of any kind. The air was now extremely sultry, and the sun poured in scorching beams, while we
could get no water to drink, nor any rest or retreat for
a moment. To sit down in the tall grass under these
scorching rays, without a breath of wind, would be overwhelming.

I had not proceeded more than a mile or two before I
became so weak and faint that I could hardly speak or
stand, and parched with a burning thirst. I was upon
the point of lying down in the hot and stagnant water,
but he took me by the arm and partly supported me, and
drew me along for some distance, exhorting and begging
of me to try my utmost to hold up a little longer. In
this way I finally reached the upland and the shade of
a fence, within about half a mile of a settlement of the
Saints and other citizens, which extended along the bluff.
I dropped down under the shade of this fence, and fainted entirely away; the man ran to the house of a brother
Brown and got some cool spring water and a little camphor, and was returning with it. Sister Brown, who had
never seen me, came running before him to my relief;
while they were yet distant I had partly come to, and
feeling a dreadful faintness at my stomach, and a raging
thirst which knew no bounds, I made an effort to arise
and run towards them, at the same time making signs
for them to hasten ; I staggered a few paces like a drunken man, and again fell to the earth. This singular appearance, and my dirty clothes and long beard so frightened the woman that, instead of hurrying, she halted till
the man came up with her, and then she exclaimed, it It
cannot be Elder Pratt, of whom I have heard so much 

310 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

it must be some old drunkardll But the man assured
her it was me, and they then came on together. They
bathed my temples and wrists in cold water and camphor,
and ilnally gave me a spoonful or two at a time to drink.
In about half an hour I was so far revived as to be able
to arise and be led to the house. I then shaved and
washed myself, and borrowed a change of linen, and got
into a comfortable bed.

Next morning I felt quite refreshed, and, after resting
through the day, I was so far recruited as to be able to
mount a horse at evening and ride towards Quincy, which
was still twenty-five miles distant. Brother Brown furnished me a good horse and saddle, and himself another,
and we started for Quincy in high spirits just as the sun
was setting. We rode on at a brisk rate, and arrived in
Quincy at about two o'clock the next morning. Riding up
to the dwelling which (from the partial recollection of Mr.
Brown, as well as from the fact of my two Missouri cows
lying before it quietly chewing their cud) we judged was my
wifels residence, we dismounted and gave a gentle knock
at the door. She had watched for four successive nights
and most of the llfth, and had now just lain down and
given up all for lost. On hearing the knock she sprang
from bed and opened the door, and in another instant I

had clasped her in my arms.

 

 

CHAPTER XXXV.

OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

Extracts from the "Columbia Patriot:"—iiBanner of Liberty:"—" Boone's Lick
Democrat:"—" Saturday News:"—it Missouri Republican:li—it New York
Sun:"—" Quincy Argus :"—Minutes of a Public Meeting in Quincy :—
"New York Commercial Advertiser:"—Public Meeting in New York :—
Closing Remarks.

EXTRACT of a letter from A. W. Turner, member of

the Legislature of Missouri, dated City of Jefferson,
November -31st, 1838, originally published in the Columbia.
(Missouri) Patriot :

ii The Mormon war is the most exciting subject before
the Legislature or the community; it involves an inquiry
the most critical of any ever presented to the Legislature of this country; one in which the rights of a
portion of the free citizens of the State is concerned, on
the one side, and the rights of another portion of the
same citizens on the other. Upon the, decision of this
subject the character of the State is suspended. If, upon
full investigation, it is found (and reported by the committee to the Legislature) that the Mormons are not the
aggressors, and that some of them have been murdered,
others driven from the State by military force, and others
imprisoned by order of the Executive, then our character
will be established as the most lawless invaders of religious and civil rights?

Will the public believe that, with the foregoing view of
the subject, the Legislature avoided an investigation?

312 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

The following is from a Missouri paper, printed in
Callaway County, entitled The Banner of Liberty :

it The Governor of Missouri has negotiated a State loan
with the Bank of Missouri, of three hundred and forty
thousand dollars. Of this sum, two hundred thousand
dollars are to go towards paying the expenses of the
troops called out to drive the Mormons from the State?

The following is taken from the Boonés Lick Democrat, a
Missouri paper, under date of January 9, 1839:

it A letter under date lof the 29th of November, 1838,
has been written by Michael Arthur, of Clay County, to
the delegation from that county in the General Assembly
now in session, from which the following is an extract:
i Humanity to an injured people prompts me at present
to address you this}

if iYou were aware of the treatment to some extent before
you left home, received by that unfortunate race of beings
called Mormons, from devils in the form of human beings;
inhabiting Davies, Livingston and part of Ray Counties.

it iNot being satisfied with a relinquishment of their
rights, as citizens and human beings, in the treaty forced
upon them by General Lucas, of giving up their arms
and throwing themselves upon the mercy of the State
and their fellow citizens generally (hoping thereby to gain
protection of their lives and property); they are now receiving treatment from those demons which makes humanity shudder, and the cold chills run over any man not
entirely destitute of humanity.

it iThese demons are now strolling up and down Caldwell County in small companies armed, insulting the women
in any and every way, and plundering the Mormons of
all the means of sustenance (scanty as it was) left them,
driving off their cattle, horses, hogs, etc., and. riding their
houses and farms of everything thereon; taking beds, bedding, wardrobes, and such things as they see they wantleaving the Mormons in a starving and naked condition.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PAHLEY P. PRATT. 313

These are facts I have from authority that cannot be
questioned, and can be maintained and substantiated at
any time! ii

The following appeared in the St. Louis (Mo.) Saturday
News. The reader may draw his own contrast between
the two statements:

it THE MORMONS :—That self-atilicted class of people
who has chosen the fancy name of Mormons has elicited
some sympathy and well intended compassion from some
of our charitable citizens, and two meetings have been
called to devise means of relieving their present wants.
Although many of the Mormons deserve hanging, as an
atonement for their criminal proceedings and corrupt intentions, they are truly objects of charity.

it But if this intrinsically vagrant race (the Mormons)
would relieve themselves from the humiliating necessity of
asking charity, they should mind their own business, i' i'
abandon abolition, and apply themselves to hard labor, as
those do who are actively engaged in attempting their relieftt No attempt should be made to retain a single Mormon within the boundaries of Missouri. A colonization
society might find advantageous employment in sending
them all off to Botany Bay?

The following resolves were adopted at a public meeting of the people of Davies County, Missouri, and published in one of the journals of the State:

it 1st. Resolved, That we esteem the laws of our country
our great bulwark, and the only safe refuge to protect
us in this and every other emergency.

it 2d. Resolvd, That we highly approve of the course or
the Executive in placing Gen. Clark in command of the
forces ordered out AGAINST THE MORMONS, and that his
orders to EXTEEMINATE AND DRIVE THEM FROM THE
STATE was dictated by the imperious duty of his omce as
Governor of the State?

314 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

The following is from the Missouri Republican, published

_ at St. Louis:

ii To show our readers the amount of injury which is
now inflicted on the character of our State, and which
there is no means of repelling (the Legislature having refused to inquire into the matter), we copy the following
from the proceedings of a public meeting held in Quincy,
Illinois, as published in the Quincy - Whig of the 2d inst:

ii iMr. Sidney Rigdon rose and read the memorial which
his people had presented to the Legislature of Missouri,
and other documents, going to show the absence of all
law and justice in the course the Missouri authorities had
pursued toward them, from Governor Boggs down to the
lowest grade of officers} ll .

it After another had addressed the meeting, the same account says: iMr. Rigdon again took the floor, and in a
very eloquent and impressive manner related the trials,
sufferings and persecutions which his people have met
with at the hands of the people of Missouri. We saw
the tears standing in the eyes of many of his people
while he was recounting their history of woe and sorrow,
and, in fact, the gentleman himse'f was so agitated at
diiferent periods of his address that his feelings would
hardly allow him to proceed}

ii We are satisfied that his address will have a lasting
and good effect, sustained, as it was, by the public documents which he produced. .

if i We will not attempt to follow him through the cold
blooded murder, by the mob of Missomi, of Mormon men
and children, the violation of females, the destroying 0
property, the burning of houses, etc. '

ii In vain may the press in Missouri protest against
these representations. In vain may we declare that Rigdon and his followers were doing injustice, misrepresenting
and slandering our people, their institutions and oiiicers,
etc., the public abroad will judge us by the course of our

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. 315

Legislature. We have made our bed and must lie down
on it.

if A friend, residing in Lafayette County, a few days
since called our attention to reports in circulation in N ew
York seriously affecting the character of the State, growing out of this subject, and requesting us to contradict
them. Most cheerfully would we undertake the task, but
we know it is hopeless!

The following is from the New York Sun. After giving
some extracts from St. Louis papers, showing the outrages of the people of Missouri against the Mormons, the
editor proceeds thus:

it That Captain Bogart must be very much like a blackguard and a coward, if he is not a decided candidate for
both titles. He was one of those who started the horrible stories of the icutting up of Missourians, fifty at a
hatch, by the Mormons} Probably he ran away from his
company, amd imagined the horrible stories he carried.
The shooting down of a flag staff bearing a iiag of truce
is characteristic of the bravery of a coward, when backed
by 3,000 men against 700.

iiThey must have a primitive mode of administering
justice in Missouri. These Mormons are as much citizens
as the others, and yet, without trial, upon the ea: parts
testimony of the persons who had provoked the Mormons
to retaliation, the Governor issues orders, if we understand
the case, for the expulsion of the Mormons from the State
of Missouri.

if The Emperor of Russia, the Shah of Persia, or the
Sultan of Turkey could not embrace in his own person
more legislative, judicial and executive power than is here
assumed. Legislative, in the enactment and promulgation
of an edict of banishment. J udicia1—-extra judicial—in
sentencing them to banishment under it. Executive, in
summoning the force of the State to put in force his own
judgment upon his own edict. Well done, Governor Boggs!

316 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

it We are sorry to hear of the massacre of the Mormons by the armed mob; however, this violence, being
the natural promptings of infuriated men, is positively less
culpable than the cool ignorance and impudent, illegal
assumption of the Governor of Missourill

From the Quincy (]Jl.) Argus, March 16, 1839:

it We give in to-dayls paper the details of the recent
bloody tragedy acted in Missouri—the details of a scene
of terror and blood unparalleled in the annals of modern,
and, under the circumstances of the case, in ancient history; a tragedy of so deep, and fearful, and absorbing
interest that the very life blood of the heart is chilled at
the simple contemplation. We are prompted to ask ourselves if it be really true that we are living in an enlightened, a humane and civilized age, in an age and
quarter of the world boasting of its progress in everything
good and great, honorable, virtuous and high minded; in
a country, of which, as American citizens, we could ask
whether we are living under a Constitution and laws, or
have not rather returned to the ruthless times of the stern
Atilla—to the times of the fiery Hun—when the sword
and flame ravaged the fair fields of Italy and Europe,
and the darkest passions held full revel in all the revolting scenes of unchecked brutality and unbridled desire?

ii We have no language sufficiently strong for the expression of our indignation and shame at the recent transaction in a sister State, and that State Missouri, a State
of which we had long been proud, alike for her men and
history, but now so fallen that we could wish her star
stricken out from the bright constellation of the Union.
VVe say we know of no language suifnciently strong for
the expression of our shame and abhorrence of her recent
conduct. She has written her own character in letters of
blood, and stained it by acts of merciless cruelty and
brutality that the waters of ages cannot efface. It will
be observed that an organized mob, aided by many of the

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 317

'civil and military officers of Missouri, with Governor Boggs

at their head, have been the prominent actors in this
business, incited too, it appears, against the Mormons by
political hatred, and by the additional motives of plunder
and revenge. They have but too well put in execution
their threats of extermination and expulsion, and fully
wreaked their vengeance on a body of industrious and enterprising men, who had never wronged or wished to
wrong them, but, on the contrary, had ever comported
themselves as good and honest citizens, living under the
laws and having the same rights with themselves, to the
sacred immunities of life, liberty and property?

it PUBLIC MEETING:

« Wednesday, Feb. 27, 1339. 6 P. M.

ii The members of the Democratic Association, and the
citizens of Quincy generally, assembled in the court
house, to take into consideration the state and condition
of the people called iThe Latter-Day Saints] and organized the meeting by appointing Gen. Leach, chairman, and
James D. Morgan, secretary.

it Mr. Whitney, from the committee appointed at a former
meeting, submitted the following report:

it The select committee, to whom the subject was referred,
of inquiring into and reporting the situation of the persons
who have recently arrived from Missouri; and whether
their circumstances are such that they would need the aid
of the citizens of Quincy and its vicinity, to be guided by
what they might deem the principles of an expanded benevolence, have attended to the duties assigned them, and
have concluded on the following

REPORT :

it The committee believe that their duties at this time
and on this occasion, are all included within the limits of
an expanded benevolence and humanity, and which are

318 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

guided by that charity which t never faileth3 From the
facts already disclosed, independent of the statement furnished by the committee, they feel it their duty to recommend to this association that they adopt the following
resolutions:

it Resolved, That the strangers recently arrived here from
the State of Missouri, known by the name of The LatterDay Saints, are entitled to our sympathy and kindest

 

regard; and that we recommend to the citizens of Quincy .

to extend to them all the kindness in their power to
bestow, as to persons who are in aiiliction. ' ' *

ti Resolved, That the committee last aforesaid be instruct-.
ed to use their utmost endeavors to obtain employment
for all these people who are able and willing to labor;
and also to afford them all needful, suitable and proper
encouragement. ' 't 't

it All of which is submitted.
it J. W. WHITNEY, Chairman.

ti QUINCY, February 27, 1839.

it Mr. Rigdon then made a statement of the wrongs received by the Mormons from a portion of the people of
Missouri, and of their present suffering condition. i

it On motion of Mr. Bushnell, the report and resolutions
were laid upon the table till tomorrow evening.

it On motion of Mr. Bushnell, the meeting adjourned to
meet at this place on to-morrow evening at seven olclockf

it Thursday evening, Feb. 28.

it Met, pursuant to adjournment.

it The meeting was called to order by the chairman.

it On motion of Mr. Morris, a committee of three was
appointed to take up a collection; Messrs. J. T. Holmes,
Whitney and Morris were appointed.

it The committee subsequently reported that $48.25 cents
had been collected.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 319

it On motion the amount was paid over to the committee
on behalf of the Mormons.

it On motion of Mr. Holmes, a committee of three, consisting of S. Holmes, Bushnell and Morris, was appointed
to draw up subscription papers and circulate them among
the citizens, for the purpose of receiving contributions in

" clothing and provisions.

it On motion, six were added to that committee.

iiOu motion of J. T. Holmes, J. D. Morgan was appointed
a committee to wait on the Quincy Grays, for the purpose
of receiving subscriptions.

it Mr. Morgan subsequently reported that 820 had been
subscribed by that company.

it The following resolutions were then offered by J. T.
Hohnes:

it Resolved, That we regard the rights of conscience as
natural and inalienable, and the most sacred guaranteed
by the Constitution of our free Government.

it Resolved, That we regard the acts of all mobs as flagrant violations of law, and those who compose them in-_

dividually responsible, both to the laws of God and man,
for every depreciation committed upon the property, rights,
or life of any citizen.

Resolved, That the inhabitants upon the western frontier
of the State of Missouri, in their late persecutions of the
class of people denominated Mormons, have violated the
sacred rights of conscience, and every law of justice and

, humanity.

it Resolved, That the Governor of Missouri in refusing
protection to this class of people, when pressed upon by
a heartless mob, and turning upon them a band of unprincipled militia, with orders encouraging their extermination, has brought a lasting disgrace upon the State over
which he presides.

320 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

ii The resolutions were supported in a spirited manner
by Messrs. Holmes, Morris and Whitrley.
it On motion, the resolutions were adopted.
it On motion the meeting then adjourned

it SAMUEL LEACH, Chairman.
it J. D. MORGAN, Secretary!

From the New York Commercial Advertiser.

** MEETING IN BEHALF OF rm; MORMONS.

i* Last evening, pursuant to public notice, a large meeting assembled at National Hall, to listen to the recital
of the wrongs and sufferings of the Mormons, and to
devise means for the relief of their women and children.

it The meeting was organized by placing Mr. Charles
King in the chair, and Mr. Marcus Spring as Secretary.
The Chairman having briefly stated the object of the
meeting, and read the circular letter signed by Governor
Carlin, of Illinois; Senator Young, from that State, and
other residents, vouching for the trustworthiness of Mr.
Green, who is deputed by this people to make their case

known to the country, the Chairman introduced Mr. Green

to the meeting.

ii Mr. Green proceeded to give a plain, unadorned, and,
as is believed, unexaggerated narrative of the settlement
of the Mormons in Missouri, of the constant outrages to
which they were subjected, and the series of persecutions
which were only ended by their forcible expulsion from the
State; and the surrender, without compensation, of the
lands and houses they had acquired by their own money,
or built with their own hands.

. it Mr. Green was himself an actor and witness in many
of the scenes he described, and be related them without
any attempt at ornament or appeal to passion.

it When Mr. Green took his seat, Joseph Blunt, Esq.,
addressed the meeting with ability and great effect, and

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 321

od'ered the resolutions that will be found below. He was
eloquently followed and seconded by Hiram Ketchum,
Esq. The resolutions were further supported by several
speakers, among whom were Dr. D. M. Reese and W. L.
Stone, Esq.; when the question was taken on them separately, and they were carried almost without a dissenting
voice.

it Upon a suggestion from the Chair, that as the wants
of the suiferers were urgent, good might arise from some
immediate contributions-—a mechanic in his working jacket
stood up, saying that having often witnessed the good
efects of example on such occasions, he proposed, although,
as he added, the sum he could give was humble, if nine
others would do likewise, to give five dollars, and immediately walked up to the table and deposited the money.
The challenge was accepted by several others, and a sum
exweding fifty dollars was collected on the spot.

ii The meeting then adjourned, it being understood that,
the committee named to receive and distribute contributions would at once enter upon their duties.

iiResolved, That as Americans, we have heard with
shame and indignation the narrative given by Mr. Green
of the persecutions, sufferings and lawless violence of
which a body of American citizens have been the subjects
and the victims, for no other apparent cause than that
without hinderance to others, or violation of any law of
the land, they had acted upon the right guaranteed them
by the Constitution of the United States of a free exercise
of religion.

iiResolved, That, without meaning to express any opinion
whatever, as to the religious views or practices of the
Mormons as a sect, we condemn and desire to bear our
testimony against mob law, lynch law and all other forms
of outrage and violence where an excited populace becomes at once jury, judge and executioner.
21

322 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

iiliteaolved, That the Mormons, as wronged, persecuted,
exiled and defrauded Americans, are entitled to the sympathy and support of their countrymen; and that especially in behalf of the women and children, driven from
their homes at the point of the bayonet, we appeal to
the known benevolence of our fellow citizens at large for
pecuniary aid.

ii Resolved, That the Chairman and Secretary be a committee, with power to add to their numbers, to obtain
subscriptions in aid of the women and children of the
Mormons; such subscriptions to be applied after due investigation by the committee themselves.

it Resolved, That these resolutions be signed by the Chairman and Secretary, and published in the newspapers.
it C1uRLRs KING, Chairman.
if MARCUS SPRING, Secretary."

From the foregoing numerous extracts the public can
see that my horrible tale of woe is not a fiction; but an
awful reality. I might fill a volume with similar quotations from the public jomnals of every part of the Union,
but I forbear, with the full conviction that the foregoing
are suliicient to show that an impartial public, who stand
entirely unconnected with our society, as religionists, bear
out my narrative in its awful tale of woe and suffering ;
and I now submit the subject to the perusal of all people,
willing to meet my statements in the foregoing at the
bar of Him who knows all secret things, and who judges
righteously.

 

 

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Congratulations :—Remove to Nauvoo :—Meet with President Smith and Other
Fellow Sufferers :—-President Smith's Reproof for the Elders:—Toils :—Stnrt
for England :—A:-rival in Detroit:—Visit my Brother Anson and Parents:
—Arrive in New York :—Visit Philadelphia and Washington :—Meet President Smith :—Great Meeting :—Preaching by S. Rigdon and President
Smith :—-Success in New York :—Farewell Song :—Sail for England :—Retlections.

BEING once more at liberty, and in the enjoyment of
the society of family and friends, I spent a few days
in rest and refreshment, and in receiving the congratulations of my friends and fellow citizens. My house was
thronged from day to day, not only with my old acquaintances and fellow exiles, but with strangers of every sect
and party, all anxious to see a martyr, as it were, who
had been so wonderfully and miraculously delivered from
bondage and death in their most terrible forms.

After a few days spent in this way, we removed to
N auvoo, a new town, about fifty miles above Quincy.
Here lived President Joseph Smith and many of the
refugees who had survived the storm of persecution in
Missouri. It had been already appointed as a gathering
place" for the scattered Saints, and many families were on
the ground, living in the open air, or under the shade of
trees, tents, wagons, etc. While others occupied a few
old buildings, which they had purchased or rented. Others,
again, were living in some old log buildings on the opposite side of the Mississippi, at a place called Montrose,
and which had formerly served the purpose of barracks
for soldiers. 324 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

The hardships and exposures consequent on the persecutions, caused a general sickness. Here and there, and in
every place, a majority of the people were prostrated with
malignant fevers, agues, etc.

VVhen we first arrived we lived in the open air, without
any other shelter whatever. Here I met brother Joseph
Smith, from whom I had been separated since the close
of the mock trial in Richmond the year previous. Neither
of us could refrain from tears as we embraced each other
once more as free men. We felt like shouting hosannah
in the highest, and giving glory to that God who had
delivered us in fulfilment of His word to His servant
Joseph the previous autumn, when we were being carried
into captivity in Jackson County, Missouri. He blessed
me with a warmth of sympathy and brotherly kindness
which I shall never forget. Here also I met with Hyrum
Smith and many others of my fellow prisoners with a
glow of mutual joy and satisfaction which language will
never reveal. Father and mother Smith, the parents of
our prophet and President, were also overwhelmed with
tears of joy and congratulation; they wept like children as
they took me by the hand; but, 0, how different from the
tears of bitter sorrow which were pouring down their
cheeks as they gave us the parting hand in Far West,
and saw us dragged away by iiends in human form.

After the gush of feelings consequent on our happy
meeting had subsided, I accompanied Joseph Smith over
the Mississippi in a skiff to visit some friends in Montrose.
Here many were lying sick and at the point of death.
Among these was my old friend and fellow servant, Elijah
Fordham, who had been with me in that extraordinary
work in New York City in 1837. He was now in the
last stage of a deadly fever. He lay prostrate and nearly
speechless, with his feet poulticed; his eyes were sunk in
their sockets; his flesh was gone; the paleness of death
was upon him; and he was hardly to be distinguished

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 325

from a corpse. His wife was weeping over him, and preparing clothes for his burial.

Brother Joseph took him by the hand, and in a voice
and energy which would seemingly have raised the dead,
he cried: it BROTHER FORDHAM, IN THE NAME or JESUS
CHRIST, ARISE AND WALK." It was a voice which could
be heard from house to house and nearly through the
neighborhood. It was like the roaring of a lion, or the
heavy thunderbolt. Brother Fordham leaped from his dying
bed in an instant, shook the poultices and bandages from
his feet, put on his clothes so quick that none ght a chance
to assist him, and taking a cup of tea and a little refreshment, he walked with us from house to house visiting other
sick beds, and joining in prayer and ministrations for them,
while the people followed us, and with joy and amazement
gave glory to God. Several more were called up in a
similar manner and were healed.

Brother Joseph, while in the Spirit, rebuked the Elders
who would continue to lay hands on the sick from day to
day without the power to heal ,them. Said he: it It is
time that such things ended. Let the Elders either obtain
the power of God to heal the sick, or let them cease to minister the forms without the powerf

After these things I joined with brother Kimball in purchasing some land in the contemplated city of Nauvoo, which
was then a wilderness, and both of us went to work
together with our own hands to build us a log house
each. After toiling a few days in this manner I sold out
my improvement and prepared for a mission to England,
as our quorum were now appointed to visit that country.

On the 29th of August, 1839, I took leave of my friends
in Nauvoo and started for a foreign land. I was accompanied by my wife and three children (having obtained
my son Parley from his nurse, Mrs. Allen), and Elders
Orson Pratt and Hyrum Clark. We journeyed in our own
private carriage, drawn by two horses. Our route lay

326 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

through the wild and but partially inhabited countries of
Illinois, Indiana and Michigan, for about five hundred and
eighty miles, to Detroit, the capital of the State of Michigan, situated at the head of Lake Erie.

The first day we rode seventeen miles through a beautiful plain, or prairie. Our route was a most delightful one.

On all sides, as we turned our eyes, we beheld a boundless field of grass and flowers, with here and there a small
grove of timber; the landscape was level or diversiiial
with gentle swells; the surface smooth as a garden; the
soil extremely rich; and, although there was no road marked
by art, yet our carriage rolled as smoothly and easily as
if it had been on a railway. Most of this delightful prairie
was without inhabitants, and could, probably, have been
purchased for one dollar and a quarter per acre.

It is well calculated for the purposes of agriculture, producing in richest profusion, when cultivated, almost every
kind of grain and grass, and every vegetable suited for
the climate.

After travelling seventeen miles through this delightful
scenery, we arrived in Carthage, a flourishing village. Here
we stopped for the night with a member of our society,
who received us kindly; and at evening preached in a
large court room to an attentive audience. Next day we
rode some twenty-five miles through a similar country, and
at evening arrived at a fine village called Macomb. Here
we were kindly entertained over Sabbath by a brother
Miller. We preached in the court house.

My brother Orson and brother Clark went still ahead
about thirty miles, where they preached on Sunday. On

. Monday morning we started and rode thirty miles through

a delightful country.

Sometimes we were in the midst of flourishing farms and
villas, and sometimes the wild deer would startle from their
grazing at our approach, and go bounding over the wild
expanse till lost in the distance.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 327

In the evening we arrived at the house of my brother,
Wm. Pratt, where we found brothers Orson Pratt and
Clark. We preac_hed at a neighboring house, which was
crowded by an attentive congregation. Next morning we
rode eight miles to Canton, and found some Saints who
persuaded us to stay till morning. VVe consented; and in
the evening preached to the people who crowded the house
and yard, and who seemed very anxious to hear more.

Continuing our journey we came next day to Peoria,
thirty miles; a flourishing town on the Illinois river. Here
we tarried with one of the members of the Church, and
were kindly entertained. Next day made thirty miles, and,
providentially, stopped for the night at the house of the
only member of our society in that region. When he learned
who we were he welcomed us, and finally prevailed upon us
to stay two or three days, after which we blessed him and
his household and departed.

We then journeyed about thirty-three miles every day
for four weeks, and at length found ourselves within part
of a days journey of Detroit. Here we found several
small branches of the Church; and being worn down with
our journey, we tarried with them six days, during which
we ministered the gospel. Brother 0. Pratt, in particular,
preached in several towns to large and attentive audiences.
Taking leave of the brethren, we rode to Detroit, where I
found my brother Anson Pratt and family; whom I had
not seen for many years, and also my aged father and
mother, who were now living with him. My father was
now about seventy years of age, and was on his death

o bed with a heavy fever. We tarried with them two weeks;

during which I preached in the City Hall at Detroit, and

superiutended some printing and publishing matters.
While here we sold our horses and carriage, and at

length took leave of our kindred and a last farewell of

our sick father, and took passage on a steamboat down
Lake _Erie to Buffalo; distance three hundred miles.

 

328 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY r. PRATT.

Previous to our departure from Detroit brothers 0. Pratt
and Clark took leave of us, and passed down the lake
into Ohio; intending to meet us again at New York.

After landing safe in Buffalo, we took the Erie canal
and railroad to Albany—-distance three hundred and titty
miles; thence to New York by steamer down the Hudson
rive.r—distance one hundred and fifty miles. Here we arrived in safety after a journey of about one thousand four
hundred miles. We were received by the Saints in New
York almost as one of the old saints risen from the dead.
I had been absent nearly two years, during which time I
had lain eight months in prison. Brother Adison Everett,
a High Priest of the Church in that city and one of the
first members I had baptized there, related to me that
the Church in that city were assembled in prayer for me
on the evening of the 4th of July previous, that I might
be delivered from prison and from my enemies in Missouri.
When, on a sudden, the spirit of prophecy fell on him, and
he arose and declared to the Church that they might cease
their prayers on that subject; it For," said he, if on this
moment brother Parley goes at liberty?

We found the Church in New York strong in the faith,
and rejoicing in the truth. They had become numerous in
the city and in several parts of the country around.

In this city I resided with my family some six months,
during which I preached most of the time in the city, and
also superintended the printing and publishing of several
of our books. I also performed occasional missions in the
country; I visited Long Island, New Jersey, Philadelphia
and the City of Washington. In this latter place I published an address in a printed circular to each member of
Congress, and to the President of the United States and his
Cabinet, setting forth our principles in plainness, and bearing testimony of the truth ;- while, at the same time, our
petitions for redress were pending before them—President
Joseph Smith and others having visited them in person,

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 329

with an earnest appeal for investigation and redress of our
grievances in Missouri. In Philadelphia I had the happiness of once more meeting with President Smith, and of
spending several days with him and ot-hers, and with the
Saints in that city and vicinity.

During these interviews he taught me many great and
glorious principles concerning God and the heavenly order
of eternity. It was at this time that I received from him
the first idea of eternal family organization, and the eternal union of the sexes in those inexpressibly endearing
relationships which none but the highly intellectual, the
refined and pure in heart, know how to prize, and which
are at the very foundation of everything worthy to be
called happiness.

Till then I had learned to esteem kindred affections and
sympathies as appertaining solely to this transitory state,
as something from which the heart must be entirely weaned,
in order to be fitted for its heavenly state.

It was Joseph Smith who taught me how to prize the
endearing relationships of father and mother, husband and
wife; of brother and sister, son and daughter.

It was from him that I learned that the wife of my
bosom might be secured to me for time and all eternity;
and that the refined sympathies and affections which
endeared us to each other emanated from the fountain of
divine eternal love. It was from him that I learned that
we might cultivate these affections, and grow and increase
in the same to all eternity ; while the result of our endless
union would be an offspring as numerous as the stars of
heaven, or the sands of the sea shore.

It was from him that I learned the true dignity and
destiny of a son of God, clothed with an eternal priesthood, as the patriarch and sovereign of his countless offspring. It was from him that I learned that the highest
dignity of womanhood was, to stand as a queen and priestess to her husband, and to reign for ever and ever as the

330 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. rnarr.

queen mother of her numerous and still increasing oil'spring. °

I had loved before, but I knew not why. But now I
1oved—with a pureness—an intensity of elevated, exalted
feeling, which would lift my soul from the transitory things
of this grovelling sphere and expand it as the ocean. I
felt that God was my heavenly Father indeed; that Jesus
was my brother, and that the wife of my bosom was an
immortal, eternal companion; a kind ministering angel,

given to me as a comfort, and a crown of glory for ever

and ever. In short, I could now love with the spirit and
with the understanding also.

Yet, at that time, my dearly beloved brother, Joseph
Smith, had barely touched a single key; had merely lifted
a corner of the veil and given me a single glance into
eternity.

While visiting with brother Joseph in Philadelphia, a
very large church was opened for him to preach in, and
about three thousand people assembled to hear him.
Brother Rigdon spoke first, and dwelt on the Gospel, illustrating his doctrine by the Bible. When he was through,
brother Joseph arose like a lion about to rear; and being
full of the Holy Ghost, spoke in great power, bearing testimony of the visions he had seen, the ministering of angels
which he had enjoyed ; and how he had found the plates
of the Book of Mormon, and translated them by the gill:
and power of God. He commenced by saying: it If nobody
else had the courage to testify of so glorious a message
from Heaven, and of the finding of so glorious a record,
he felt to do it in justice to the people, and leave the

event with God."
The entire congregation were astounded; electrified, as it

were, and overwhelmed with the sense of the truth and
power by which he spoke, and the wonders which he related.
A lasting impression was made; many souls were gathered
into the fold. And I bear witness, that he, by his faith 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P.' PRATT. 331

ful and powerful testimony, cleared his garments of their
blood. Multitudes were baptized in Philadelphia and in
the regions around; while, at the same time, branches
were springing up in Pennsylvania, in Jersey, and in
various directions.

Among the Elders who were instrumental in doing a
good work in those regions, I would make honorable mention of Benjamin Winchester, of Philadelphia, since fallen
from the faith; and Lorenzo Barnes, who labored and did
a great work in Chester County, Penn., and afterwards
laid down his life while on a mission in England.

Soon after my arrival in New York City, Elders O.
Pratt and Clark, who left us at Detroit, arrived, having
performed a mission through some parts of Ohio and
New York. Elders Turley, John Taylor, and Wilford W.
Woodruif, had also arrived from the West on their way to
England.

Brother Clark and two Elders soon sailed for Liverpool. Brothers Taylor, Woodruif, and Turley, sailed a few
weeks afterwards. Brother 0. Pratt labored in the
country around New York with good success.

Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, George A.
Smith, and R. Hedlock, also arrived in New York City
late in the winter, after performing a long and important
journey and mission through the States of Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, and New York.

Finding ourselves together once more, after all our trials
and sufferings, we rejoiced exceedingly and praised God
for all His mercies to us. During the few days that we
were together in New York we held many precious meetings in which the Saints were filled with joy, and the
people more and more convinced of the truth of our
message. Near forty persons were baptized and added to
the Church in that city during the few days of our
brethrenls stay there.

We held a general Conference. in the ii Columbian Hall,"

"332 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

previous to our departure, in which the following song,
composed by myself, was written expressly for that occasion and sung by those present:

When shall we all meet again?
When shall we our rest obtain?
When our pilgrimage be o'er—
Parting sighs be known no more ?
When Mount Zion we regain,
There may we all meet again.

We to foreign climes repair;

Truth, the message which we bear;
Truth, which angels oft have borne;
Truth to comfort those who mourn.
Truth eternal will remain,

On its rock welll meet again.

Now the bright and morning star.
Spreads its glorious light afar,
Kindles up the rising dawn

Of that bright millennial morn;

When the Saints shall rise and reign,
Then may we all meet again.

When the sons of Israel come,

When they build Jerusalem;

When the house of God is reared,
And Messiah*s way prepared;

When from Heaven he comes to reign,
In the clouds Weill meet again. _

When the earth is cleansed by fire;
When the wickedls hopes expire;
When in cold ob1ivion*s shade,

Proud opprcssors all are laid;
Long will Zion's Mount remain,
There we all may meet again.

On the 9th of March, 1840, we embarked on board the
ship it Patrick Henryfl for Liverpool, England. W'e were
accompanied to the water by my family, and by scores of
the congregation, of both sexes. We bade them farewell

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 333

amid many tears, and taking a little boat were soon on
board ship-—which lay at anchor a short distance from the
shore.

From there we could still see the crowd of our friends on
the shore, while a wave ot' their hats and handkerchiefs
in the air bid us a last adieu. At twelve olclock we
were under way, being towed by a steamer for some
distance until the sails were all unfurled before a fair
breeze. The steamer now bade us farewell with three
cheers, and we found ourselves fairly under way on the
broad expanse of ocean. The sun was soon setting behind a distant promontory, which looked like a dark
cloud on the bosom of the ocean: while to the north the
distant shores of Long Island were still in view.

Next morning we found ourselves tossing upon a rough
sea before the wind with no land in sight. We had a
rough passage of twenty-eight days, and on the sixth of
April landed in Liverpool, England. Brother Kimball had
been there before; but it was the first time that the other
brethren and myself had set our feet on the shores of
the old world.

We soon found brother Taylor, who had raised the
standard of truth in Liverpool, and had already baptized about thirty. From him we learned that all those
who had sailed before us had arrived in safety, and had
commenced their missions in various parts with good
success. We soon called a general Conference in Preston,
where we were enabled to rejoice together with most of
our brethren in the ministry.

Thus, through the mercy of God, we have been enabled to fullll His commands thus far, and h'ave accomplished a journey of five thousand miles under circumstances which would have discouraged any except such as
were upheld by the arm of Jehovah.

When we take into consideration the persecution, imprisonment, and banishment, together with the robbing

334 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

and plundering which has been inflicted upon our people in
the West, and the consequent sickness, poverty, and distress to which ourselves, families and friends were reduced,
previous to our undertaking this mission—when we consider
that it has been opposed by persecution, sword, flame,
dungeons, chains, sickness, hunger, thirst, poverty, by
death and hell, by men and devils, and all the combined
powers of darkness—it would have been no marvel, if,
like Paul, we had failed to accomplish the mission at
present, and had addressed an epistle to the Church in
England, saying, it We would have come unto you once
and again, but Satan hindered us."

But this could not take place with us, as it "did with
Paul, because our mission to Europe was by express command of the Almighty, and therefore it had to be accomplished in spite of men and devils.

One might suppose, from the opposition that it met
with, that Satan was aware that if once accomplished, it
would result in the ultimate overthrow of his kingdom,
and the enlargement of the kingdom of God—which may
God grant for Ohristls sake.

 

CHAPTER XXXVII.

General Conference at Preston, England :—P1iblishing Committee :—Editorial
Appointment:—First Number of the "Millennial Stnr " Issued:—My own
Ministry in Manchester and Vicinity :—New Hymn Book:-—Action of Congress on the Missouri Tragedies

N the 15th of April, 1840, a general conference was

convened in the it Temperance Hall," Preston, Lancashire, in which thirty-three branches of the Church were
represented, including a total of near two thousand members.

In this conference, Elders Brigham Young, Heber C.
Kimball and myself were appointed a publishing committee
for the Church. I was also appointed editor and publisher of a monthly perodical, to be called the Millennial
Star.

While the residue of the committee travelled in the ministry, I repaired to Manchester and commenced preparing
to fulfil my new appointments. .

The first number of the Star was issued in May. The
following hymn was written by myself expressly for the
introduction of this periodical, and originally appeared on
its cover :

The morning breaks, the shadows llee;
Lol Zion's standard is unfurled! '

The dawning of a brighter day
Majestic rises on the world.

The clouds of error disappear
Before the rays of truth divine;

The glory, bursting from afar,
Wide oler the nations soon will shine.

336 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY r. PRATT.

The Gentile fulness now comes in,
And Israel's blessings are at hand;
Lo! Judah*s remnant, cleans'd from sin,
Shall in their promised Canaan stand.
Jehovah speaks! Let earth give car,
And Gentile nations turn and live!
His mighty arm is making bare,
His covenant people to receive.
Angels from heaven, and truth from earth
Have met, and both have moord borne;
Thus Zion's light is bursting forth,
To bring her ransomed children home.

While engaged in editing and publishing the Star I also
preached the gospel continually to vast congregations in
and about Manchester, and the spirit of joy, and faith and
gladness was greatly increased, and the number of the
Saints was multiplied. I also assisted my brethren in selecting, compiling and publishing a hymn book. In this
work was contained near fifty of my original hymns and
songs, composed expressly for the book, and most of them
written during the press of duties which then crowded upon
me.

In the third number of the Star, page 65, is published
the final action of the Congress of the United States, on
the subject of the outrages committed by the State of Missouri, upon the Church of the Saints. It reads as follows:

it TWENTY-SIXTH oonoasss, FIRST SESSION.

it In Senate of the United States, March 4, 1840. Submitted, laid on the table, and ordered to be printed.
it Mr. Wall made the following report:

tiThe Committee on the Judiciary, to whom was referred
the Memorial of a Delegation of the Latter-Day Saints,

report :

if The petition of the memorialists sets forth, in substance, that a portion of their sect commenced a settlement
in the County of Jackson, in the State of Missouri, in the

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 337

summer of 1831; that they bought lands, built houses,
erected churches and established their homes, and engaged
in all the various occupations of life; that they were expelled from that county in 1833 by a mob, under circumstances of great outrage, cruelty and oppression, and against
all law, and without any oifence committed on their
part; and to the destruction of property to the amount

of one hundred and twenty thousand dollars; that the

society thus expelled amounted to about twelve thousand
souls; that no compensation was ever made for the destruction of their property in Jackson County; that after their
expulsion from Jackson, they settled in Clay County, on
the opposite side of the Missouri River, where they purchased lands, and entered others at the land olllce, where
they resided peaceably for three years, engaged in cultivation and other useful and active employments, when the
mob again threatened their peace, lives and property, and
they became alarmed, and finally made a treaty with the
citizens of Clay County, that they should purchase their
lands, and the Saints should remove, which was complied
with on their part, and the Saints removed to the County
of Caldwell, where they took up their abode, and re-established their settlement, not without having pecuniary losses
and other inconveniences; that the citizens of Clay County
never paid them for their lands, except for a small part.

ii They remained in Caldwell from 1836 until the fall of
1838; and, during that time, had acquired by purchase
from the Government, the settlers and pre-emptionists,
almost all the lands in the County of Caldwell, and a
portion of the lands in Davis and Carroll Counties-—the
former county being almost entirely settled by the Saints,.
and they were rapidly filling up the .two latter counties.

ii Those counties, where the Saints first commenced theirsettlements, were for the most part wild and uncultivated,
and they had converted them into large and well improved farms, well stocked.
22

 

338 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

it Lands had risen in value to ten, and even twenty
five dollars per acre; and those counties were rapidly
advancing in cultivation and wealth.

it That in August, 1838, a riot commenced, growing out
of an attempt of a Saint to vote, which resulted in creating great excitement, and the perpetration of many scenes
of lawless outrage, which are set forth in the petition.
That they were finally compelled to fly from those counties,
and onl the 11th of October, 1838, they sought safety by
that means, with their families, leaving many of their
eifects behind. That they had previously applied to the
constituted authorities of Missouri for protection, but in
vain. '

it They allege that they were pursued by the mob, that
conflicts ensued, deaths occurred on each side; and,
finally, a force was organized under the authority of the
Governor of the State of Missouri, with orders to drive
the Saints from the State, or to exterminate them. The
Saints thereupon determined to make no further resistance;
but to submit themselves to the authorities of the State.
Several of the Saints were arrested and imprisoned, on a
charge of treason against the sum; and the rest, amounting to about fifteen thonnnd souls, fled into other States;
principally in Illinois, where they now reside.

it The petition is drawn up at great length, and sets forth
with feeling and eloquence the wrongs of which they complain; justifies their own conduct, and aggravates that
of those whom they call their persecutors; and concludes
by saying that they see no redress, unless it is obtained
of the Congress of the United States, to whom they
make their solemn, last appeal, as American citizens, as
Christians, and as men; to which decision they say they
will submit.

ti The committee have examined the case presented. by
the petition, and heard the views urged by their agent
with care and attention; and, after full consideration,

 

AUTOBIOGRAPEY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 339

unanimously concur in the opinion, that the case presented
for their investigation, is not such a one as will justify
or authorize any interposition by this Government.

it The Wrongs complained of are not alleged to have been
committed by any of the oilicers of the United States, or
under the authority of its Government, in any manner whatever. The allegations in the petition relate to the acts of
the citizens, and inhabitants, and authorities of the State of
Missouri, of which State the petitioners were, at the time,
citizens or inhabitants. The grievances complained of in
the petition are alleged to have been done within the
territory of the State of Missouri. The committee, under
these circumstances, have not considered themselves justified in enquiring into the truth or falsehood of the facts
charged in the petition. If they are true, the petitioners
must seek _relief in the courts of judicature of the State
of Missouri; or of the United States, which has the appropriate jurisdiction to administer full and. adequate
redress for the wrongs complained of; and, doubtless,

Swill do so fairly' and impartially; or the petitioners may,

if they see proper, apply to the justice and magnanimity
of the State of Missouri; an appeal which the committee feel justified in believing will never be made in vain
by the injured or oppressed. It can never be presumed
that a State either wants the power, or lacks the disposition, to redress the wrongs of its own citizens, committed Within her own territory; whether they proceed
from the lawless acts of her officers, or any other persons.

if The committee therefore report, that they recommend
the passage of the following resolution:

it Resolved, That the Committee on the Judiciary be discharged from the further consideration of the memorial in
this case; and that the memorialists have leave to withdraw the papers which accompany their memorial?

The actio'n of the general Government on this momen340 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

was subject, establishes the precedent that there is no
power in the Government to carry out the principles of- its
own Constitution. Fifteen thousand citizens of the United

States can be murdered, robbed, plundered, driven from

their lands, or disinherited, while the Constitution guarantees to them liberty and protection, and yet there -is no
power to protect or reinstate them. Congress only mocks
them by referring them to their murderers for redress. It
seems almost superfluous to say that the Saints appealed
to a higher tribunal—-even the throne of God, where the
case is yet pending; and that the Congress of the United
States are charged with being accessory to these highest
crimes known to the laws of God and man. They hold in
fellowship this guilty partner—Missouri—after knowing her to
be a wholesale murderer and land pirate.

As the case is yet pending before the court of Heaven,
we will drop the subject and proceed with our own
history.

 

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

General Conference at Manchester :—0I-dinations and Appointmems :—Return
to New York :—Meet With My Family: -Visit to the State of Maine °.-A. Dream and its Fuliilment:—Embark Again for England :—Consequence
of Looking Back :—Safe Arrival in England :—Resume the Editorial
Duties :—Retlections.

N the 6th of July, 1840, a General Conference was
. convened at Manchester, in the ii Carpenterls Hall," a
building which would seat near live thousand people.

There were present of the Twelve Apostles: Brigham
Young, H. C. Kimball, Wilford W. Woodruif, John Taylor,
Willard Richards, George A. Smith, and myself. Of other
officers: High Priests, 5; Elders, 19; Priests, 15; Teachers, 11; and Deacons, 3.

At this Conference Parley P. Pratt was unanimously
chosen President; and William Clayton, Clerk.

Two thousand seven hundred and sixty-seven members
were represented, including 254 otiicers.

The publishing committee had just completed the new
Hymn Book, which was presented to the Conference, and
accepted by them by unanimous vote.

Three persons were then ordained to the high priesthood,
viz.: Thomas Klngton, Alfred Cordon and Thomas Smith;
also John Albertson, John Blezord, William Berry John
Sanders, John Parkinson, James Worsley, and John Allen
were ordained Elders; seven individuals were ordained to
the lesser priesthood.

Many Elders were also selected and appointed to labor
in the ministry in various parts. There was a variety of

342 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

business transacted, and much instruction given by Brigham
Young and others, after which,Confe1ence was adjourned
to the 6th of October, at the same place.

During this Conference I received a letter from my family
in New York, informing me that they were dangerously ill
of scarlet fever. I, therefore, by advice of the other members of the quorum, concluded to cross the ocean once
more and bring them to England, where I was likely to
remain for several years rather in a stationary position as
an editor and publisher. I accordingly repaired I immediately to Liverpool and embarked for New York. I was
thirty-seven days confined on this dreary passage, without
any friends or associates who cared for me or the cause
of truth.

I then landed in New York, found my wife and children
recovered from their sickness, for which I felt truly thankful. They were agreeably surprised at seeing me so soon
and so unexpectedly, and so were the Saints in that city

and vicinity. After several joyful meetings among them, I .

went to the State of Maine on a visit with my wife and
children to her parents and kindred. They lived in Bethe],
Oxford County, about sixty miles from Portland, the seaport
where we landed. The day before our arrival my wifds sister, a Mrs. Bean, prophecied to her husband that brother
Pratt and family would arrive there the next evening, and
she actually changed the bedding and prepared the best
room for our reception, as if she had received notice of our
coming. At this her husband and friends laughed in derision; if forfl said they, if our brother-in-law is in England
and his family in New York; how, then, will he be here
tonight W But she still persisted, and made ready the
room and all things for our reception, assuring them that
I would arrive that night with my family.

Night came, the deep shades of evening gathered around,
a dark and gloomy night set in, and still no signs of us.
They still laughed her to scorn for her superstition, and

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 343

she still persisted in her anticipations of our momentary
arrival. At length, as they were about to retire to rest,
we knocked at the door and were joyfully received-—it
being the first time that any of my wifels kindred there
had seen my face. Mrs. Bean had a dream a few days previous to our

 

arrival, in which she dreamed that I came to her and A

gave her a key to the Bible. As she related the dream
to me, I presented her with my if Voice of War-m'ng.l' It
seemed to her and her husband as they read it as if it
was indeed a key to the doctrine and prophecies of the
Holy Scriptures. They rejoiced with exceeding joy, and
promised to be baptized, and to gather to Nauvoo if God
would only open their way to sell their farm.

My father-in-law, Aaron Frost, and household, and all our
kindred and many others in that region, received me with
joy and hospitality, and I preached several times in their
churches.

I finally took leave of them and returned to New York,
accompanied by my wifels sister, Olive Frost, a young
lady of some twenty years of age, who accompanied us to
England to help us in the family.

We soon embarked, and after a long and tedious passage we arrived again in England in October, 1840. My
family then consisted of my wife and wifels sister, and my
wifels daughter, Mary Ann Stearns, and my sons, Parley
and Nathan.

I new again resumed the editorial duties in Manchester,
and assisted in the publishing department and in the presidency of the Manchester Conference, and the general Presidency of the work in that country. The Star had, during
my absence, been edited and published by Elders Young
and Richards. '

My brother-in-law, Samuel Bean, soon sold out, according
to his desires, and started with his family to remove to
Nauvoo. '

344 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

He arrived in Portland, ready to embark, when he heard
some lying tales about the it Mormmwfl as is usual, and
being darkened in mind he turned back and bought a farm
in Maine, and soon afterwards died without ever obeying
the gospel or gathering with the Saints. His wife and
children were left as a widow and orphans to drag out a
lonely existence on a farm which was not saleable, and
without means to gather with the Saints, and without opportunity to obey the gospel——a solemn warning to all persons not to delay or neglect a strict and punctual obedience
to their convictions.

On the 6th of October, a general Conference convened
at Manchester, according to adjournment.

I had hoped to land from America in time to attend it,
but was disappointed by contrary winds.

The following members of my quorum were present, viz:
Brigham Young, Orson Pratt, VV. W. Woodruff, John Taylor,
Willard Richards, H. C. Kimball and G. A. Smith; other
oilicers, viz.: High Priests, 5; Elders, 19; Priests, 28;
Teachers, 4; and Deacons, 2.

In this Conference, Elder Orson Pratt was called to the
chair, and Elder George Walker chosen clerk.

A general representation showed a great increase since the
July Conference, and a spread of the work into many parts.

Many ordinations took place; much instruction was
given; and many additional missionaries were sent out.

In a few days after this Conference, I landed in safety
with my family, and again repaired to Manchester, and
resumed the editorial duties; a-nd, in connection with
Elder Young, superintended the publishing department.

The October number of the Star contains much cheering news of the spread of the work in various parts of
the United States, England, Scotland and Isle of Man,
and an interesting account of Elder Orson Hydels appointment on a mission to Jerusalem, in connection with
Elder John E. Page. '

AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT. 345

May the Almighty speed his work, and bless the believers with signs following, and with grace and wisdom
to escape all the judgments which await the wicked, and
to stand before the coming of the Son of Man; for
Christls sake. Amen.

Thus closed the year 1840 with us and our labors.
An eventful year it had been to us, and to the Church
of the Saints. It was the iirst mission of the Twelve
modern Apostles, as a quorum, to a foreign country. It
had been undertaken under circumstances which would
have deterred men of a less holy and sacral calling and
responsibilty. It had overcome chains and dungeons, and
gloomy cells, and perils of robbers and of death. It had
triumphed over poverty and sickness, and perils by sea
and land. And it had triumphed and been crowned with
a success unparalleled, even by the history of the ancient
Apostles.

It was the hand of God that performed it, and to his
name be ascribed honor and majesty, and power and
glory, forever and ever. Amen.

 

 

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Visit and Ministry in Bolton :—Conduct of two Methodist Priests :—Arrest
and Trial :—Emigration:—General Conference at Manchester :—Council
of the Twelve :—Charter the ship ttTyrean":—tt Philosophy of the Resurrection":—Emigration on the Ship " Chaos ":—Visit to the Isle of
Man :—Visit to Norwich :—Mob.

the 19th of January, 1841, I visited Bolton for the
first time; found an interesting society there consisting of about one hundred and thirty members, including
some small branches in the vicinity. They appeared to
be dwelling together in truth and love, and zealously
united in the cause of God and godliness. Their presiding otiicer is an aged minister by the name of Crooks,
formerly of Stockport; through whose labors the society
there has grown from a small handfull to its present
flourishing condition. The meetings are crowded to excess,
and scores of people are pressing forward and uniting
with the Church by repentance and baptism. The Holy
Ghost is poured out into their souls, and its fruits are
manifested in their gifts and blessings.

On Wednesday evening, the 20th, I attended one of
their meetings, and had the privilege of addressing a full
and attentive audience. The subject was confined to a
few scriptural observations, in which the precepts and
promises of Christ were clearly set forth, as contained in
the written word of the New Testament. These were
contrasted with the systems of Christianity as they now
exist, and the difference was so manifest that the
people saw clearly that the religion of Christ was one

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 347

thing, and modern sectarianism another. This so exasperated some craftsmen who were present, viz.: a Mr. James
Pendlebury, professedly a Primitive Methodist preacher,
and Mr. Thomas Balsham, of the New Connection, that
they could no longer hold their peace. For while the
sermon was proceeding, the said Pendlebury arose and began speaking so loud that the speaker paused and requested the interruption to cease; but was not heeded,
for the intruder with stentorian voice continued to cry
out, saying: it This is a new doctrine, and we cannot believe it without miracles; here is a blindman, heal him;
—here is a blind man, heal him! You have preached a
new doctrine—a new doctrine, sir, and we want the
proof—we want the proof 1 ii By this time the house was
all confusion, everyone endeavoring to act as moderater.
We endeavored from the pulpit to command silence, and
expressed our surprise that the New Testament doctrine
should be a new doctrine; but we found that it was a
new doctrine to him, as was manifest in his behavior.
Indeed, the doctrines of common law and civilization were
to him equally as strange and new as the doctrine of
Christ, for he still continued to disturb the meeting
The Saints commenced singing, and finally closed the meeting. But while this was proceeding the riot grew more
and more violent, till at length a form was broken, and
some other damage done. While the civil part of the
people were retiring from the room they were variously insulted by him and his comrades, some crying out, it He
bath a devil/l some challenging to debate, and some calling for a miracle. At length a policeman arrived and
took this brave champion into custody, and his associate,
T. Balsham.

These were handcuffed, marched away, and finally held
to bail. Next morning they had a warrant served on
them for a breach of the peace, and were brought before James Arrowsmith, Esq., Mayor, and five magistrates.

348 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEYT P. PRATT.

An able plea was made by attorney John Taylor, Esq.,
and a laborious attempt on the part of the prisoners to
justify themselves by the introduction of several witnesses
belonging to several diiferent orders of Methodists, whose
testimony was more calculated to throw a false coloring
over our doctrine than anything else. At length Pend1ebury was found guilty of a breach of the peace, had to
pay for the form and make good the damages and costs
of suit; and was bound in the penal sum of ten pounds
to keep the peace for six months.

It is to be hoped that these prompt measures will put
a stop to similar disturbances in our public worship, and
also prove a warning to other priests not to turn iniidels
against the doctrines of the New Testament, and then
use such vile measures against the truth.

Since this affair we have heard verbally from Bolton,
that many are embracing the truth and coming to the
waters of baptism. May the Lord shed forth his Spirit
upon the people of Bolton, and cause a great work to be
done among them.

During February, about two hundred and forty of
the Saints embarked at Liverpool for America, intending to
settle with the Saints at Nauvoo. ,

An editon of the Book of Mormon, consiting of 5,000
copies, was issued by us at Liverpool during this month.

On the 6th of April, 1841, the Council of the Twelve as-.
sembled at Manchester, in the Cai-penterls Hall, for the first
time to transact business as a quorum, in the presence of
the Church in a foreign land, being the first day of the
twelfth year of the rise of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints. _

Nine of the quorum were present, viz.: Brigham Young,
Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, Orson
Pratt, Wilford W. Woodrutf, Willard Richards, John Taylor,

and George A. Smith.
President Young having called the house to order and

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 349

organized the Conference, then opened by prayer. Elder
Thomas Ward was then chosen Clerk. The President then
made some introductory remarks relative to the organization of the Church in the house of the Lord in America;
in reference to the different quorums; in their respective
orders and authorities in the Church.

The representations of the Churches and Conferences
throughout the kingdom were then oaueu for. The total
numbers of which were as follows: 5,814 members; 136
Elders; 303 Priests; 169 Teachers; and 68 Deacons, besides
about 800 souls who had emigrated to America during the
year, who were not included in this representation. * "

Eleven persons were chosen and ordained to the High
Priesthood during this Conference, and twelve persons were
ordained Elders.

Several new Conferences were also organized, and Presidents were appointed for each Conference in the kingdom.

The names of the several Conferences, with their respective Presidents, were as follows: Manchester, P. P. Pratt;
Edinburgh, G. D. Watt; Liverpool, J. Greenhouse; London,
Lorenzo Snow; Maccleslleld, J. Galley; Staifordshire, A.
Cordon; Birmingham, J. Riley; Glasgow, J. McAuley;
Gadiield Elm, Thomas Richardson; Preston, P. Melling;
Brampton, J. Sanders; Garmay, Levi Richards; Clitheroe,
Thomas Ward; Froomes Hill, William Kay.

The business of the Conference being accomplished, several appropriate discourses were delivered by different members of the quorum in relation to the duties of the oiiicers
in their respective callings, and in relation to the duties
and privileges of the members, also on the prosperity of the
work in general. " " " " * *

Elders Young and Miller then sung the hymn, it Adieu,
my dear brethren," etc., and President Young blessed the
congregation and dismissed them.

This Conference closed the mission of the Twelve for the
present in England, and as they were about to take their

350 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

departure for America, all save myself, an epistle was addressed by them to the Saints in the British Isles. It was
written by my own hand, under the direction of the President of the quorum, and signed by each of the nine members present in that country. It was dated at Manchester,
April 15, 1841."

In the month of Sept., 1841, brother Amos Fielding and
myself chartered a large new ship called the it Tyreanf
Captain Jackson, master, for New Orleans. On which we
sent two hundred and seven passengers of our Society
bound for Nauvoo.

Our chartered ship, the it Tyreanfl sailexl with two hundred
and seven passengers on the morning of the 21st of September. On going out of the dock the" previous day, many
hundreds crowded around to witness a ship load of the
sons and daughters of Zion depart from their native shore
for the promised land. They moved slowly out into the
river, singing:

"Lovely native land, farewell!

Glad I leave thee—Glad I leave thee-—
Far in distant lands to dwell."

Next morning they weighed anchor about ten o'clock,
and hoisted sail before a fair wind; moving away under
the flag of liberty—the American Stars and Stripes.

The emigrants were all on deck, and in good spirits;
and as our little boat came off with three hearty cheers,
they were singing the favorite hymn:

"How firm a foundation, ye Saints of the Lord,
Is laid for your faith in His excellent word!"

The last lines which we heard, as their voices were lost
in the distance, were as follows:

"When through the deep waters I call thee to go,
The rivers of sorrow shall not thee o'erllow."

Hats and handkerchiefs were still waving in view as a.

' See Hwcnnial Star, April, 1841.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. rmrr. 351

last token of farewell. Soon all was a dim speck upon
the ocean; a few moments more and they vanished from
view in the wide expanse and lost in the distance. May
God speed them onward in their course, and land them
safely in their destined port. a

The Star for October, 1841, contains several other communications of interest; giving cheering accounts of the
spread of the work in various places, but we will not
record them here.

The November number opens with an editorial on it The
Philosophy of the Resurrection," from which we extract the
following: ~

The mysterious works of God in the formation, progress, changes, and final destiny of creation, are all wonderful and miraculous in one sense. The formation of the
natural body in embryo, or even of a plant or flower, is
as much a miracle as the creation or reorganization of a
world or the resurrection of the body. Each etfect has its
cause, and each cause its effect; and the light, spirit or
truth which proceeds from Deity is the law of life and
motion; the great governing principle of the whole machinery of the universe, whether natural or spiritual, temporal or eternal. It is the cause of causes; the main
spring of naturcls time piece. By it we live; in it we
move and have a being.

Let man be placed upon a lofty eminence surrounded
with the original elements of uncreated worlds; let him
contemplate the confused and chaotic mass of unorganized
existence; let him hear the voice of truth and power as
its first sentence rolls in majesty of wisdom from the
lips of Deity; let him behold the first movement of chaos
as its begins to come to order.

Let him contemplate its various workings till the heavens and earth, and man and beast, and plant and flower
startle into conscious being in all the beauty of joyous
existence; let him observe every minute particular of its pro352 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

gress through time in all its various changes; let him contemplate the changing seasons as they roll in hours and
days, and months, and years; let his thoughts reach to the
starry heavens and View them in all their motions and revolutions: the sun in its daily course; the planets in their annual revolutions; the blazing comet as it moves afar in the
wilds of ether, and returns from its journey of a hundred
or a thousand years; let him return to earth and view the
vegetable kingdom as it blooms and ripens, and falls again
to decay in the revolving seasons: the time-worn oak of
a thousand years, as it braves the tempest, or the modest

flower whose life is but a day; let him view the animal
creation in all its variety, as it appears and passes in turn

from the stage of action; let him contemplate man from
his infant formation through all the changes of his various
life till he returns to dust; let him view the laborious
revolutions of the groaning earth and its various inhabitants through all their temporal career, till wearied nature
sinks to rest, and, worn by slowly rolling years, the
earth itself shall die; and lastly, let him contemplate
all nature regenerated, renewed, and starting into being,
while death itself shall conquered be and immortality alone
endure.)

The vision ended. Man! what hast thou seen!

Nothing out of the ordinary course; all I beheld was
nature moving in perfect accordance with the law of its existance ; not one single deviation or shadow of turning from
the immutable laws of truth,

But hast thou seen no miracle?

Yes, it was all miraculous; it was all achieved by the
law of light, which was the immediate power of God; but
it was all upon the most natmal, easy, simple and plain
principles of nature in its varied order, and which to call
the most miraculous I know not, whether it was the creation of a world, the blossoming of a ilower, the hatching
of a butterfly, or the resurrection of the body, and the

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY 1>. PRATT. 353

making of new heavens and a new earth. All these were
so many displays of the power of God.

All these were miraculous.

All these were natural.

All these were spiritual.

All these were adapted to the simplest capacity, aided by
the Spirit of God. All these were too sublime for an archangel to comprehend by his own capacity, without the
spirit of revelation.

On Sunday, October 17, 1841, the Manchester Qonference
convened at the Carpenter-is Hall. Twelve branches were
represented, consisting of one thousand, five hundred and
eighty-one members, with appropriate oliicers. Many were
called to the ministry, and ordained to their respective
oiiices. Instructions were given in relation to the duties
of the otlicers, members, etc., and they were particularly exhorted to abstain from intoxicating drinks, together with
tobacco, snuif and all other evil habits.

After the ordinations, the Saints present partook of the
Lordls Supper, and sung and rejoiced together. Several
interesting and useful addresses were delivered at evening,
and the meeting concluded with a spirit of joy and satisfaction. The number of oiiicers present at this conference
was about one hundred, and members not far from one
thousand.

Some hundreds had emigrated from this conference, and
still it numbered near one thousand, five hundred members,
all of whom had been gathered in about two years, and
that from an obscure beginning in a small basement in
Oldham Road, being the first place where the fulness of
the gospel was preached within the bounds of what now

comprises the Manchester Conference.
On the 8th of November we sent out the ship it Chaosfi

with about one hundred and seventy passengers of the
Saints. ,
Cheerfulness and satisfaction seemed to pervade every
23

354 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

heart as they bid farewell to their native shores, and set
sail for the land of promise.

Several interesting communications were received during
the month of November, from various parts of the country, the purport of which was that the sick were healed,
the lame walked, the old men dreamed dreams, the
young men saw visions, and the Lordls servants and
handmaidens spake in tongues and prophecied, while the
Lord was showing wonders in heaven above, and signs in
the earth beneath—blood, fire and vapor of smoke.

In the meantime, the wicked rage, and the people imagine a vain thing; the priests take council together against
the Lord and against His anointed ones. The most artful
falsehoods ever inspired by Satan continue to flood the
country, both from the press and pulpit, and reiterated by
those who profess to be followers of Jesus. We went on
a short mission to the Isle of Man of late, and after
preaching to vast multitudes the plain truth of the Scriptures, they would mock and make light of the Bible, and
everything quoted from it.

The priests too were busy in church and chapel, in
lying against the Saints, and perverting the written Word,
and thus inspiring the people with violence, hatred and
every cruel work; yet we found the Saints rejoicing in
the truth, and the honest in heart disposed to inquire
into it.

We have just returned from a visit to Middlewich and
Norwich. In the former place we had a very candid
hearing in the magistrates room, which was filled. In the
latter place many hundreds of people assembled at our
meeting house, among which were a large number of
it Association Methodists ll and other professors, with one
Thompson at their head, who came possessed of the devil
to make disturbance. These made all manner of noises,
such as whooping, shouting, laughing, whistling, mocking,
etc. They openly hissed and mocked the written Word

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 355

of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and made such a noise
as to finally break up the meeting; after which they began to rush among the people, and to bellow like bulls,
and to run over, and knock down, and trample under foot
all who came in their way. We narrowly escaped, but
finally got out of their midst. Mr. Thompson then addressed them, justifying and applauding their conduct.
The lights were at length extinguished, and the room
cleared, but not until some persons were wounded, and
some forms broken.

 

.CHAPTER XL.

Notice for a General Conference :-—Extract of a Letter from Elder Orson Hyde
in Jerusalem :—Ext:racts from my Farewell Address.*

HE following appointment for a General Conference for
the British Isles appeared in the March number of the
Star :

ii The several Conferences of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter Day Saints, in the United Kingdom of Great Britain, are hereby informed that a General Conference will be
held in Manchester, to commence on Sunday, the 15th
day of May next, and to continue for several days, or

until all the business is completed.

ii Each Conference is requested to appoint one or more
delegates to represent them in the General Conference, and
to assist in such business as may be necessary for the
general welfare and prosperity of the cause of truth. It is
very desirable that a full representation should be made
of all the Conferences, branches, and members of this realm.

if P. P PRATT, President.
ii THOMAS WARD, Ole:-kf

In the Star for March, 1842, the following editorial introduces an extract of a letter from Elder Hyde in Jerusalem :

ii We have lately received two lengthy and highly interesting letters from Elder Orson Hyde, dated at Trieste,
January 1 and 18, containing a sketch of his voyages and

' See Millennial Star, October, 1842.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 357

travels in the East; his visit to Jerusalem; a description
of ancient Zion; the Pool of Siloam, and many other
places famous in Holy Writ; with several illustrations of
the manners and customs of the East as applicable to
Scripture texts; and several conversations held between himself and some of the Jewish missionaries, etc., in Jerusalem; together with a masterly description of a terrible
tempest and thunder storm at sea, with a variety of miscellaneous reflections and remarks, all written in an easy,
elegant and masterly style; partaking of the eloquent and
sublime, and breathing a tone of that deep feeling, .tendemess and affection so characteristic of his mission and
the spirit of his holy and sacred otlice. '

it Elder Hyde has, by the grace of God, been the iirst
proclaimer of the fulness of the gospel both on the Continent and in far off Asia, among the nations of the East.
In Germany, Turkey, Egypt and Jerusalem he has reared,
as it were, the ensign of the Latter-Day glory, and sounded

the trump of truth ; calling upon the people of those regions
to awake from their thousand years slumber and to make
ready for their returning Lord.

t* In his travels he has suifered much, and has been
exposed to toils and dangers; to hunger, pestilence and
war. He has been in perils by land and sea, in perils
among robbers, in perils among heathens, Turks, Arabs and
Egyptians; but out of all these things the Lord has delivered ghim, and has restored him in safety to the shores
of Europe, where he is tarrying for a little season for the
purpose of publishing the truth in the German language-—
having already published it in French and English in the
various countries of the East. And we humbly trust that
his labors will be a lasting blessing to Jew and Gentile?

Being about to return to America, I published in the
October number of the Star, 1842, my Farewell Address,
from which I here give a few extracts:

358 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

FAREWELL ADDRESS TO OUR READERS AND PATRONS.

Brethren and Friends :—As I am about to take leave of
the STAR, and give it to the management of others, I
feel it necessary to make a few remarks suited to the
occasion.

This publication was undertaken two years and six

months since. Since that time I have labored diligently,
as far as a pressure of other duties would admit, to
render it a useful and interesting periodical. I have published the principles of the Latter-Day Saints, together
with a choice selection of the most interesting items of
news in relation to the progress of these principles among
men.
I have also endeavored at all times to defend the cause
of truth, and to ward off the arrows of envy and slander
which have been hurled at the children of light by the
strong arm of thousands who speak evil of things they
understand not.

I feel great satisfaction in a review of my editorial
course; I feel my conscience clear, and a secret whispering within, that I have done my duty faithfully before
God.

I also feel to rejoice in the success which has attended
the efforts of the servants of God in this country in the
publication of truth. At the commencement of the STAR,
the Saints in Europe numbered less than two thousand,
they now number near ten thousand, besides thousands
who have emigrated to a distant land. This, surely, is
a great triumph of the truth, when we take into consideration the prejudice and opposition which we have had
to encounter. Surely the STAR has stood forth as a
beacon on a hill, as a lonely lamp amid surrounding
darkness, to light the weary pilgrim on his toilsome journey, and to kindle up the dawn of a. day of glory when
the eifulgent beams of the sun of righteousness shall

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 359

shine forth as the morning, and dispel the misty vapors
which, like a gloomy cloud, have for ages hovered over
the pathway of mortals.

Dear Brethren and S'isters—Though I now take leave of
the editorial department, and withdraw from the shores of
Europe, yet I have the satisfaction of leaving the STAR
to shine among you in its full glory, being conducted by
one who has a willing heart and a 'ready pen, and one
who, I hope, will be so aided by his patrons and by
Divine favor as to be able to conduct it with effect, till
its feeble rays shall be lost amid the eifulgence of the
rising morn.

I now return my sincere thanks to all our agents and
patrons, and to all who have in any way contributed to
our assistance in this great and good work; and I pray
that the blessings of God may rest upon them and upon
the thousands who may hereafter peruse this work.

I must now take leave of you for a season, as duty
calls me home. I have labored among you in the ministry between two and three years, and for the last eigh-_
teen months (since the departure of the rest of the Twelve)
I have had the more particular Presidency of the Church

 

in Europe, and as one of old said, ii in some measure I

the care of all the churches?

In this highly responsible trust I have endeavored so
to serve you in all things, both temporal and spiritual,
and to go in and out among you in the fear of God, exercising judgment, mercy, and charity according to the ability
which God has given me. I have endeavored to teach
the ignorant, to reclaim the transgressor, and to warn the
wicked; to comfort the feeble-minded, to bind. up the
broken-hearted, and to administer to the poor.

I remmmend and appoint Elder Thomas Ward as my successor in the office of the General Presidency of the Church
in Europe, in connection with Elders Lorenzo Snow and
Hiram Clark. To these persons I commit the care and

360 AUToB1oGnAP11Y or PARLEY P. PRATT.

government of the Church in this country for the present, trusting that they will conduct and counsel in all
things according to the mind of the Spirit, and according
to the counsel which shall be given them from Nauvoo,
from time to time, by the quorum of the Twelve, or the
iirst Presidency. _

On taking leave of you for a season I take this opportunity to assure you before God, to whom we are all
accountable, that the fulness of the gospel is true, that the
Book of Mormon is true, and that the everlasting covenant
is true, and will stand when heaven and earth shall pass
away.

I now take a pleasing farewell of the Saints, with a. firm
conviction that I have labored diligently and done my
duty thus far, and I have nothing to regret but my own
weaknesses and imperfections, which I trust you will all
be willing to forgive, and that God will forgive also.

Please remember me in your prayers, and may the
Lord Almighty bless you all, and preserve us faithful to
the end, that we may meet again with joy. Amen.

 

 

CHAPTER XLI.

Vessels Chartered :—Emigration :—sail for New Orleans on the " Emerald ":Passage:—Land in New Orleans :—Ch_arter of a Steamer:—Historical
Letter:—-Journey and Arrival at Nauvoo:—Mission with Joseph Smith:—
Visit to Chester.

ETWEEN the middle of September and my own embarkation in October, I chartered three vessels for
New Orleans, and filled them with the emigrating Saints,
v1z.:
The ii Sidneyfl with one hundred and eighty souls; the
iiMedford," with two hundred and fourteen souls; and the
it Henryfl with one hundred and fifty-seven.

I next chartered the it Emeraldf on which I placed about
two hundred and fifty passengers, including myself and
family. .

Having ilnished my present mission in England and taken
an affectionate leave of the Saints and friends there, I
embarked on the it Emerald,l* and sailed on the 29th of
October. We had a tedious passage of ten weeks, and
some difficulties, murmurings and rebellions; but the Saints
on board were called together, and chastened and reproved
sharply, which brought them to repentance. We then humbled ourselves and called on the Lord, and he sent a fair
wind, and brought us into port in time to save us from
starvation.

We landed in New Orleans early in January, 1843. Here
I chartered a steamer called the ti Goddess of Liberty,"
and took passage with the company for St. Louis. Running up the river for about a week, I landed with my

362 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

family in Chester, Illinois—-eighty miles below St. Louis.
The company continued on to St. Louis. My reason for
landing here was, that I would not venture into Missouri
after the abuses I had experienced there in former times.

Here I wrote the following historical letter, which appeared in the Star of April 1, 1843.

CHESTER, STATE or ILL1NoIs,}
January 21, 1843.

DEAR BROTHER WA.RD—I take this opportunity of communicating a few items of news which may be of use to
your readers. I arrived here two weeks since with my
family. We are all well, except my eldest daughter,
Olivia, who has the whooping cough. We are living here
a few weeks, waiting for the river to open for Nanvoo.
We are comfortably situated, a few yards from the landing, in a stone house in a small village, eighty miles below
St. Louis, and three hundred from Nauvoo. Provisions are
cheaper than ever; Indian corn is 20 cents per bushel;
wheat, 40 cents; flour, 3; dollars per barrel; oats, 15 cents
per bushel; pork and beef, from 2 to 3 cents per lb.;
butter, 10 cents; sugar, 5 cents; chickens, 8 cents each.
Cows, from 8 to 10 and 12 dollars per head; good horses,
from 25 to 50 dollars; land, from 1} to 4 dollars per acre.

We were ten weeks on the " Emeraldf and one in
coming up the river. The weather was very fine until the
day before we landed, when it became extremely cold and
snowy ; but after a week of severe weather, it became suddenly warm and pleasant, and it remains so yet-—all ice
and snow have disappeared, and the weather is like May.

I have not heard from Nauvoo, except by the public
prints. From these I learn that brother Joseph Smith gave
himself up to the authorities of Illinois, agreeably to the
Governoris writ of last fall to attempt to deliver him to
the State of Missouri. He was brought by habeas corpus
before the Judge of the Supreme Court of the United States,

.-a'''

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 363

and after a trial at Springiield, the seat of Government
for Illinois, he was honorably discharged—the Judge deciding that. he must not be delivered to the Missouri authorities, according to the demand of the Governors of the two
States. Thus, one more malicious lawsuit has terminated
in which the rulers have been disappointed and bloodthirsty men have lost their prey—the prophet of the Lord
having found protection under the wings of the eagle.

Brother William Smith, J osephls brother, is a member
of the Legislature of Illinois, which is now in session.
They have introduced two bills for the purpose of taking
away all our Nauvoo charters, but they have both been
lost without becoming a law, and the charters still stand
good. The first was a bill for the repealing of all city
charters in the State (for the avowed object of getting rid
of Nauvoo), this bill was lost by a majority of one. Next
a bill was introduced to repeal the N auvoo charter alone.
This was too barefaced to be countenanced, and was lost
by an overwhelming majority; but not until some warm
debating on Mormonism had occupied the house for some
time. The fact is, it grieves the enemies of the Saints
very much to see them enjoying political privileges in common with others, and every exertion is made to hinder the
progress of a people and of principles which they consider
as already becoming too formidable to be easily trampled
under foot.

I have now been here two weeks, and have minded my
own affairs as a private man, in no way seeking to be
public, or even to be known. I have spent my time in
providing for my family, getting wood for me, bringing
water, etc., together with reading papers, educating my
children, etc., and have not mentioned ii Mormonism," or
any other it ismfl or principle, till it was first mentioned
to me. Mrs. Pratt and I attended a Presbyterian meeting
last Sabbath, and listened in silence to a dry sermon.

But after all my endeavors to be quiet, it is noised

364 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

abroad, through all parts of the town and surrounding
country for twenty-live miles, that a it Mormon " is here.
All parties are on tiptoe to hear him preach; the citizens
have sent the postmaster to me with a request to hear
me, and have opened their chapel for to-morrow, where
we heard the Presbyterian last Sabbath. I have consented, and commence my public ministry to-morrow. In the
meantime I have lent and sold several books, it Voices of
Warningfl iiBook of Mormon/l etc., and these are having
the desired eifect. The people here were greatly prejudiced against something called it Mormonism fl they knew
not what, having never read or heard any of the Saints;
indeed they had not the most distant idea of our holding to Christianity in any shape.

Yesterday a brother called here, from twenty-live miles
in the country; he had heard of my coming and came to
see me. He is a rich farmer, possessing two hundred
acres of land well improved.» He informed me of a small
branch of the Church in his neighborhood, and made an
appointment for me "to go to George Town (sixteen miles
distant), on Monday next, and another to his own house,
nine miles further, for Tuesday evening, so you see I am
getting into business fast. This man brought me two
Nauvoo Wasps, the latest of which was printed January
7th. From these I learned that all was peace, industry
and prosperity there; a line hard winter had set in so
early that none of our shipsl companies which had sailed
this season had been able to get up the river to Nauvoo;
they are scattered from New Orleans to St. Louis, and
are waiting to swarm Nauvoo in the spring. From the
weather, I judge that the river is about opening that far;
it is now open above St. Louis.

No one landed here with me but sister Mary Aspen, and
my family. Sister A. is with us now, she is well and
much pleased with the country; most of our passengers
went to St. Louis.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT. 365

Jcmuary 26th—Last Sunday, preached twice to an attentive audience. Monday, walked sixteen miles; preached
in George Town; good attention. Tuesday, rode ten
miles; preached twice among the Saints. Wednesday, baptized two young men; held confirmation meeting, then
rode twenty-five miles to this place. '

The river is now open, and is twelve feet higher than
it was last week, the weather is like May. I start for
Nauvoo on horseback to-morrow, my family will follow in
two weeks by water. I shall _write again soon.

Yours, truly, in Christ,
P. P. PRATT.

January 27th, 1843, I started for Nauvoo on horseback, and
after a ride of some eight days I arrived there in safety
—a distance of some two hundred and eighty miles.

I was astonished to see so large a city all created during my absence, and I felt to rejoice. I visited my brothers Orson and William and their families, by whom I was
hospitably entertained. I also visited President Smith and
family, who received me with the usual welcome and ff God
bless you, Bro. Parley." While on this visit to Nauvoo I was invited to Shockoquon, a small town up the river, a few miles above Nauvoo, in company with President Smith, Elder O. Hyde
and others. We started February 15th; stayed over night
at a Mr. Russells. On the next day we dined at McQueenls
Mills; visited Shockoquon and returned to the said mills
at evening. Here President Smith spoke for about two
hours. The crowded congregation seemed deeply interested
—most of them being strangers to if Mormonism?

After a few days I returned to my family in Chester
County on horseback. The weather being extremely cold
the Mississippi did not open till very late in the spring.

I at length sent my family per steamer to St. Louis, and
stopped at a hotel myself on the opposite side of the

366 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

river, in Illinois Town. In this situation we still had to
remain for several days awaiting the opening of the river
above.

A small steamer arrived, commanded by Captain Dan
Jones, and was finally chartered for Nauvoo, and tilled
with Saints, including my family. I passed by land to
Alton, and there went on board.

Captain Jones was a good and kind hearted Welshman,
and was much interested in the fulness of the gospel. He
soon joined the Church, and was finally ordained and appointed a mission to Wales, where he introduced the fulness
of the gospel and gathered thousands into the Church.

April 12th we landed in Nauvoo, and were kindly welcomed by President Smith and scores of others, who came
down to the wharf to meet us.

My time, from my arrival until the last of the year, was
spent in the ministry, and in building, travelling, etc.

 

 

CHAPTER XLII.

Miscellaneous Writings :-—Mission to the East :—Impressions of the Spirit :—
Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith :—Spirit of Exultation :Return to N auvoo :—Sidney Rigdon Disfellowshipped.

January 1, 1844.

IN the opening of this year I completed a number of
miscellaneous works, some of which were published in
pamphlet form. Among these were it An Appeal to the
State of New York,ii—ii Immortality of the Bod;/,"—ii Fountain
of Knowledge,"—ii Intelligence and Afection," and it The Angel
of the Prairiesf This last work was a curious and extraordinary composition, in the similitude of a dream. It
was designed as a reproof of the corruptions and degeneracy
of our Government, in suifering mobs to murder, plunder,
rob and drive their fellow citizens with impunity, etc. It
also suggested some reforms. It was read in the presence
of President Joseph Smith and a General Council, and was
highly applauded; but never appeared in print.

In the spring I went to Boston as a missionary, and
on business. I proclaimed the gospel, as usual, while on
this journey, on steamers on the lakes and rivers; in the
cities of the Atlantic, and in whatever village or neighborhood I had opportunity. Visiting North Bridge, a short
distance from Boston, and having a days leisure, I wrote
a dialogue entitled " Joe Smith and the Devilfl which
was afterwards published in the New York Herald, and in
various papers in America and Europe. It was finally
published and republished in pamphlet form, and had a
wide circulation; few persons knowing or mistrustin g who
was the author.

368 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

President B. Young, and most of the members of the
quorum of the Twelve, were then on a mission through
the Eastern States, as well as myself. While on this
mission, on the 27th of June, 1844, a mob murdered the
Prophet, Joseph Smith, and his brother Hyrum, in a jail
at Carthage, Illinois, while Governor Ford had pledged
the faith of the State for their protection.

A day or two previous to this circumstance I had been
constrained by the Spirit to start prematurely for home,
without knowing why or wherefore; and on the same
afternoon I was passing on a canal boat near 'Utica, New
York, on my way to N auvoo. My brother, VVilliam Pratt,
being then on a mission in the same State (New York),
happened, providentially, to take passage on the same boat.
As we conversed together on the deck, a strange and solemn
awe came over me, as if the powers of hell were let
loose. I was so overwhelmed with sorrow I could hardly
speak; and after pacing the deck for some time in silence,
I turned to my brother William and exclaimed—tt Brother
William, this is a dark hour; the powers of darkness
seem to triumph, and the spirit of murder is abroad in
the land; and it controls the hearts of the American
people, and a vast majority of them sanction the killing
of the innocent.  brother, let us keep silence and not
open our mouths. If you have any pamphlets or books
on the fulness of the gospel lock them up; show them
not, neither open your mouth to the people; let us observe an entire and solemn silence, for this is a dark day,
and the hour of triumph for the powers of darkness. 0,
how sensible I am of the spirit of murder which seems
to pervade the whole landil This was June 27, 1844, in
the afternoon, and as near as I can judge, it was the
same hour that the Carthage mob were shedding the
blood of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and John Taylor,
near one thousand miles distant. My brother bid me
farewell somewhere in Western New York, he being on

AUTon1oGBAPm' or PABLEY P. PRATT. 369

his way to a conference in that quarter, and passing on
to Buifalo I took steamer for Chicago, Illinois.

The steamer touched at a landing in Wisconsin, some
fifty or sixty miles from Chicago, and here some new
passengers came on board and brought the news of the
martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Great excitement prevailed on board, there being a general spirit of
exultation and triumph at this glorious news, 'as it was
called, much the same as is generally shown on the first receipt of the news of a great national victory in time of war.

Many passengers now gathered about me and tauntingly
inquired what the Mormons would do now, seeing their
Prophet. and leader was killed.

To these taunts and questions I replied, that they
would continue their mission and spread the work he had
restored, in all the world. Observing that nearly all the
prophets and Apostles who were before him had been
killed, and also the Saviour of the world, and yet their
death did not alter the truth nor hinder its dual triumph.

At this reply many of them seemed astonished, and
some inquired who would succeed him, and remarked to
me: it Perhaps you will be the man who will now seek to
be leader of the Mormons in his stead—who are you, sir 1"
I replied: tt I am a MAN, sir; and a MAN never triumphs
and .exults in the ruin of his country and the murder of
the innocent." This was said in the energy of my soul,
and by constraint of the Spirit, and a powerful and
peculiar accent was thrown upon the word MAN each
time it occured in the sentence. This served as a sumcient rebuke, and all were silent.

Landing in Chicago I found great excitement, and the
press had issued extras announcing the triumph of the
murderous mob in killing the Smiths.

I now hastened on to Peoria, and, staying over night,
started next day on foot across the country to Nauvoo—

distance 105 miles.
24

370 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

During the two or three days I spent in travelling between Chicago and Peoria I felt so weighed down with
sorrow and the powers of darkness that it was painful
for me to converse or speak to any one, or even to try
to eat or sleep. I really felt that if it had been my
own family who had died, and our beloved Prophet been
spared alive, I could have borne it, and the blow would
have fallen on me with far less weight. I had loved
Joseph with a warmth of affection indescribable, for about
fourteen years. I had associated with him in private and
in public, in travels and at home, in joy and sorrow, in
honor and dishonor, in adversity of every kind. With
him I had lain in dungeons and in chains; and with
him I had triumphed over all our foes in Missouri, and
found deliverance for ourselves and people in Nauvoo,
where we had reared a great city. But now he was
gone to the invisible world, and we and the Church of
the Saints where left to mourn in sorrow and without the
presence of our beloved founder and Prophet.

As I walked along over the plains of Illinois, lonely
and solitary, I reflected as follows: I am now drawing
near to the beloved city; in a day or two I shall be
there. How shall I meet the sorrowing widows and
orphans! How shall I meet the aged and widowed
mother of these two martyrs? How shall I meet an entire community bowed down with grief and sorrow unutterablel What shall I say? or how console and advise
twenty-live thousand people who will throng about me in
tears, and in the absence of my President and the older

members of the now presiding council, will ask counsel at
my hands! Shall I tell them to fly to the wilderness

and deserts? Or, shall I tell them to stay at home and
take care of themselves, and continue to build the Temple! With these reflections and inquiries, I walked
onward, weighed down as it were unto death. When I
could endure it no longer, I cried out aloud, saying: 0

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. 371

Lord! in the name of Jesus Christ I pray Thee, show
me what these things mean, and what I shall say to Thy
people? On a sudden the Spirit of God came upon me,
and filled my heart with joy and gladness' indescribable;
and while the spirit of revelation glowed in my bosom
with as visible a warmth and gladness as if it were fire.

_ The Spirit said unto me: if Lift up your head and rejoice;

for behold! it is well with my servants Joseph and Hyrum. My servant Joseph still holds the keys of my
kingdom in this dispensation, and he shall stand in due

time on the earth, in the flesh, and fulfil that to which .

he is appointed. Go and say unto my people in Nauvoo,
that they shall continue to pursue their daily duties and
take care of themselves, and make no movement in Church
government to reorganize or alter anything until the return of the remainder of the quorum of the Twelve. But
exhort them that they continue to build the House of
the Lord which I have commanded them to build in
Nauvooi

This information caused my bosom to burn with joy
and gladness, and I was comforted above measure; all my
sorrow seemed in a moment to be lifted as a burthen
from my back.

The change was so sudden I hardly dare to believe my
senses; I, therefore, prayed the Lord to repeat to me the
same things the second time; if, indeed, I might be sure
of their truth, and might really tell the Saints to stay in
Nauvoo, and continue to build the Temple.

As I prayed thus, the same spirit burned in my bosom,
and the Spirit of the Lord repeated to me the same message
again. I then went on my way rejoicing, and soon arrived
in Nauvoo, and delivered this message both to the people and friends individually, and in the great congregation. In confirmation that the message was right, I found
them already renewing their labors on the Temple, under

the direction of John Taylor and Willard Richards, who

372 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

were members of our quorum, and were in jail with the
prophets when they were murdered—Taylor being wounded
with four bullets, and Richards escaping uninjured.

We then, being the only members of the quorum now
present in Nauvoo, united in daily councils at Bro. Taylofs,
who was confined by his wounds, and counseled for the
good of the Church. We were enabled to baille all the
designs of aspiring men, such as Rigdon and others .(who
strove to reorganize and lead the Church, or divide them),
and to keep the Church in a measure of union, peace
and quiet till the return of President Young and the
other members of the quorum.

Elder Rigdon arrived from Pittsburgh soon after my
arrival, and with the aid of Elder Marks, local President
of the Nauvoo Stake, and others, attempted to worm himself in as President of the whole Church. A public meet
ing was actually called and appointed for that purpose;
the call being made and the day appointed by President
Marks on the public stand. President W. Richards was
present when this appointment was announced.

On being informed of this untimely and underhanded
attempt, I called upon Elder Bigdon to meet with us-—
that is, the three of the Twelve then in the city, at the
house of brother Taylor, who was still confined with his
wounds, and there we expostulated with him, and showed
our reasons for being opposed to such a course.

I ilnally told him that no such meeting should be held,
nor any such business attempted in the absence of the
general authorities of the Church. And that, if any such
meeting was attempted, I should be there and oppose it,
and show my reasons, and then dismiss the congregation
and take my hat and walk away. He finally assured us
that no business of the kind should be attempted, and
that the meeting should only be the usual prayer meeting.
We likewise forbade President Marks from attempting any
general business till the return of the general authorities.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 373

About this time, President Marks joined with the widow
of the martyred Joseph and some others, in a council in
the upper room of brother J osephis house, to try to nominate and appoint a trustee, in trust for the whole Church.
I entered *this council and heard Mrs. Emma Smith plead
in relation to this matter, the great importance and absolute necessity of immediate action on this subject, as delay
would endanger much property of a public and private
character, and perhaps cause a loss of scores of thousands.
I arose and protested against any action of the kind,
telling them plainly that the appointment of a trustee in
trust was the business of the whole Church, through its
general authorities, and not the business of the local authorities of any one stake of the Church, and that, therefore, it could not be done till the remainder of the quorum
returned. To this it was replied that by this delay much
property would be lost. I again repeated that dollars and
cents were no consideration with me, when principle was
at stake, and- if thousands or even millions were lost, let

 

them go. We could not and would not suffer the author-'

ities and principles of the Church to be trampled under
foot, for the sake of pecuniary interest. The council finally
broke up without accomplishing anything.

At length the day for Mr. Rigdonls great meeting arrived, when the remainder of the quorum, or a majority,
with President Young at their head, arrived in time to
be present. Mr. Rigdon was frustrated in his ambitious
schemes, and with his adherents, including President Marks,
soon left the place, being disfellowshipped by the Church.

President Brigham Young was unanimously chosen and upheld in the Presidency of the whole Church; the keys of
which he held by virtue of his apostleship, being the senior
and President of the highest quorum of the Church then
living in the flesh.

October 6th.—The half yearly Conference was held at Nauvoo, which I attended.

CHAPTER XLIII.

Eastern llission:—Return:—Moboc1-acy:-Labor in the Temple :—Expulsion
from Nauvoo :—Cross the Mississippi :—-Garden Grove :—Mount Pisga:—
Council Bluffs :—Mormon Battalion :-—Winter Quarters :—Mission to Eughnd with Elders Orson Hyde and John Taylor :—Conference at Manchester :—Tour through the Kingdom.

1}eoember2d.

AVING been appointed by the President and others of

the Twelve to go East, and take charge of churches

in the Atlantic States, I this day bade farewell to home,
family and the City of Saints and started on this journey.
I rode to Quincy; staid over night at brother Haywoodls,
and next morning took boat and soon arrived in St. Louis.
I was accompanied by Elders E. T. Benson and P. Brown,

who were sent to assist me in this eastern mission. Nothing

worthy of note transpired on the passage. We arrived in
New York towards -the close of the year. I appointed
brother Benson to take charge of Boston and vicinity, and
brother Brown to the charge of Philadelphia and vicinity.

January 1st, 1845.—I sent forth a proclamation in a New
York paper, called the Prophet, edited and published by
Samuel Brannan, and professedly devoted to the interests
of the Church of the Saints!

As we gradually became acquainted with circumstances
pertaining to the Chm-ch in these parts, we found that
Elders William Smith, G. J. Adams, S. Brannan and others,
had been corrupting the Saints by introducing among them
all manner of false doctrine and immoral practices, by

t See Star. No. 10, vol. 5, page 149.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. 375

which many of them had stumbled and been seduced
from virtue and truth. While many others, seeing their
iniquity, had turned away from the Church and joined
various dissenting parties. We, therefore, in accordance with the instructions of the Holy Spirit in
President Young before we left home, directed William
Smith and G. J. Adams to return to Nauvoo, where, in
process of time, they were cut off from the Church. We
also warned brother Brannan and others to repent spealily
of all such evil practices or we would withdraw fellowship
from them. They promised faithfully to repent and lead a
new life, and therefore we bore with them. We also taught
the Church to beware of all impure and wicked doctrines
and practices, and not to receive any Elder or minister who
sought to seduce them by any false teachings. With these
exertions and the continual labors of Elders Benson, Brown,
Grant and many others, with myself, we succeeded in setting in order the churches and , reéstablishing pure gospel
principles. There were, however, many who would not
believe us, nor hearken to our advice, but continued in
their abominations and dissentions. Elder Brannan was at
length disfellowshipped at Nauvoo, as appeared in the oilicial
organ of the Church there. On seeing this notice I called
his attention to it, and urged him to repair immediately to
the authorities there; acknowledge and frankly repent of
his faults, and seek restoration to his standing. He did
this, and returned in full fellowship. But, as it finally
proved, this was only to disgrace himself and the cause
still more in a wider and more responsible career in Cali»
fornia, where he, under our instruction, soon after repaired
with a colony of . Saints in the ship ii Brooklyn." He was
a corrupt and wicked man, and had the Church and myself
bwn less long suffering and merciful, it would have saved
the Church much loss, and, perhaps, saved some souls
which were corrupted in California, and led astray and
plundered by him. I have always regretted having taken

376 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

any measures to have him restored to fellowship after he
was published in Nauvoo as cut of from the Church.
However, if I erred, it was on the side of mercy.
- I devoted the winter in the presidency of the eastern
churches, to writing for the Prophet and in visiting the
churches in Boston, Lowell, Philadelphia, Long Island and
various other places, and preaching the gospel among them.

The following pieces from my pen are found in the above
periodical, under their appropriate dates and titles: if Materiality ;" if New Proverbsf

I continued .writing for this periodical in New York,
which had, however, changed its name, and was now
published as the New York Messenger. From my nu_merous editorials and communications in that paper, I select the following as worthy of record: if Heavenf

July 20th, 1845, I published an address to those under
my charge.

Soon after the publication of the foregoing, I took leave
of the Saints and friends in the Eastern States, and returned to Nauvoo by way of the Erie Canal and the,

lakes, journeying from Chicago to Nauvoo by land, by
private conveyance, accompanied by a few of the Saints
from the East. We arrived in Nauvoo sometime in
August. I found, my family mostly in health, and was
rejoiced to meet them. .

From the time of my arrival home until the end of the
year, I was engaged in the cares of my family, in finishing my house, and in my oiiicial duties.

In autumn the mobs re-commenced their murders, robbings, house and grain burnings, and driving families away
from their lands and homes in the borders of our county,
and elsewhere.

The Sherif of the County called out several posses and
dispersed them, killing some and arresting others.

This bold and energetic execution of the sworn duties of
Sheriff Backinstafs did not seem to be quite congenial to

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 377

the spirit of the Governor and citizens of the State of
Illinois-—they being to a great extent in favor of mob
violence, murder, plunder and house burning. Therefore,
Sheriff Backingstafs was arrested to answer to the charge
of murder, and another Sheriff was imposed on the
county, unlawfully, entirely independent of the ballot box.
Backingstafs, however, was afterwards discharged by the
Court, who justified his killing some of the mob, pronouncing it an ofiicial act in perfect conformity with his duties
as an odicer. The Governor sent troops to our county,
on pretence of aiding the law, but, in reality, to aid the
mob to escape justice and carry out their expressed resolutions of driving every member of the Saints, and their
families, from the State. General Hardin and Major
Warren, who had the command of this expedition, joined
their advice with Judge S. A. Douglass and others, some
of them citizens of Quincy. and meeting with President
Young and our other leaders in council, advised and
urged us strongly to yield to the mob, and abandon our
houses, farms, cities, villages and Temple to this wholesale
banditti, who were engaged against us, and sell them for
what we could get, and remove out of the country. But
very little of the real estate was ever sold.

To these extravagant counsels we finally yielded assent,
and agreed to move West in the spring, and to advise
others of our society so to do, as fast as we could sell.

We continued, however, our work on the Temple, 21. portion of which was finished and dedicated.

" It was the first specimen of a new order of architecture, introduced by President Joseph Smith, and was
the most beautiful building in the Western States, erected at a cost of a million dollars. The mob subsequently
set fire to it, the light of which was visible for thirty
miles."

As winter approached, President Young, myself, the
quorum, and many others were daily engaged in the Tem4

378 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT.

ple, administering in the holy ordinances of Endowment,
to many hundreds of people. Thus closed the year 1845.

January 1st, A. D. 1846, I continued to minister in the
Temple night and day, with my President and the rest of
the Twelve, until early in February.

Soon after these things the minist-rations in the Temple
ceased; and President Young, with the rest of the quorum
and many others, bade farewell to their homes in the be. Z I . .
-- sill "
I I ' it - .7. .. '..;;:.---  *" '"
_ _ L  _
- ' l . a '
r I I I  I, ' n M ' "

 1"

r

NAUV00 TRIPLE.

loved city of N auvoo, and crossed the Mississippi River,
with their families and such teams and wagons as they
could get. They formed an encampment on Sugar Creek,
in the State of Iowa.

February 14th, I crossed the river with my family and
teams, and encamped not far from the Sugar Creek encampment, taking possession of a vacant log house, on

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PR_A'r'r. 379

account of the extreme cold. This encampment was about
seven miles from Nauvoo. In leaving home at this inclement season, I left a good house, lot and out buildings,
worth about seven thousand dollars, and several lots and
houses of less value, besides a farm in the country worth
near two thousand. But I was much in debt. I, therefore, left Mr. Biekford as my agent, authorized to sell
the property, settle up my business, and take care of
such of my family or friends as might be left in his care,
including my aged mother, and the father, mother and
sister of my» wife. I was intending, when things were
settled, to place the surplus, if any, at the disposal of
the Church or its agents, in aid of the removal of such
as were not able to remove without assistance.

While we lay encamped, some one hundred and twenty
miles west of N auvoo, President Young coming up with
the main body of the camps, formed an encampment a few
miles in the rear, and sent for me and the members of
the Twelve, who were with me, and George Miller, to meet
with the council at his camp. His letter censured us on
account of some of our moves, and as heavy rains had
swollen the small streams which intervened between the
two encampments (so that they could only be passed by
swimming), and myself being sick on account of exposure
in the storms, we did not immediately attend the council,
as requested. However, we found means to cross after a
little delay, and were proceeding to his camp when an
express met us with another letter from the President, censuring us still_ more severely.

We hastened on and met in council. The President then
reproved and chastened us severely for several things ,
among which was our drawing off from the council and
main body of the camp and going ahead. He said there
was manifestly a spirit of dissension and of insubbrdination
manifested in our movements. I could not realize this at
the time, and protested that in my own heart, so far as I

380 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

was concerned, I had no such motive; that I had been
actuated by the purest motives, merely seeking to sustain
the teams and people, and to make what progress we could
with that end in view. However, the sequel soon proved
that it was the true Spirit which reproved and chastened
us. For Bishop Miller, who was a leading and active member of our camp, has since left us and gone his own way,
having refused to be led by the counsels of the Presidency,
and removed to Texas. And here -I would observe that,
although my own motives were pure, so far as I could
know my own heart, yet I thank God for this timely
chastisement ; I profited by it, and it caused me to be more
watchful and careful ever after.

All things being harmonized and put in order, the camps
moved on. Arriving at a place on a branch of Grand
River we encamped for a while, having travelled much in
the midst of great and continued rains, mud and mire.
Here we enclosed and planted a public farm of many hundred acres and commenced settlement, for the good of some
who were to tarry and of those who should follow us
from Nauvoo. We called the place it Garden Grove? It is
in Iowa, perhaps one hundred and fifty miles from Nauvoo. After assisting to fence this farm and build some
log houses, I was dispatched ahead by the Presidency with
a small company to try to find another location. Crossing
this branch of Grand River, I now steered through the
vast and fertile prairies and groves without a track or anything but a compass to guide me—the country being entirefy wild and without inhabitants. Our course was west,
a little north. We crossed small streams daily, which, on
accoimt of deep beds and miry banks, as well as on account of their being swollen by the rains, we had to
bridge. After journeying thus for several days, and while
lying encamped on a small stream which we had bridged,
I took my horse and rode ahead some three miles
in search of one of the main forks of Grand River, which

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. 381

we had expected to find for some time. Riding about three
or four miles through beautiful prairies, I came suddenly
to some round and sloping hills, grassy and crowned with
beautiful groves of timber; while alternate open groves
and forests seemed blended in all the beauty and harmony
of an English park. While beneath and beyond, on the
West, rolled a main branch of Grand River, with its rich
bottoms of alternate forest and prairie. As I approached
this lovely scenery several deer and wolves, being startled
at the sight of me, abandoned the place and bounded away
till lost from my sight amid the groves.

Being pleased and excited at the varied beauty before
me, I cried out, ii this is Mount Pisga." I returned to my
camp, with the report of having found the long sought
river, and we soon moved on and encamped under the
shade of these beautiful groves. It was now late in May,
and we halted here to await the arrival of the President
and council. In a few days they arrived and formed a
general encampment here, and finally formed a settlement,
and surveyed and enclosed another farm of several thousand acres. This became a town and resting place for
the Saints for years, and is now known on the map of
Iowa as a village and post-oiliee named if Pisga."

June 1. We crossed the river, and, travelling one mile, encamped; next da-y we travelled nine miles, and the third
day twenty miles. Passing on from day to day, we at length came to a
large river which could not be forded, called the 'Nishnihotany. Here was the home of the Pottowatamie Indians
who were very friendly and civil to us. .

We tarried here some days and built a large bridge,
over which the camps were enabled to cross.

In July we arrived at the Missouri river, near Council
Bluffs. There we encamped for several weeks; opened a
trade with upper Missouri, exchanging wagons, horses, harness and various articles of furniture, cash, etc., for provisions, oxen, cows, etc.

 

382 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

In the meantime we built a ferry boat, fixed landings,
made dugways, etc., and commenced ferryingover the Missouri. The ferry ran night and day for a long time, and ,
still could not complete the crossing of the camps till late
in the season. I

While we tarried here I returned on the road as far as
Pisga—being sent on a mission to the camps and settle.
ments in the rear—-distance, in going and returning, two
hundred miles. In this journey I came near drowning, in
attempting to swim a branch of the Nishnihotany on horseback. My horse refused to swim, reared on his hind feet
to try to touch bottom, and caused me to slide off behind
him in the middle of a very strong current with all my
clothes on, including hat, coat and boots, and a large parcel under my arm. The parcel contained letters and important documents. I, therefore, clung to it and to my hat
also, and, stemming the current with the other hand,
swam to shore, a distance of several rods. Passing on a
mile or two, I came to a camp of the Saints and dried
my letters and clothing. As I returned from this mission
I met President Young and others, who were going down
to Pisga and to intermediate camps to try to raise
five hundred men, who had just baan called for by the
United States as recruits for the Mexican war. These
troops were soon raised by the united exertions of President Young and Council, and were mustered into service
by Lieutenant-Colonel Allen, and called the Mormon Battalion.

This is that famous battalion which marched through more
than _two thousand miles of a trackless waste on foot, and
helped to take and maintain California_—some of the members of which first discovered the gold mines of that country, and thus turned the world the other side up.

The lateness of the season, the poverty of the people,
and, above all, the taking away of five hundred of our
best men, finally compelled us to abandon any further pro/

4 AUTOBIOG\RAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. "383

gress westward till the return of another spring. The
camps, therefore, began to prepare for winter. L

The place for winter quarters was finally selected on the
west bank of the Missouri River, in what is since known
as the territory of Nebraska. This was a beautiful town
site. The land sloping up from the immediate banks of
the river sutliciently high to be secure from high water, and
then stretching away in an unbroken plain to the hills,
which swelled up at less than half a mile distant in beautiful rounded grassy points, or in rising benches, one above
another.~

Vast quantities of hay was cut and secured, and some
seven hundred log cabins and one hundred and fifty dugouts (cabins half under ground) were built in the course
of the autumn and winter. Other large settlements were
also formed on the other side of the river, and back into
the country.

President Young also caused the erection of a good
flouring mill on a small stream which here entered the
river.

This city, which was known by the name of Winter
Quarters, is now (1856) called Florence, and is becoming
a thriving place in Nebraska.

While the camps lay in these parts, and soon after I
had, with my teams and family, crossed the Missouri,
Presidents Orson Hyde, John Taylor and myself were
appointed a mission to England. The reason for this mission under the present distressing circumstances was this:
Elder R. Hedlock, who was then presiding in England,
was in transgression, and was engaged in a wild scheme
of flnanciering, by which he obtained vast sums of money
from the Church in a kind of joint stock organization,
which professedly had for its object the emigration of the
Saints to America, while in reality the money was squandered by himself and others in any and every way but
to do good. Our mission was for the purpose of breaking

r384 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY 1>. '1>nu'r.

up this scheme of fraud, and displacing him and regulating
all the affairs of the Church in the British Isles. 7

July 31.—I bid a solemn farewell to my family and
friends, then dwelling in tents and wagons on the west
side of the Missouri River, and started for England. I
met Elders Hyde and Taylor as agreed upon, and we took
passage down the river in an open scout, or flat boat, in
company with a family of Presbyterian missionaries who
had been residing on the Loupe fork of the Platte River,
among the Pawnee Indians, and who were now bound for
St. Joseph, Missouri. We floated or pulled the oars for
some days, tying up and sleeping on shore at nightArriving at St. Joseph, the missionaries landed and sold
the boat to us. We then continued down the river to
Leavenworth, where we found the Mormon Battalion, who
were just receiving money for clothing, etc., preparatory to
their long march thence to California.

We visited with them a day or two, and they contributed
several hundred dollars to aid us on our mission to England.

They also made up a purse of between five and six
thousand dollars for their families and friends at the
Bluffs, and furnishing me a horse, it was finally agreed by
my two brethren that I should return to the Bluffs with
this money. Accordingly, I took leave of Elders Hyde
and Taylor and the brethren of the battalion, and started
on horseback for the camp of the Saints. I rode with
all speed, and in less than three days reached home—-distance one hundred and seventy miles. Unexpected as this
visit was, a member of my family had been warned in a
dream, and had predicted my arrival and the day, and
my family were actually looking for me all that day.

I delivered the money to President Young and Council,
with the list of subscribers, and of the persons for whom it
was sent, and again prepared for my departure. Obtaining
a light buggy, I harnessed my horse before it, and started

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 385

for Chicago, Illinois, by land—-distance five hundred and
fifty miles. I performed this journey in safety in eleven
days, averaging fifty miles per day. Arriving in Chicago
towards evening, I immediately sold my horse and buggy,
and then took steamer the same evening across Lake
Michigan, thence by railroad to Boston; thence to New
York, where I arrived a day or two sooner than the day
agreed upon. I was hindered a little, being at a loss for
funds to pay my passage; but one Elder Badlam kindly
assisted me, and I soon embarked in the cabin of a splendid ship, and set sail for Liverpool. On this same ship
was Franklin D. and Samuel Richards, and M. Martin,
on a mission to the same country.

We had a long passage, and arrived in Liverpool October 14, in good health and spirits.

We found Elders Hyde and Taylor there all well, and
were kindly received and entertained by the Saints.

A General Conference was convened in Manchester October 17; an account of which will be found in the Star,
N o. 7, vol. 8.

In this Conference it was agreed that President Hyde
should edit the Star, and attend to all business in the

- publishing office at Liverpool, while President Taylor and

myself should visit the different conferences in the British
Isles. We, therefore, published our appointments beforehand in the Star, and so commenced our winterls mission.
I will not detain the reader with a detail of our journcyings, visits and meetings in pursuance of this arrangement; but, suiiice it to say, we travelled from conference
to conference by railway, coaches, steamers, etc., visiting
nearly all the principal towns in England and Scotland. We were everywhere received and treated with
the utmost -hospitality, and with demonstrations of joy
and gladness not soon to be forgotten. The Saints and
others convened from far and near at the sessions of A

our several conferences, and vast crowds of strangers, as
25

 

386 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

well as Saints, listened to us. Public feasts, tea parties,
public dinners and all kinds of demonstrations of joy and
welcome greeted us as we visited from place to place.
So that our sojourn was more like a triumphal procession
than like a dreary pilgrimage. We preached the gospel,
set in order the churches, directed the labors of the
Elders, comforted the Saints, and reproved and corrected
the abuses introduced by President Hedlock and others in
relation to the joint stock companies, etc.

Hedloek tied at our approach, leaving many debts unpaid, aud finally lived incog. in London with a vile woman
—he being severed from the Church.

It was during my travels in England on this mission
that I wrote the following letter in blank verse to my
family, whom I had left at Council Bluffs, on the Missouri
River. It was published in England at the time, on a
beautiful sheet with a handsome border, and designed to
be put in. a frame as a household ornament; and is frequently seen to this day (1856) as a memorial in the
parlors of the Saints on both sides of the Atlantic.

May it be handed down to posterity as a monument of
suffering and self-denial of women and children for the
gospells sake.

 

 

 

CHAPTER xL1v_

AN APOSTLE OF THE CHURCH or JESUS CHRIST,

OF LAVTTER-DAY SAINTS,

Waeintlaelskzndof G-reatBritainforthegoepePseake,° andbeinginthe
Spirit on the 24th of November, 1846, addressed the following words of
comfort to his dearly beloved wife and family, dwelling in tents, in
the camp of Israel, at Council Blufe, Jllissouri Territory, North America;
where they and twenty thousand others were banished by the cz'vz'l2'zed
Christian of the United Stab for the word of God and the testimony
of Jesus:

MY DE.uzEs'r WIFE,

Thy kindly soul and - all

Thine acts of love to him, thy chosen head,
Are treasured deep in memoryls archives.

And when, amid the busy throng of towns,
I pass unheeded, or wander lonely
In some country lane, or gravelled highway,
Lined with hawthorn lied ge-—or turn aside
From the busy walks of men in meadows green,Or wander imid the solitary grove * 'A '
At twilight hour, where silence reigns, and the
Fading tints of autumn tell of timels ilight,
And the low murmur of the whispering breeze
Steals oler the senses like a funeral dirge,—
Or flying swift oier country hedge and ditch
In flaming chariot; while hills and ValesAnd towns, and villas, farms, plains, and woods
Are swiftly whirled behind :—-or musing in
The midnight hour in lonely solitude

388

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Upon my bed :—lTis then I tl.ink of thee.

Sweet thoughts steal gently oler the memory;
And my spirit wanders oier the wide sea
A.nd far away oler Alleghanyls heights,

And down the broad Ohio, from its source

To where it mingles its limpid waters

With the dark waves of Missouriis current;
And onward still, with lightning speed it flies,
Till towns and cities all are left behind;

And the last trace of Gentile dwelling fades
From view, and disappears in the far east.

At length the long sought vision bursts to view
And stays my spirit in its onward flight.

Towering bluffs ;—-deep indented vales ;—wide spread
Prairies ;—boundless plains and beauteous groves
Expand to view; all clad in green, and deckld
In summerls richest livery of flowers;

Or with the grey tints of fading autumn
Orownid :—-emblem of Naturels dissolution.

There one eternal silence seems to reign,
And slumbiring Nature rests in solitude.

There peace prevails ;—the Sabbath rules the year;
And, in its own primeval innocence,

Uncursed by manls polluted touch, the earth
Seems resting in sacred, sublime repose. No Gentile tyrant sways his sceptre there ;—

N o prislners groan in solitary cells.

There freedom dwells; no superstitious creed
Enslaves the mind of man ;—no Christian mobs
To drive him from his home or shed his blood.

0 sacred solitude, divinely blest—

Zionls retreat ;--where dwell the great and good.

There, with delight my spirit lingers still,

And would prolong the heavenly vision.

I love thee, for thyself, 0 land of Zion!

The beauty of. thy landscape,-thy flowers, 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 389

Thy boundless immensity of green fields,
Mingling with the wide expanse of Heavenls
Blue arch ;—thy star-bespangled firmament

Have charms for me.
The mellow moonlight

Gently stealing oler thy sacred forests ;—

The fading tints of twilight painted on

Your evening sky ;—the soft and plaintive voice
Of the autumnal cricket, as he sings

The funeral knell of expiring insects,

Or sounds a requiem to the closing year :—

All these steal oler my senses with delight,
And wake the memory to scenes afar:

They whisper to the lonely exile,

And tell of youth, and friends, and native clime.

Yet not for these charms alone I love thee;
Nor yet for peace, or freedom sweet, or rest,
Or sacred Sabbath of sublime repose.

All these, though dear to me, are worthless toys,Mere baubles,—compared to that precious gem
Which yet remains to beautify my verse,

And swell the music of my joyous theme.

There dwell my family,—my bosom friends,The precious lanbs of my Bedeemer,—my
Best of Heavenls gifts to man,-my germs of
Life and immortality,—my hope of Heaven,My principality on earth began,My kingdom in embryo, big with thrones
Of endless power and wide dominion.

Ye kindred spirits from worldls celestial!
Oifsprings of Deity ;—Sons and daughters
Of eternity ;—Ye nobles of Heaven
Whose dwellings were of old among the Gods
In everlasting mansions, and who stood ,
In the councils of the High and lofty
One, ere chaos sprang to order, or the

390

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Foundations of the everlasting hills

Were laid: Why came ye to this world of woe!
Why this disguise l—This painful sojourn in

A land of death 1Why wander far from Heavenls eternal fold,
And from the bosom of your Father there?
Had He no love! No fond affection for
His own, that you are banished thus, and left
As exiles wandering in some dreary waste!
And if thus fallen, and forsaken quite,

Like evil spirits thrust from Heaven, to

Return no more ;—why that latent spark of
Heavenls pure love still glowing in your breast!
Why does your bosom swell with hope and joy,
And fire celestial kindle in your eye!

" O heavenly gift! The key of knowledge
Restored to man, the mystery unfolds

Of Godls elect-—their final destiny.

You are here because your father loved you;
Because in Heaven ye kept your first estate,
And firm remained when iangels did rebel,

And Lucifer drew a third of Heavenls host
From God; and with them sunk in dark despair.

You are here for further proof and trial ;—
For a second estate; which if ye keep
As ye did the first, will purify your souls,

And fit you for a Heaven celestial.

You came to the earth to be born of flesh,

To fashion and perfect your earthly house,To live, to love, to suifer and to die,To rise and reign, in immortality.

To form your kindred ties with kindred souls,To blend your sympathies by mutual acts

Of kindly charity :—

To love and serve
Each other in ten thousand nameless ways;

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

And thus give exercise to mutual love,

And qualify yourselves for union endless

In that world of bliss.

0 ye beings of noble birth! ye lambs

Of celestial origin, to Zion bound!

I know ye now; and knowing, can but love.

0 my Father in Heaven! Thine they were,
And Thou gavest them to me :—Precious gifts!
Endearld by long acquaintance in the heavens,By the soulls best affections on the earth,

By mutual love. and sympathy of soul,

By all the kindred ties which twine around
The heart in sacred, inexpressible
Delight.—Made nigh by a Saviourls blood ;—
Sealld by the Holy Ghost, and securld

By the spirit and power of Elijah,By which the hearts of the fathers are turnld
To the children: Enlivenld by the hope

Of endless union in that world of life
Where all is pure :—

. ' Thrones, principalities,
Powers, majesty, might and dominion,

As a mutual reward! Who can but love!

0 precious kindred! my loveliest, best!

Are motives wanting still to prompt my love,
And kindle my soulls affection to its
Highest, purest ilame! sweet memory dwells
On all the past,—Your sufferings with me;
Your sacrifices for the Gospells sake.

For me and truth you gladly left your home,
Your native clime, your father, mother, friends,
And kindred dear, and wandered far away
Oler mountain, seas, and continents. The wide
Expanse of ocean—its waves and tempests

391

Could not quench your love, or cool your courage :Towering mountains rose before you; rivers

392

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Intervened to check you on your journey :—
W_ide lakes, gloomy forests, and desert plains
Forbid your further progress, but in vain.
Truth was the prize you sought; and love impellld
You onward. These overcome, a host
Of fiends assailed you next, with lying tongues
To flatter, frown, to pity or deceive;
To coax, or drive you from your chosen course.
When slander, rage, and lies, and pity faiPd,

"Then came the deadly strife !—The fire consumld;

The sword devourld ;—Widows and orphans mournld;
Hellls artillery bellowld; Martyrs bled;
The world exulted ;—Devils hugely grinnld ;—
Heaven wept; saints prayed; Justice stood aghast ;—
Mercy, retiring, dropped a tear of blood ;—
Angels startling, half drew their glittering swords;
And the Gods, in solemn council decreed
A just VENGEANCE!

Amid these awful scenes ye firmly stood
For truth, and him you loved; And leaving house
And home again behind, in poverty
Ye fled; and pitchld your humble tent amid
The storms of winter: And wandering o'er the
Wide, unsheltered plain, ye braved the tempest
Many a weary month without a murmur :—

Without a murmur! Nay more—Ye smiling

~ Stood, amid the awful storms, and hailld the

Tempest welcome. The solitary wilds
Beverblrated with freedomls joyful songs,

While there you fondly pressed your infant to
Your bosom,—smiPd on your lord,—receivld his
Smile in turn, and realized your freedom.
Supremely blest with heavenls approving smile,
With peace and friendship, liberty and love;
And with the daily presence of your lord,Whose best affection sweetenld every care;

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 393

Ye still were happy in your low estate,
Nor sighed for more.
One only sacrifice remained for us

-To make, to further test our depth of love

For God and truth ;—ltwas all that Heaven could ask.

Will you, my lambs, be left alone, to spend
Another winter in this dreary wild,
While him you love shall wander far away
Beyond the sea, for truth and Zionls sake!

Your pulse beat quick; your bosom heavld a sigh;
Your heart swellld with emotion; a big tear
Gnshld forth, and stole in silence down your cheek;
While your spirit said: it If I must, I will P

The Rwording Angel smilld ;—Heaven approvld,
And said—ii It is erwughfl record the same,
And with it Our decree :—They are Elect!
Eternal life is theirs: They shall be ONE,
WHILE ENDLESS AGES noLLl

PARLEY P. PRATT.

 

CHAPTER XLV.

Return with Elder John Taylor to Amer-ica:—A1-rival at Winter Quarters :Camp Starts for the Rocky Mountains :—Meet the Pioneers —Arrival in
Great Salt Lake Valley :—Visit to Utah and Great Salt Lakes.

ARLY in January, 1847, having completed our mission

in the British Isles, brother John Taylor and myself
went to Liverpool, preparatory to our return, with a few
of the Saints, who were accompanying us as emigrants.
Here we soon made arrangements for passage to New
Orleans, chartering the second cabin of a large new ship,
called ti America?

We bid adieu to our warm hearted and aifectionate
friends in England, and embarked on this ship. Our company consisted of fourteen persons in all, composed of
returning Elders and a few families or individuals who
were emigrating with us. We were very comfortable in
our own little cabin, where we had our own provisions,
and set our own table, hiring the ships cook to do our
cooking. We sailed January 19th, but we soon met a gale
of wind, which was directly contrary to us. This gale continued for nine days, without any cessation or abatement,
during which time we were beating in a landlocked channel between Ireland and England, without gaining fifty
miles on our course, being in iminent danger of being cast
away on a lee shore. During all this time our Captain lay
sick in his berth with a fever on the brain, and much of
the time in a state of mental derangement. We frequently
watched with him, and in his rational moments he would
converse a little. He said his family lived in America, and

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 395

he much wished to get to them, but was very positive he
should never see them more, having been for many days oppressed with a sure and certain presentiment that he should
never reach America alive. We, in reply, allowed that presentiments of that kind were possible, and sometimes true,
and to be depended on, but not always. And brother
Taylor and myself assured him, as men of God, that his
present presentiment was false, and that both him and his
vessel would reach America in safety. This we assured
him over and over again, from day to day. After nine
days of severe struggle with the wind and waves, the
mate and supercargo becoming discouraged, and the men
worn out, they counselled with us and concluded to put
back into the port of Liverpool, which was accordingly
done after some diiiiculty and delay. Here the Captain,
who was still dangerously ill, went on shore, and under
proper medical aid, recovered, and afterwards landed in
America per steamer, where he reached his family in safety. Our mate was sworn in captain, and we again put
to sea, after visiting our friends on shore, and recruiting
our stock of provisions. On taking this second farewell
of our friends in the British Isles I sent forth through
the colunms of the Star the following farewell address:

To THE SAINTS IN GREAT BRITAIN.

Beloved Brethren :—Having been so crowded with business and care on my late departure from your shores for
my home in the distant wilds of western America, I had
no time to say farewell, or to leave my blessing with you
in a formal manner as a whole, although expressed frequently in our farewell meetings. I have, therefore, providentially returned to your midst, after nine days of seafaring life, in order to take a fair start, and to say farewell through the medium of the Star.

I feel the most perfect satisfaction with the manner of
our reception and entertainment among you as men of

 

396 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

God. I also feel that we have, as far as time would permit, accomplished the work for which we came, and that
the utmost success and prosperity has attended our labors.
The Church universally has manifested a spirit of confidence and obedience to the instructions we had to impart,
and the measures we were sent to propose for their prosperity and deliverance, both temporally and spiritually.
We have also been received and entertained in the most
kind and hospitable manner in every place we have been
permitted to visit. We have been lodged, fed, comforted
and cheered as if we had been angels of glad tidings,
and we feel the utmost satisfaction in expressing our most

grateful thanks for all the kindness and assistance rendered

unto us while in your midst; and, in the name of Jesus
Christ, and by authority of the holy priesthood and apostleship vested in us, we bless the congregations of the Saints
throughout this land, with all the officers and members
thereof, with the blessings of time and eternity in all their
fulness. We also bless the Queen, ministers, magistrates,
and people of this realm, while they continue to administer
equal justice for the protection of every subject, without
respect of persons; and we pray that Heavenls choicest
blessings may rest upon the Saints, and upon all that fear
God and work righteousness in this land. Ye sons and
daughters of Zion, be of good cheer; for God will deliver
you in due time, and gather in one the children of God.
Pray for us and for the camp of the Saints in the wilderness. Farewell.
P. P. PRATT.
LIVERPOOL, January 29, 1847.

Elder Hyde did not sail with us, but stayed a few days
longer to complete the business in the ofllce. Soon after
we set sail Elder Joseph Cain, returning missionary, was
married on board to Miss Elizabeth Whittaker. It was a
fine affair, and we had a good dinner on the occasion.
The wind was now fair continually, and we were only

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 397

thirty-live days in coming to anchor off the port of New
Orleans—having sailed some seven or eight thousand miles.
Here we were delayed a day or two by a dense fog, but
as the weather cleared, a tug steamer soon got hold of
us, and took us into port.

Here, as soon as we could get clear of the custom house,
we took a steamer, and, in about six days, arrived in St.
Louis.

Here I left brother Taylor to pass up the Missouri
River on a steamer, with the company and baggage, while
I took a horse and rode through the northwestern portion of Missouri, and into Iowa, by land. I went incog.
for fear of my old enemies in that State.

I struck the wagon trail we had made the year before,
near Garden Grove, and tarried there with the Saints
one day. It was then quite a flourishing place—t-he farms
which I helped to open and enclose the previous year
having yielded abundance of provisions, and other farms
having been opened.

Being a little refreshed I passed on to it Mount Pisgaf
where I found another flourishing settlement of the Saints,
and stayed over night. Thence I passed on to the Missouri River, finding Saints to entertain me every night.
In making the journey from St. Louis to Missouri River,
near Winter Quarters, I had probably travelled near four
hundred and fifty miles on horseback. I crossed over the
ferry at noon of a fine April day, and came suddenly
upon my friends and family. This was April 8, 1847. I
found my family all alive, and dwelling in a log cabin.
They had, however, suffered much from cold, hunger and
sickness. They had oftentimes lived for several days on
a little corn meal, ground on a hand-mill, with no other
food. One of the family was then lying very sick with
the scurvy—-a disease which had been very prevalent in
camp during the winter, and of which many had died. I
found, on inquiry, that the winter had been very severe,

398 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

the snow deep, and, consequently, that all my horses (four
in number) were lost, and I afterwards ascertained that
out of twelve cows I had but seven left, and out of
some twelve or fourteen oxen only four or five were
spared.

President Young and Council, with a company of pioneers, were then encamped on the Elk Horn River, twenty
miles west, ready to start for the mountains. Some of
them, however, returned to Winter Quarters on business,
and I had an interview with them. I then gave a relation of our European mission, and delivered to them an
account of four hundred and sixty-nine sovereigns in gold,
collected in England as tithing, which had crossed the
sea in my charge, and was then in charge of Elder
Taylor on the Missouri River, and might be expected
soon. This small sum proved a very acceptable and timely
relief in aiding the Presidency to relieve some of the
distress, and to lit out as pioneers for the mountains.

The President and Council seemed well pleased with
our mission and management. They expressed an earnest
wish for me to accompany them on the pioneer trip to
the mountains; but my circumstances seemed to forbid,
and they' did not press the matter.

After a few days rest I began to prepare for journeying to the mountains with my family. My wagons were
overhauled and put in order, tires reset, chains repaired,
yokes and bows arranged in order, wagon bows made or
mended, etc., etc. This occupied most of my time till
June. '

Early in June I loaded my goods and family into my
wagons, and, obtaining a few more cattle, started for the
Rocky Mountains; or rather for the Elk Horn River, where
we expected to form a rendezvous, and establish a ferry,
and wait the arrival of others, and the organization of
companies for the purpose of mutual safety in travelling.

Arriving at Elk Horn River with a small company-, we

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 399

made a ferry of a raft of dry cotton wood timber, and

 

rafted over our own company of about iifty wagons. We

then organized for herding and grazing purposes, and continued to aid others in crossing and organizing until live
hundred and sixty-six wagons were finally crossed and
organized ready for a march. In the iiinal organization
of this vast company Father Isaac Morley and Bishop
Whitney assisted, or rather took the oversight—-being a
committee appointed for that purpose by the Presidency
before they left. As brother Taylor and myself were
present, we were appointed and invited to take a general
superintendency of this emigration.

The organization consisted of companies of tens, fifties
and hundreds, with a captain over each, and the whole
presided over by a president and two councilors, a marshal, etc. President John Young was called to presidehaving been nominated by the Presidency before their departure. John Van Cott was appointed marshal.

Thus organized, this large company moved on up the
Platte about the Fourth of July. There were some dithculties and jealousies during the first few days, on

account of some misunderstanding and insubordination in V

the order of travel. This at length became so far developed that it was found necessary to call a general halt
on the Platte River, and hold a council of the principal

oiiicers, in which things were amicably adjusted and the
camp moved on.

Arriving at the Loupe Fork of Platte River, we continued up it quite a distance above the trail the pioneers had made, as we could not ford the river in their
track. We at length found a ford, and with some difficulty
on account of quicksands, forded the river and made our
way over to the Main Platte, re-entering the pioneer
trail. As we passed up the Platte on this trail the companies in front had frequently to halt and build bridges,
etc. On one occasion Peregrine Sessions, who was captain

400 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

of our company of fifty, and myself found two horses
which had probably strayed from some former travellers,
and which, after several unsuccessful attempts by different
parties, brother Taylor succeeded in driving into camp,
and he and I captured them. We were at the time ahead
of the company, following up a stream to try and find a
ford. This was a very timely providence to me, as I had
lost all my horses the previous winter, and was now pioneering for "the company without any horse, and on foot.
After journeying for several hundred miles up the Platte,
we at length met two messengers from the pioneers
under President Young, from Salt Lake Valley. These were
P. Rockwell and E. T. Benson; who had been sent out
to try to find us and report our progress and circumstances. Having visited all the camps, they returned to the
valley, or rather to where they met the President and
pioneers, on their way back to Winter Quarters on the
Missouri. I accompanied them back nearly one dayls ride
on the way, and then bid them God speed, and returned
to my own camp. Soon after this our fifty met the President and company of pioneers and camped with them one
day. _
A council was called, in which I was' highly censured
and chastened by President Young and others. This arose
in part from some defect in the organization under my
superinteudence at the Elk Horn, and ~ in part front other
misunderstandings on the road. I was charged with
neglecting to observe the order of organization entered
into under the superintendence of the President before he
left the camps at Winter Quarters; and of variously
interfering with previous arrangements. In short, I was
severely reproved and chastened. I no doubt deserved
this chastisement; and I humbled myself, acknowledged
my faults and errors, and asked forgiveness. I was frankly
forgiven, and, bidding each other farewell, each company
passed on their way. This school of experience made me

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 401

more humble and careful in future, and I think it was the
means of making me a wiser and better man ever after.

After bidding farewell to the President and pioneers,
and to my own brother, Orson Pratt, who was one of
them, we continued our journey; and after many toils,
vexations and trials, such as breaking wagons, losing
cattle, upsetting, etc., we arrived in the Valley of Great
Salt Lake late in September, 1847. Here we found a fort
commenced and partly built by the pioneers, consisting of
an enclosure of a block of ten acres with a wall, or in
part of buildings of adobes or logs. We also found a
city laid out and a public square dedicated for a Temple
of God. We found also much ground planted in late
crops, which, however, did not mature, being planted late
in July; although there were obtained for seed .a few
small potatoes, from the size of a pea upward to that of
half an inch in diameter. These being sound and planted
another year produced some very fine potatoes, and, finally,
contributed mainly in seeding the territory with that
almost indispensable article of food.

After we had arrived on the ground of Great Salt
Lake City "we pitched our tents by the side of a spring
of water; and, after resting a little, I devoted my time
chiefly to building temporary houses, putting in crops,
and obtaining fuel from the mountains. "

Having repented of our sins and renewed our covenants, President John Taylor and myself administered the
ordinances of baptism, etc., to each other and to our families,
according to the example set by the President and pioneers
who had done the same on entering the valley.

These solemnities took place with us and most of our
families, November 28, 1847.

Some time in December, having finished sowing wheat
and rye, I started, in company with a brother Higby and
others, for Utah Lake with a boat and fish net. We

travelled some thirty miles with our boat, etc., on an ox
26

 

402 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY r. rnur.

wagon, while some of us rode on horseback. This distance brought us to the foot of Utah Lake, a beautiful
sheet of fresh water, some thirty-six miles long by fifteen
broad. Here we launched our boat and tried our net,
being probably the first boat and net ever used on this
sheet of water in modern times. _
We sailed up and down the lake shore on its western side
for many miles, but had only poor success in fishing.
We, however, caught a few samples of mountain trout

and other fish.

After exploring the lake and valley for a day or two
the company returned home, and a brother Summers and
myself struck westward from the foot of the lake on
horseback, on an exploring tour. On this tour we discovered and partly explored Cedar Valley, and there
crossed over the west mountain range and discovered a
valley beyond; passing through which we crossed a range
of hills northward, and entered Tooelle Valley. Passing
still northward, we camped one night on a bold mountain
stream, and the next day we came to the southern ex 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 403

  treme of Great Salt Lake, and passing round between it

and the west mountain we journeyed in an eastern course,

- and, crossing the Jordan, arrived in Salt Lake City—having devoted nearly one week to our fishing, hunting and
exploring expedition. During all this time we had fine
weather and warm days; but the night we arrived home
was a cold one, with a severe snow storm. And thus
closed the year 1847.

 

CHAPTER .XLVI.

Spring of 1848 :—scarcity of Provisions :—t" Harvest Feast :"—Arrival of
President Young and Company :—G-old Fever :—Explore Southern Utah.

January 1st, 1848.

HE opening of the year found us and the community
generally in good, comfortable, temporary log or adobe
cabins, which were built in a way to enclose the square
commenced by the pioneers, and a portion of two other
blocks of the city plot. Here life was as sweet and the
holidays as merry as in the Christian palaces and mansions of those who had driven us to the mountains.

In February we again commenced to plough for spring
crops, while I had the happiness to behold the tender blade
of my wheat and rye clothing a few acres with a beautiful
green, pleasingly contrasted with the gray, wild, wormwood
and other traits of our dreary solitude; while similar
pleasing sights stretched away in the distance, marking
the bounds of agriculture as possessed by my neighbors.

March 25th.—My oldest son Parley celebrated his birthday with a family party—being then eleven years of age.

After dinner, in presence of the assembled family, I related the circumstances of his being a promised child,
with an account of his birth, his history, and the death
of his mother. I reminded him that he was my first
born—my heir, both to estate and priesthood. I exhorted
him to prepare to walk in my footsteps, and to do good
and serve God and his fellow men by a well ordered
life, and by laying hold of knowledge and a good educaAUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 405

tion. I rehearsed to him my own sufferings, and the sufferings of my family, and of the Church while in the
States-—telling him of the murder of our prophets and
saints, and how we had been driven to the mountains,
robbed and plundered of a very large amount of property
and possessions. {The day was spent most pleasantly and
profitably by all. _

I continued my farming operations, and also attended to
my ministry in the Church. Devoting my Sabbaths and
leisure hours to comforting and encouraging the saints, and
urging them to faith and persevering industry in trying.
to produce a first harvest in a desert one thousand miles
from the nearest place which had matured a crop in,
modern times.

We had to struggle against great ditiiculties in trying
to mature a first crop. We had not only the difficulties,
and inexperience incidental to an unknown and untried
climate, but also swarms of insects equal to the locusts of,
Egypt, and also a terrible drought, while we were entirely
inexperienced in the art of irrigation; still we struggled
on, trusting in God. ' '

During this spring and summer my family and myself,
in common with many of the_ camp, suffered much for
want of food. This was the more severe on me ' and my
family because we had lost nearly all our cows, and the
few which were spared to us were dry, and, therefore, we
had nol milk to help out our provisions. I had ploughed

 

and subdued land to the amount of near forty acres, and

had cultivated the same in grain and vegetables. In this

labor every woman and child in my family, so far as they _

were of sufficient age. and strength, had joined to help me,
and had toiled incessantly in the field, suffering every
hardship which human nature could well endure. Myself
and some of them were compelled to go with bare feet
for several months, reserving our Indian moccasins for extra
occasions. We toiled hard and lived on a few greens and

406 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

on thistle and other roots. We had sometimes a little
flour and some cheese, and sometimes we were able to procure from our neighbors a little sour skimmed milk or
buttermilk.

In this way we lived and raised our first crop in these
valleys. And how great was our )joy in partaking of the
first fruits of our industry.

On the 10th of ~ August we held a public feast under a
bowery in the centre of our fort. This was called a harvest feast; we partook freely of a rich variety of bread,
beef, butter, cheese, cakes, pastry, green corn, melons, and
almost every variety of vegetable. Large sheaves of wheat,
rye, barley, oats and other productions were hoisted on
poles for public exhibition, and there was ' prayer and
thanksgiving, congratulations, songs, speeches, music, dancing, smiling faces and merry hearts. In short, it was a
great day with the people of these valleys, and long to be
remembered by those who had suffered and waited anxiously
for the results of a first effort to redeem the interior deserts of America, and to make her hitherto unknown solitudes if blossom as the rose."

During this autumn our little colony was reinforced by
the arrival of President Young and family, accompanied
with large trains of emigrants, amounting in all to several
thousands. Under his wise counsels city lots were given
out, and people began to build on them and vacate the
forts; I obtained some lots south of the Temple square,
and built a temporary adobe house, where I soon removed
with most of my family. Here, in our new habitation, we
spent the remainder of the year.

January 1st, 18-l9.—Our city now began to take form and
shape, and to be dotted here and there with neat little
cottages, or small temporary buildings, composed of adobes
or logs. The roofs were generally of poles or timbers
covered with earth. Saw mills were now in operation, and
a few boards were obtained for floors, doors, etc. Our

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. run. 407

happy new year passed off merrily, and we were probably
as happy a people as could be found on the earth.
February 12th.—I met in council with the First Presidency
and members of the Twelve, in which certain vacancies in
our quorum were filled. We were then instructed to assist
in reorganizing the different quorums here, and in establishing righteousness. We accordingly met with the Presidency almost daily, and proceeded to organize and ordain
the Presidency of the High Priests, quorum, the Presidency
of the Stake at Salt Lake City, with its High Council, and
to divide the city and country into wards and ordain a
bishop over each. In these and similar duties, and in

meeting with my quorum and teaching and preaching in

the several branches of the Church my time was chiefly

spent until spring. d
March 15th.—I was appointed by a General Convention as

one of a committee of ten to draft a constitution for the

.Provisional State of Deseret. d

March 18th.—The committee reported, and the Convention
unanimously adopted the constitution.
I devoted the fore part of the summer to farming; but,

' my crop failing, I commenced in July to work a road up

the rugged Kanyon of Big Kanyon Creek. I had the previous year explored the Kanyon for that purpose, and also
a beautiful park) and passes, from Salt Lake City to Weber
River eastward, in a more southern and less rugged route
than the pioneer entrance to the valley. Emigrants now
came pouring in from the States on their way to California to seek gold. Money and gold dust was plenty, and
merchandise of almost every description came pouring into
our city in great plenty.

I soon so far completed my road as to be able to obtain
a large amount of fuel and timber. In November I ceased
operations in the Kanyon and broke up my mountain camp
and returned to the city.

s Since called Parleyls Park.

408 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

I now received a commission from the Governor and
Legislative Assembly of the State of Deseret to raise fifty
men, with the necessary teams and outfit, and go at their
head on an exploring tour to the southward. This company was soon raised, armed, equipped, and
ready for a march into the dreary and almost unknown
regions of Southem Utah. I will here give the list of names composing the company, and also a short summary of the report that I gave
in to the. Legislative Assembly on our return.

_ PARLEY P. PRATT, President.
W. W. PHELPS, D: FULMER, Counsellors.

Feb. 7th, 1850. RoRERT L. CAMPBELL, Clerk.
FIRST TEN. THIRD TEN.

Isaac C. Haight, Captain. Joseph Horn, Captain.

Parley P. Pratt, Wm. Brown,

William Wadsworth, George N ebiker,

Rufus Allen, Benjamin F. Stewart,

Chauncey West, Alexander Wright,

Dan. Jones, James Farrer,

Hial K. Gay, Henry Heath,

George B. Mabson, Seth B. Tanner,

Samuel Gould, Alexander Lemon,

Wm. P. Vance. David Fulmer.
sEooND TEN. FOURTH TEN.

Joseph Matthews, Captain. Ephraim Green, Captain.

John Brown, Wm. W. Phelps,

Nathan Tanner, Charles Hopkins,

Sterling G. Driggs, _ Sidney Willis,

Homer Duncan, Andrew Blodgett,

Wm. Matthews, Wm. Henry,

Schuyler Jennings, Peter Dustin,

John H. Bankhead, Thomas Ricks,

John D. Holiday, Robert Campbell,

Robert M. Smith. Isaac H. Brown.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 409
FIFTH TEN.
Josiah Arnold, Captain. Stephen Taylor,
Jonathan Packer, Isaac B. Hatch,
Christopher Williams, John C. Armstrong,

Dimick B. Huntington.

Our company had 12 wagons; 1 carriage; 24 yokes of
cattle; 7 beeves ; number of horses and mules, 38.

Average in flour, 150 lbs. to each man; besides crackers,
bread and meal. One brass field piece; firearms; ammunition in proportion.

At Captain John Brown's, on Cotton Wood, 23d of November, 1849, at 2 P. M., a meeting 'of the company for
exploring the south was convened. Called to order by P.
P. Pratt, who gave instructions relative to the necessity of
peace, order and good feelings being preserved during this
expedition. Supported in this by W. W. Phelps and David
Fulmer.

Voted, that Parley P. Pratt be President of the company. That W. W. Phelps and David Fulmer be his
Counsellors; carried unanimously.

Voted, That John Brown be Captain of Fifty; carried
unanimously.

Voted, That W. W. Phelps act as Topographical Engineer; carried unanimously.

Voted, That Ephraim Green be Chief Gunner; carried
unanimously.

During our exploring expedition we encountered severe
weather, deep snows, and many hardships and toils incident
to such an undertaking. We explored the best portions
of the country south from Great Salt Lake City to the
mouth of Santa Clara, on the Rio Virgin, which is a principal branch of the Rio Colorado. Our distance in going
and returning was (counting the direct travelled route as
afterward opened), between seven or eight hundred miles.
In much of this distance we made the first track; and

 

410 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

even the portion which had before been penetrated by
wagons was so completely snowed under that. we seldom

found the trail.
It was during these toils, and perils, and amid the snows
of these regions, that I composed the song, beginning, ft 0,

 

come, come away, from northern blasts retiring,ll which be- .

came a favorite with the singers in camp, and seemed to
beguile the tedious winter evenings around our camp tires.

I here give a few extracts from .my journal while on
our return trip:

January 21st.—Having been on our homeward journey for
some twenty days, and it snowing severely, we remained in
camp. This day I was taken very sick of a bilious attack,
and was confined to my bed. We held a council, and
finding that our provisions would only sustain half of our
company till spring, and travelling with the wagons was
impossible, we decided upon leaving half the company to
winter there with the wagons and cattle, and the other
half, with some of the strongest mules and horses, should
attempt to reach Provo-—the southern frontier—distance upwards of one hundred miles. The company that remained
were mostly young men without families. My counsellor,
David Fulmer, being placed in command.

It was in a country of shrub cedars, which would afford
some shelter for the animals, and richly clothed in bunch
grass, and some portions of the hill sides where the snow
had blown of being nearly bare, the cattle could live.

January 22d.—In the morning I was still sick, but about
noon bid farewell to those who stayed, mounted a mule,
and, with upwards of twenty men and animals, we commenced our wallowing in the snow. We made about nine
miles, and camped in a cedar thicket. Being unable longer
to sit on my mule, or stand on my feet, the snow was
shovellcd away, some blankets spread, and I lay down.
I had not eaten one mouthful for a day or two, but vomited many times very severely.

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT. 411

Wednesday, 23d.—I was better, and we again started, the
snow being from three to four feet deep on a level. The
men went ahead on foot, the entire company, men and ani. mals, making but one track. The person breaking the track

would tire out in a few moments, and, giving place to
another, would fall into the rear. This day we made
nine or ten miles, and camped in a mountain pass, thirteen miles south of the Sevier River.

Thursday, 24th.—It was long after night when we wallowed into camp, waist deep in snow; and, shovelling
away the snow, we made fires, spread our blankets, and
sank down to rest, being entirely exl1austed—-our animals
either tied to cedar bushes without food, or wallowing up
the hills in search of bare spots of bunch grass.

Friday, 25th.—We were obliged to leave several of our
animals which gave out. We passed through Round Valley,
made about ten miles, camped on the heights, some four
miles south of the Sevier. It was still snowing; our ani.
mals found some bunch grass on the hill sides.

Saturday, 26th.—In the morning we found ourselves so
completely buried in snow that no one could distinguish
the place where we lay. Some one rising, began shovelling
the others out. This being found too tedious a business,
I raised my voice like a trumpet, and commanded them to
arise; when all at once there was a shaking among the
snow piles, the graves were opened, and all came forth!
We called this Resurrection Camp. Passing on, we forded
the Sevier, and camped on the heights, six or seven miles
north of the same, the snow this day being much less.

Sunday, 27 th.—Our provisions being nearly exhausted,
Chauncey West and myself volunteered to take some of the
strongest animals and try to penetrate to Provo, which
was still some fifty miles distant, in order to send back
provisions to the remainder, who were to follow slowly.

We started at daylight, breaking the way on foot, and
leading the mules in our track, and sometimes riding them.

I

4.12 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Travelled all day, averaging about knee deep in snow.
Camped at eleven at night on Summit Creek, extremely
hungry and feet badly frozen. We built a small fire, it
being the widest night we had ever experienced, and after
trying in vain to thaw out our frozen shoes, stockings and
the bottoms of our drawers and pants, we rolled ourselves
in our blankets, and lay trembling with cold a few hours.

' Monday, 28th.—Arose long before day; bit a few mouthfuls oif the last black frozen biscuit remaining. Saddled
up our animals, and, after another laborious day, living
on a piece of biscuit not so large as our fist, we entered
Provo at dark; raised a posse of men and animals, with
provisions, and sent back same night.

These picked up one of our men, whose name was
Taylor, who had wandered off ahead of the rest, and had
reached within some eight miles of Provo. They found
him sunk down in the snow, in a helpless condition, his
horse standing by him, and both nearly frozen to' death.
He lived, but in a measure lost the use of his limbs.

This relief company met those we had left behind somewhere in the southern end of Utah Valley, some twenty
miles from Provo. They were entirely out of food and
very faint and weary. They were plentifully supplied and
safely wnducted to the settlement.

I rested a day or two in Provo and then started again
for home. After riding thirty-six miles on a mule, I took
supper with a friend in Cottonwood, and, leaving the mule,
started at sundown and walked the other ten miles which
brought me once more to my home. This was about the
1st of February, 1850.

The company we had left with the wagons and oxen
wintered themselves and cattle very well, and finally arrived
home in safety in March following.

After my return from my southern exploring expedition
I reéntered the Legislature and continued my duties as a
member of that body until its annual adjournment.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 413

Some time in this month I again commenced work on
my road in Big Kanyon Creek, and in getting out timber
and wood from the same. I continued this operation during the remainder of the season—obtaining much building
and fencing timber and a large quantity of poles. In
July I had so far completed the road as to open it for
the California emigration. The amount of toll taken this
first season was about one thousand live hundred dollars.

The following winter, being reélected to the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Deseret, I devoted much of the
time in the duties thereof._ I also continued in the duties of my priesthood. And, lest any time should run to
waste, I filled up the interstices not otherwise occupied, in
the study of the Spanish language.

During this winter I was called by the First Presidency
and set apart to take charge of a General Mission to the
Pacific. I composed a song, which was sung before the
congregation in the Tabernacle, on the occasion of our departure on this mission, commencing

"Holy, happy, pure and tree," etc.

I now close this chapter of my history by saying that
my life up to this date has been an eventful one, somewhat hurried and laborious; and, if it variety is the spice
of life," I think it may truly be called a spicy one

. -which circumstance will account for the imperfect sketch

I have written of it.

 

CHAPTER XLVII.

Start on my Pacific Mission :—-Sketch of the Journey :—Attacked by Indians:
—Crossing the Desert:—Arrival at Los Angelou.

March 16th, 1851.

LEFT Great Salt Lake City for the Pacific, on a

mission to its islands and coasts, being commissioned
and set apart for that work by the First Presidency of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.

Passing through various settlements, and visiting the
brethren, I arrived at Fort Utah, and assisted the Presidency to organize a stake of Zion, with its High Council
and other oilicers, and to ordain and -set them apart.

Friday, 21st.—I took leave of my friends and pursued
my journey on horseback, twenty-eight miles to Peteetneet,
where I overtook my teams, and spent Saturday in organizing the company with which we journeyed. Their outiit
consisted of about one hundred and fifty wagons. Most
of the company were emigrating with C. C. Rich and A.
Lyman to Southern California.

My own party of missionaries consisted of the following
Elders, viz.: John Murdock, Rufus Allen, Wm. Perkins,
S. Woodbury, F. H. Hammond, P. B. Wood, Mr. Hopkins

\

and Morris Miner. _

Mr. Perkins, Mr. Woodbury, Mr. Hammond and Mr. Hopkins were accompanicd by a wife each, as well as myself.

Monday, 24th.—We commenced our journey from Peteetneet organized in companies of tens, titties and one hundred—-tifty journeying together.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. marr. 415'

Our fifty, commanded by Captain Seely, travelled six
miles to Summit Creek.

Tuesday, 15th.—I took a walk in the morning about

three miles and ascended a beautiful height, which afforded

a fair view (with a telescope) of the head of Utah Lake_

and the valley of Salt Creek, which enters the lake
through an extensive meadow at the head of the lake,
forming at its junction a beautiful harbor and a convenient
beach of sand. The depth of water not known, but its
deep blue color intimated sumcient depth for small crafts.

About two miles west of an encampment on Summit
Creek I discovered a beautiful and inexhaustible stone
quarry of blue lime, which, both for building and lime,
will be very useful and wnvenient to the settlement which
will soon grow up on that beautiful site.

Returning to camp, we journeyed eleven miles to Willow

. Creek—the country being rich in grass, and watered by

Salt Creek, a stream of one and a half rods wide, and
several large springs running north into Utah Lake.

Friday, 28th.—I ascended a ridge of mountains, and
obtained a view of an extensive country to the West,
composed of desert plains, hills, and confused fragments
of broken mountain chains, without fertility or anything
to redeem or enliven this landscape except the windings
of the Seviere River and narrow, grassy bottoms. And
even this scene soon loses itself amid the black and
barren hills of the dreary waste.

This day we passed through about ten miles of waste
country, with some grassy spots and cedar groves, and
encamped on the Seviere River.

Saturday, 29th.—We passed the ford, three feet deep and
one hundred and fifty feet wide—a smooth and sluggish
current—and encamped on its southern bank.

The weather bad, with squalls of snow and cold winds.
The hills aEord some scattered bunch grass, which is very
good.

416 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Monday, 31st.—We travelled thirteen miles through a
pass where the hills were very rich in grass and fuel,
and full of line stone quarries. This pass was five miles
from the river.

Thence through a valley rich in grass and soil, beautiful and extensive, and abundantly supplied with fuel on
its borders, but destitute of living streams, although the
melting snows of its bordering mountains supply some
streams which run a short distance at certain seasons of
the year, and then sink.

April 1st.—Camp divided for convenience of travel, and
General Rich and myself, with twenty-three wagons, travelled thirteen miles, and encamped at a beautiful spring
brook, among grassy hills, interspersed with cedar, like
an orclml... ,

Our road to-day led through a pass in the mountains
by a gradual ascent for about three miles, and then down
very gradually for ten miles among hills, plains and little
vales, more rich in bunch grass and cedar fuel, and more
varied and beautiful than any other country I ever beheld.
Every high hill, every dell, every vale or nook seemed
richly coated with a living green of rich grass, and set
about with cedars from twelve to twenty-five feet high,

' like on old orchard.

Its northern bounds, limited by a rocky and barren
range of high mountains through which we had passed.

Its eastern limit was a snowy and timbered range,
which divides between the valley where we were and the
Seviere a River, which heads in the south, near the rim of
the Great Basin, in a beautiful salmon trout lake, surrounded with lofty pines and cedars, and runs in a northerly
direction, till it sweeps round to the west and southwest, and
forms a lake which is in view from our camp, and appears
like a silver mirror at some thirty or forty miles distance.

I arose in the morning, and with my large telescope
viewed from an eminence the vast country before me.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY on PARLEY P. PRATT. 417

On the east the high mountain chains at several miles
distance appears snowy and timbered, and pierced with
gorges accessible for roads to be made to the timber;
and giving rise to several streams which meander through
this vast valley on our south and west, and enter the
lakes or sinks in their own rich alluvials.

To our southwest and northwest the view is almost
boundless; consisting of a vast valley interspersed with fertile meadows, desert spots, known by their darker hues;
lakes, rivulets, distinguished by the yellow meadow grasses
and red willow streaks; and hills here and there dotted
with cedars, and the whole bounded, in the vast and dim
distance, by dark mountains not very high. Beyond which,
at the distance of perhaps a hundred miles, appear other
and more lofty peaks white with snow, and looking up like
distant white clouds on the horizon.

Here are resources for farming, stock raising, fuel, etc.,
in sight of our present encampment, probably more than
suiiicient to sustain the present population of Rhode Island;
and yet, not a domestic animal, except those of the passing traveller, or a human being, save the occasional
savage in his wanderings, occupies any portion of this
wide domain.

Crossing several streams in the same large valley, all
bordered by rich lands, we at length left the valley and
journeyed two miles over a hilly country, well supplied with
cedar and shrub pines for fuel, and bunch grass for feed,
but not well watered.

Thence a few miles over a worthless country to the
Beaver River.

This is a large stream, swift and clear, running in several branches through a large and fertile bottom; the soil
of which appears rich, but highly impregnated with saleratus, and the table lands, which surround it, barren, or
nearly destitute of pasturage.

However, I think the place worthy of settlement, and,
27

418 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

probably, containing eight or ten thousand acres of land
which may be watered and cultivated.

Leaving this place, we passed another long stretch of
upland, destitute of all resources, except grass and fuel,

which were abundant in places.

\\'e were at length met by G. A. Smith and others, from
Little Salt Lake settlement; and accompanied by them, we

all arrived on Red Creek, in the same valley. Here the

camp found water and grass to refresh themselves after so
wearisome a journey.

April 10th.—Same evening I arrived in the fort, accompanied by the citizens, who came out to meet us. I found
the inhabitants all well, and the settlement in a truly
fiourishing condition. Hundreds of acres of grain had been
sown, gardens planted, etc., and the farming land nearly
enclosed; together with a most substantial saw mill, and
many houses of wood and of sun dried brick, built and in
progress. Building materials. consisting of timber of the
finest quality, viz.: pine, fir and cedar, together with good
building stone and brick, were scattered in profusion in
every direction.

Water ditches were flowing for mills and irrigation purposes in many directions.

Mechanicsl shops were in operation; such as joiners,
carpenters, millwrights, coopers, blacksmiths, shoemakers, etc.

All this was the work of two or three months, in winter and early spring; not to mention a large enclosure of
pickets in the centre of the fort-a council house of hewn
timber, and a bastion of the same material.

The number of men composing the settlement and performing all this work, did not exceed one hundred and
twenty all told, including old men, boys and Indian servants, just being tamed and initiated into the first rudiments of industry.

All the camps moved from Red Creek and encamped
near the fort, where we tarried a few days.

 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 419

April 12th.-Celebrated my birthday by a feast jointly
provided by us and G. A. Smith, at his house. Ten or

twelve persons sat down to a sumptuous repast.
April 14th.—We removed to Summit Creek-distance

seven miles. Here we tarried one week, in course of
which the rear camp, headed by Amasa Lyman, arrived in
good condition. T
Stmdzy, 20th.—A1l met in a general assembly, to worship
God and to edify one another; being joined by the people
from the fort, we had a good time. The Spirit was poured
out upon us. G. A. Smith and others spake with power
in the Spirit and testimony of Jesus; rebuking iniquity,
worldly mindedness, unbelief, profanity, and all manner of
iniquity, and exhorting the people to obey the servants of

the Lord in all righteousness.
As the meeting was about to close P. B. Lewis, who

lived in this settlement, was set apart by prayer, prophecy

i and the laying on of hands of the four Apostles present,

as one of the Pacific missionaries. He had already moved
into camp with his wife and teams, etc., to accompany us.
We travelled eight miles to a stream called Coal Creek.
Encamped and built a bridge across the deep and narrow
channel, about four feet wide, and tarried here next day
for the remainder of our company, some of whom had
failed to obtain their animals the day before.

This encampment was about ten miles below the crossing of the same stream on the old road. I had, however,
looked out a new route, which would save some eight or

ten miles.
This stream forms a rich meadow bottom, of about fifteen miles long and two broad.

Abundance of cedar fuel and rich pasturage is found
on the table lands which border this bottom; and iron ore
abounds a few miles to the southwest, not to mention a

large cottonwood grove in the upper part of the meadow,

and a canon opening into the mountains, from which the420 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

stream issues. Taken all together, this place combines materials for a large settlement.

Wednesday, 23d, we travelled twenty miles without water,
over hills and plains, and among for sts of cedar, and eneamped after dark at a spring, having regained the old
road a few miles before encamping.

While the cattle were feeding I ascended an eminence,
and, with my telescope, viewed the largest valley I had
ever seen in the great basin. It might have been seventy
miles from south to north, and thirty miles from east to
west.

Some signs of water and rich and fertile spots appeared
in the dim distance; but, generally speaking, it was a
cheerless monotony, without water, and clothed in the
leaden hue of the desert.

We travelled several miles over a fine table land, on
east of said valley, which still stretched away some thirty
miles to the west, and was finally bounded by a low
range of mountains on its south and west, and these again
were backed by a still higher range and white with snow.
Their lofty peaks, at fifty or sixty miles distance, peeping
up from. behind the nearer hills like distant clouds on the
far off horizon.

After passing a few miles of very hilly road we came
down upon a small stream, which heads in numerous
spring meadows near the rim of the basin, on the divide
between it and the Colorado. Here we camped to rest
on Saturday and Sunday.

This little mountain paradise was, by the present road,
three hundred and eleven miles from the Great Salt Lake
City, and was altogether the most beautiful place in all
the route. Some thousand or fifteen hundred acres of
bottom, or meadow lands, were spread out before us like a
green carpet richly clothed with a variety of grasses, and
possessing a soil both black, rich and quick—being a mixture of sand, gravel and clayey loam, and the decayed

 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. 421

visitations of ages. It -was everywhere moistened with
springs, and would produce potatoes, vegetables and the
smaller grains in abundance without watering.

The surrounding hills were not abrupt-, but rounded off,
presenting a variety of beauteous landscapes, and everywhere richly clothed with the choicest kind of bunch
grass, and bordered in their higher eminences with cedar
and nut pine sutlicient for fuel.

Afar off, behind the hills in the east, could be seen
from the eminence high, snowy mountains, black in
places with tall timber, plainly distinguishable with the
telescope, probably from ten to twenty miles distance.

Mag] 13th, we encamped at a large spring, usually
called the Vegas—having travelled nearly two hundred
miles since the foregoing was written. The country through
which we have passed is a worthless desert, consisting of
mountains of naked rock and barren plains, with the exception of here and there a small stream, with feed suiii- i

cient for our cattle.

The longest distance without water is about fifty miles,
which we passed on Saturday and Sunday last, and arrived
here safe and without much suffering. We have_ as yet lost

no cattle through hunger, thirst, or, fatigue. Two cows
were stolen from ' us by the Indians on the Rio Virgin.

The place where we now are is about two hundred and
fifty miles from the coast settlements on the Pacific. It
is well watered, abundance of grass, and would admit of
a small sett1ement——say one or two hundred familieshas a good soil, good water and fuel, but no building
timber.

The same remarks would apply to the last stream, fiftythree miles from this, called the Muddy. The Indians
already raise wheat and corn there.

Wednesday, 21st.—We oncamped at a place called Resting
Springs, where we arrived on the 19th after dark.

This is a fine place for rest and recruiting animals-—

422 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. VPRATT.

being a meadow of rich grass and suliiciently extensive to
sustain thousands of cattle. The water is sutlicient for
all travelling purposes, although the stream is small.

Since leaving the Vegas we have travelled seventy-five
miles through a most horrible desert, consisting of mountain ridges and plains of naked rock, or sand and gravel,
and sometimes clay, destitute of soil or fertility, except a
few small springs and patches of grass.

_T
.-;
-' .-4*
.3:
1"]
J

I .
I: _n Q.-_

AITACK BY ' INDIANS.

The weather, contrary to our expectations, has been
universally cool since We left the Muddy; thick vests, and
sometimes coats, have been worn in the noon of a sunny
day, and the sun has been sought rather than the shade.
The nights have all been cool, and some of them as cold
in the middle or latter part of May as the nights usually
are in March and April in Great Salt Lake City.

AU'I'OBIOGRA.PHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 423

Twenty miles from the Vegas, our camp was assailed in
the evening, about ten dclock, by a shower of arrows
from the savage mountain robbers; some of which passed
near mensl heads and all fell promiscuously among men,
women, children and cattle, but did no injury. Our
men mustered and returned the nre without eifect. ~

Afterwards, in the same place, a savage, single handed,
made his way among the cattle, in open day, while they
were under the care of armed herdsmen and shot an ox and
a mule; one was wounded in the hip, and the other in
the leg; but they are _both doing well.

Friday, 23d.—Provided with water and hay we travelled
on fourteen miles. Road heavy, up hill and sandy; day
hot. Arrived at Salt Spring gold mines towards evening;
water brackish; but answered for stock and use.

After resting for a few hours we started on in the
evening and travelled all night, with the exception of
short intervals of rest. The hot day and heavy road had
so harrassed the cattle that we made but little progress.

Next morning we continued to travel, finding no grass
nor water. The road was up hill for ten or twelve miles,
and rough; the day rather cool.

Long before night our hay and water were consumed,
and the camp in a sudering condition. Some cattle had
given out entirely; and fifteen or twenty miles still intervened between us and water, and without grass sufficient
to feed a goat. Six or eight miles of the way was still
up hill. This was the most trying time of all.

At dark, about fourteen miles from water, our ten was
behind, and my two wagons were the rear of all; and
some of my oxen had already failed. We still rolled
slowly, resting every few minutes. We soon found the
di&'erent portions of the camp ahead, halted, and lost in
slumber—every man and beast, by common consent, sunk in

profound slumber, and probably dreaming of water and
feed ahead.

424 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT.

We, viz., our tan, with some exceptions, slipped quietly
past them, and resting often and a few minutes at a time
continued to roll. The night was cool, and a miraculous
strength seemed to inspire the cattle.

At sunrise next morning we arrived at the Bitter
Springs; the water of which was about as palatable as a
dose of salts.

The other camps followed us in, and by ten o'clock all
were in, except three oxen left by the way, and two
wagons with their loads, left twenty miles back.

Men and animals were so exhausted that, after digging
and improving the water, and a general watering, it was
ten hours or more before the cattle were driven to what
little feed there was, a mile or two distant.

I rode back ten miles and carried water and feed to
two animals, and tried in vain to drive them in.

In this desert we had travelled, without much intermission, two days and two nights; during which we had
no feed not water, excepting that which we carried with
us, and the Salt Springs, and the Bitter Springs, and a
little dry feed to refresh upon after this toi1——women and
children, young and old, and old men walked on foot
day and night.

It was certainly the hardest time I ever saw; but we
cried unto God, and in the name of Jesus Christ asked
Him to strengthen us and our teams, and He did so in
a miraculous manner, and we were saved from the horrors
of the desert.

Wednesday, 28th.-—We arrived on the Mohave River in
the evening, in an exhausted condition; having travelled
thirty-one miles without water or much rest. The day had
been warm and some two or three cattle gave out, and
were left by the way.

At this camp we found plenty of water, timber, soil
and grass. Those appointed to the Pacific mission (with
the exception of brother Hopkins, who said he should not

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 425

till the mission), now took leave of brother Rich and
company, and travelled twelve miles up the Mohave, and
encamped in a pleasant place, with water, feed and fuel.

June 1st.—Rested Sunday. At two olclock had a prayer
meeting in the shade of some trees. All the members of the
mission offered themselves in prayer, acknowledging their
faults and imperfections; seeking the remission of the
same; renewing their covenants with God and with each
other; and giving thanks to Him for deliverance from
the perils of the desert, and praying that God would
graciously open the way for the further prosecution of
the appointed mission. All seemed renewed in spirits,
faith and union, and felt blessed of the Lord.

Passing on our journey over one hundred miles we
came to a fine farm, which had wheat and other grain,
gardens, and even bearing fruit trees, etc. We also found
a member of our society by the name of Crisman, who, with
his family resided on the place. We were kindly received,
and, after resting a few days, obtained a team, and brother
Wood went to Los Angelos, thirty miles, to obtain supplies to send back. We sent a load of supplies to the
companies on the Mohave River, and then moved our
camp to brother Crismanls, where we arrived at noon,
and were received with welcome; and all rejoiced that
our desert and toilsome journey was at an end. Having
rested the last week, every man who was with me as
a fellow missionary accompanied me to the lone hills,
about one mile from camp, where in solitude we joined
in prayer with all the energy we possessed; praying in
t11rn, and asking our Father in Heaven, in the name of
Jesus Christ, to open our way, to guide us in wisdom in
our duties, to give us the gift of -the Holy Ghost, and to
supply us with means to proceed on our journey in His
own way, and in His own time.

We also remembered our families before the Lord, and
all the authorities and interests of the kingdom of God.

 

 

426 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

Selling some of our cattle and one wagon, we journeyed
seventeen miles and encamped on a small stream near
some hills of ; wild oats, which served us for feed. We
also pulled several bundles to fill our beds, and to take
with us to Los Angelos, where we arrived in the evening
of the 16th of June.

Several Americans called on us, conversed in a friendly
manner, and seemed much interested in the Mormon settlement about to be made. More particularly as to the
additional security this population would afford to the
peace and order of a distracted country.

 

CHAPTER XLVIII.

Los Angelos :-Catholic Celebration of Corpus Christi :-—,Arrival in San Francisco :—Le.tcr to President B. Young :—Fami1y Letter.

I OS ANGELOS is a fertile, well watered, and delightful
.1

valley of vineyards and orchards, with a fine old
Spanish town—a mixture of American, European, Spanish and Indian population-—and has been cultivated for
eighty years.

Thursday, 19th.—I attended the Catholic celebration of
Corpus Christi, and witnessed perhaps five hundred people
of all ages, sexes and colors, the Indian blood prevailingthree priests at their head—performing the various ceremonies. The ladies in the finest dresses I ever beheld in
any country, consisting of silks and satins of various figures
and extreme costliness; white muslin, cambric, etc., made
in full dresses, together with costly silk and satin shawls
worn over the head and enclosing the shoulders, bosom
and waist, leaving only the face in view; while all other
portions of their persons were buried beneath the rich
and ample folds of costly apparel.

In these costly robes every female knelt or sat on the
filthy floor of earth in the old church for hours! No
seats, carpets, or spreads of any kind; while various images were exhibited in turn, and were worshipped in
humble postures, and with low chants, amid the discharges of cannon and crackers, the beating of drums,
and the tinkling of bells. _

Clouds of incense rose before each image, and perhaps
one hundred candles were burning at midday. All the

 

 

428 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

men were also dressed in their best, and knelt in a devout manner, or stood in a reverent posture with hats om

Not one changed place, or was seen to leave the
church, although the services lasted for hours, without one
seat or other convenience whereon to rest.

This ended, all formed in procession and moved around the
public square, beneath the beautiful arches richly decorated, and the walk lined on each side with green branches.

At proper distances were placed images amid costly

'decoratious, before which all fell upon their knees, and

remained for a length of time prostrated in the thick
dust with all their llnery, chanting hymns, praying and
worshipping, while crackers were discharged in profusion.
Even all the spectators must stand in the broiling sun in
the roads uncovered, or give great offence.

In a few days brother Wood returned from the rear
camps where he and brother Allen had been with provisions. Reported all well and prosperous. Brother Lyman
and Rich also paid us a visit, and some others.

Brothers Hammond, Perkins, Wood and Murdock with
their baggage, etc., started for the landing at San Pedro.
The remainder tarried to complete their sales.

Sunday, 29th.—I preached in the court house in Los Angelos to some forty attentive persons, mostly American
gentlemen.

Monday, 30th.—I sold my last wagon and moved down
to the Port at San Pedro. Found that portion of the
brethren well who Went down before, and camped with
them on the beach.

July 7 th.—-VVe embarked on board the steamship Ohio,
and set sail for San Francisco, at 4 o'clock P. M.

After four days rather rough passage, we arrived in
San Francisco on the 11th inst. at eleven olclock, A. M.
Found some good brethren who rendered us assistance in
various ways. Rented a house the same day, and all
moved into it together. A

AUToRIoGRArHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. 429

Brothers Lyman and Rich arrived per steamer Goliah.
We visited and received visits.

Sunday, 20th.—I preached at eleven A. M. in a large
room, a goodly number of persons out to hear, and good
attention. Next morning we repaired to the water and
baptized eight persons, and the same evening met at the
house of brother Winner and organized a branch of the
Church, confirming the above persons.

I was chosen president of this branch, and Philo B.
Wood, clerk. The remainder of the week devoted to
writing and instructing inquirers who called.

I wrote the following letter to Elder Addison Pratt,
Society Isles:

SAN FRANcIsco, July, 26, 1851.

DEAR BROTHER PRATT: My long contemplated mission
to the Pacific has at length become a reality. I am here,
having left home in March last. Eight of us are here, and
will go to the Sandwich Islands and elsewhere as the
way opens and the Spirit directs. Brother P. B. Lewis
and wife would have sailed for your islands with letters,
etc., but brothers Clark and Thompkins having arrived,
we concluded to send no more laborers to that part of
the vineyard at present.

I hold the presidency of all the islands and coasts of
the Pacific, under the direction of the First Presidency of
the Church—to open the door to every nation and tongue,
as fast as the way is prepared and the Lord directs, for
the preaching of the gospel of salvation.

As president of that part of the vineyard you will
preach the gospel to every people as fast as possible.
Send men to the Friendly Isles, or to any other groups
where the way may be open, and as circumstances will
permit, as you are led by the Holy Ghost. If you need
more laborers send to me at this place. I am well
known here, and making some progress. Also make your

430 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

report to me from time to time, and ask such counsel as
you may need.

Elder Philip B. Lewis will sail for the Sandwich Islands,
accompanied by his wife, brother Hammond and wife, and
brother Woodbury and wife. He will have the presidency
of those islands. It would be well if you would correspond with him.

The work is prospering wonderfully in Deseret, England,
Wales, Scotland, Switzerland, Italy, Denmark, Sweden,
Norway, etc. Several young men are with me who will
go to Chili and Peru in due time. Bishop Murdock will
also go soon to the English Colonies in New Zealand, Van
Diemanls Land, or New Holland, if the Lord will.

Our instructions to the Elders abroad, everywhere, are
to seek the Spirit and gift of the Holy Ghost, by humble prayer and faith and good works. Also, to take no
part in government matters, except to uphold and obey
the authorities and laws of every nation where they may
labor, and teach others to do so.

The laws of the country we are in will govern us in
all things consistent with liberty of conscience, freedom of
speech, etc.

With sentiments of love and good will I subscribe
myself,

Your brother in the gospel,

PARLEY P. PRATT.

Sm FRANCISCO, July 26, 1851.

To His Majesty me. Kmmmm and the People of the
Sandwich Isles. GREETING:

I beg leave to introduce to the favorable notice of your
Majesty and subjects, and to commend to your protection,
hospitality and kind consideration the following persons,
who go out as missionaries and residents to your country:

Elders P. B. Lewis, Francis A. Hammond and Stillman

Woodbury, with their wives.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 431

These persons are from Great Salt Lake City, Utah
Territory, U. S., and have been selected by the Presidency
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints to
fulill a mission to the Pacific.

Mr. Hammond is a former resident and artizan of your
kingdom, and we trust is favorably known to your Majesty and some of his fellow citizens. We can confidently
recommend these gentlemen as men of good character,
and men who bring good news, peace and good will to
man.

With sentiments of high consideration and esteem for
your Majesty and the people of your realm, I have the
honor to subscribe myself,

Your humble servant and the friend of man,

P. P. Pun,

Prcu'dcnt of the Pacific Mission of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.

I here give a few extracts from a letter to President

. Brigham Young:

Sm Fnmmxsoo, August 28, 1851.
Pnnsmnnr YOUNG.

Dear Brother : I am well, or rather so as to be able
to perform my daily duties, although not in good health.

I arrived in this place some time in July, together
with those who accompanied me on the mission. r ' '
* * " If the Presidency wishes to make any communication on any subject, letters addressed to me at San
Francisco, California, will be forwarded to me to Chili, or
elsewhere, as I shall not leave this place without appointing an agent to receive and forward all papers and
communications.

The Sandwich Islands are at peace, and enjoy a free
government. We have sent to those islands three additional missionaries, who, sailed on the sixth day of August

 

 

432 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

for the Port of Honolulu. P. B. Lewis is appointed to
preside over that mission.

t t it * Since I have a.rrived here I have been 
gent in the duties of my calling every hour, and have
called upon God for His Spirit to help me with all the
energy I possessed, and without ceasing. The result is, the
Spirit of the Lord God has been upon me continually, in
such light, and joy, and testimony as I have seldom experienced.

Brothers A. Lyman and G. 0. Rich have been here with
me some of the time; we have called together the old
members and others, and preached repentance and reformation of life. We have re-baptized many of them, and have
re-organized the Church. Several new members are being
added—somc of whom are young people of the old members, and others are strangers from different countries. We
are upwards of fifty members in number. We have preaching twice a day on Sundays in a large theatre in the
centre of the city, and prayer meetings on Sunday and
Thursday evenings. Strangers give good attention. The

members feel well, and are full of faith and the good'

Spirit, and the Spirit is poured out till our hearts are
full. ,

I expect to leave this country soon for South America,
unless I should be able to go to New York, via. the Isthmus, to get some books printed.

I am studying Spanish with all diligence, and will, I
trust, master it in the course of a few months.

Now, my dear brethren of the Presidency, accept this
manifestation of my remembrance, good wishes and determinations, and rest assured. you are always upheld by my
prayers and good wishes. I want your prayers—your continued confidence, and your good wishes and fellowship. I
want the Spirit of God and His angels to be with me;
and I fear not earth, nor hell, not men, nor devils, nor
death. I desire power to do good continually, and to

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 433

bring about the restoration of His people. I glory in my
calling. I would not exchange it for any other position
or calling on this earth.

I hope to come home by and by and see you all, and
see the preparations for the ordinances and powers of
Heaven in your midst in state of forwardness; such as

peace, union and diligence can alone produce. So farewell.
With my best wishes and prayers,

Your brother and laborer in the truth,

1

, P. P. PRATT.

During my stay in San Francisco I wrote a proclamation of the gospel addressed to the people of the coasts
and islands of the Pacific, which was afterwards published
by Elder Wandell in Australia. I also commenced the
book entitled Key to Theology. At a public meeting of the
Saints, Elder George K. Winner was unanimously chosen
and set apart to preside over the San Francisco branch
—myself being honorably discharged from the duties of
the same, with a view of a mission to Chili.

I then spoke of my duties to other parts of the Pacific;
was honorably discharged from the presidency of the branch
with a vote of thanks, and_ a sum of money, amounting in
all to fourteen hundred and ten dollars, was then and
afterwards subscribed to assist me on my mission.

Sqrt. 5.—I sailed for Valparaiso, Chili, on board the bark
Henry Kelsey. After a tedious and disagreeable passage
of sixty-four days, arrived safe in Valparaiso, Nov. 8th, accompanied by my wife and Elder Rufus Allen, all in tolerable health.

Found the country in a state of civil war, and most
kinds of business at a dead stand—menls' hearts failing
them for fear.

I then finished the following letter which I had com~
menced on the sea:

28

 

 

434 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT.

SHIP *l HENRY KELsEY," PACIFIC O01-:AN,)
Lat. 24 N., .1on. 115 W., '}
Sept. 15, 1851. 3

Dear Family :—Here we are on the deep, bound for Chili,
S. A.—-self, Phebe and R. Allen. We sailed from San
Francisco on the 5th inst. Have had fine weather, excepting three days, in which we were becalmed; and have
sailed more than eleven hundred miles. We are now running before the wind seven miles an hour. We have all
been sea sick, and have not yet recovered in full. We are

.the only passengers, and have the cabin to_ ourselves, except at meals. We study Spanish every day. It is a
beautiful language, and wonderfully adapted to the simplicity
of the Lamanites. I hope to master it during the passage
and a few months! residence among the Chilians.

We pay sixty dollars for passage in the cabin, and
found. We expect to be two months in going.

Well, dear ones, six months have passed, and their
events been recorded in the records of eternity since we
parted; all this time I have had not one lisp from you. Oh,
how lonesome! Just imagine the monotony! Sky and sea!
Sea and sky! Night and day! Day and night! Iniinitude
of space! Boundless waste! Emblem of eternal silence!
Eternal banishment! Eternal loneliness, where the voice
of the bridegroom and of the bride are not heard. Where
the holy music of childrenls voices, in joyous merriment,
falls not on the ear; where no changing or varied land-scape relieves the eye; where no vegetation, or leafy bower, or sweet blooming flower cheers the senses; where no
birds tune their soft notes of praise to announce the dawn,
or sound the requiem of the closing day.

Even the fierce and ravenous beast of the desert (which,
in his native solitude, announces with doleful and prolonged howls the midnight hour, or wakes the weary

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 4.35

traveller at early dawn, and gives the signal for another
day of thirst, and toil, and suffering) is lacking here.

On this boundless waste of waters there is seldom anything to break the monotony of eternal silence, or, rather,
of the roar of the waves as they break in increasing foam
upon each other, or against the vessels side.

Thanks for that promise, it There shall be no more sea?
Thanks for the hope that all the elements of nature will
one day be adapted to the enjoyment or occupation of intellectual life, or social and sympathetic existence.

Just imagine sundown, twilight, the shades of evening,
the curtains of the solitary night gathering in silent gloom
and lone melancholy around a father who loves his home
and its inmates; his fireside and the family altar! Behold him standing leaning over the vessells side as it
glides over the waters of the lone and boundless Pacific,
gazing for hours in succession into the bosom of its dark
abyss, or watching its white foam and sparkling spray!
What are his thoughts? Can you divine them? Behold,
he prays! For what does he pray? For every wife, for
every child, for every near and dear friend he has on earth,
he prays most earnestly! most fervently! He calls each
by name over and over again, before the altar of remembrance. And when this is done for all on earth, he remembers those in Heaven; calls their names; communes
with them in spirit ; wonders how they are doing; whether
they think of him. He calls to mind their acts and sufferings in life, their death, and the grave where sleeps
their precious dust.

This done, he prays for Zion, Jerusalem, Judah, Israel,
the Church, the Holy Priesthood, the resurrection of the
just, the kingdom and coming of Messiah, the end of war,
and sin, and death, and wrong, and oppression, and sorrow, and mourning, and tears; and for earth, and Heaven,
and God, angels and men, to be i joined forever in the
bonds of eternal peace, and love and truth.

A436 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

This done, he commends himself, the vessel and his all
on board to God, and to the guardianship of his good
angel. Amen. Walks the deck a few minutes, examines
the sails, the speed of the vessel, the course of the wind,
and then retires to rest to dream of home.

October 5th.—Coast of Peru, S. A., lat. 3 deg. 30m. S.
A month has passed on the ocean; much head wind, some
calms, and more or less sea-sickness has attended us by
turns until the present. We have not been able to read,
write, or study much, therefore the time has passed oif

very tediously indeed. _

We have a miser for a captain, who thinks more of a
sixpence than he does of our lives or even of his own.
He will not suffer the steward to cook potatoes, bread,
pies, puddings or any other wholesome food, but keeps us
on hard, mouldy bread, full of bugs and worms, and on salt
beef and pork—the pork being rotten. He has flour, potatoes and good pork, but will not allow it to be used;
thus you will readily perceive that we are truly in unpleasant circumstances.

Last evening we came near a shipwreck, having run near
the land without knowing it, and it fell calm. The ship
became unmanagable, and was drifting on to the shore,
but we cast anchor and awaited the light of morning,
when we got under weigh with much labor, and stood again
to sea.

FRENCH HOTEL, Va.lpara.c'so, Chili, S. A., }
November 9th.

Dear Fn°end.s:—After a most disagreeable and tedious passage of sixty-four days we have at length arrived in port,
in tolerable health. We landed yesterday at noon, and
took lodgings and board at a French Hotel, where we have
a great variety of good eating, and a front parlor to ourselves—price four dollars per day for three of us. The
proprietor speaks French, the clerk French, with a little

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 437

English, the landlady German, the waiter Spanish, and
ourselves English, with a little Spanish."

So you see we have a little Babel of our own, independently of Nimrod or the great tower. ,

We find the country in the midst of revolution and civil
war. Two persons and their adherents fighting for power and rule. Business is dull, living high, and doubt and
uncertainty characterizing every transaction in the various
business departments.

On Sunday we attended a meeting in a very large building. We saw thousands of both sexes, and of all classes
and ages, throng the place, bow down on their knees and
worship certain images and paintings with much apparent
devotion. No instructions were given in any language, no
music, no voice br sound, except a low, plaintive voice in
the far end of the room, not addressed to the people,
neither suihciently loud or distinct to be understood by
them.

The worshippers were dressed in a variety of degrees
of neatness or of its opposite. Some of them wore very
costly apparel, and others were very neatly clad. All
seemed full of zeal and devotion. All bowed down on
their knees in silent, solemn attitudes. All their faces
seemed disfigured with a painful and awe-stricken solemnity. All made certain signs and motions, while they said
nothing audible, and the impression of a strange observer
would be that the image, to which every eye was turned
with long and supplicating gaze and imploring look, had
no cars to hear, but was deeply versed in the science of
physiognomy, and also acquainted with the deaf and dumb
alphabet.

On inquiry, we were informed that this kind of worship prevailed throughout Spanish America and various
other countries, and that it is called by the dignified name
of Christianity, and that it is very ancient. '

From all which circumstances I infer that it must have

438 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

been instituted soon after the Church of Jesus Christ became extinct in the Roman world, and, by some unaccountable blunder, borrowed its name from those institutions,
which it does not even resemble in the least in any one
feature save the name.

Sunday, November 16th. Dear friends :—During the past
week we have rented a house, purchased furniture and
commenced housekeeping. We devote almost our entire
time to the Spanish language.

Our house is in the rear of a block of buildings which
fronts a large and beautiful street, called Victoria street.
It opens into a large yard, surrounded with high walls
and with other buildings, and filled with beautiful trees,
such as orange, fig, peach, pear, etc., together with pinks
and a variety of other flowers and shrubs. Its walks
and pavements are neatly swept, and the houses around
it occupied with widows, orphans, etc. of a good class of
Spanish or Chilanoes, and their kind and sociable young
people and little children.

We divide our time between reading and studying our
Spanish lessons, and chatting, visiting, reading Spanish,
hearing them read, and playing with the little ones, etc.,
all of which pleases them much, and causes us to advance
in the language with a rapidity which is almost astonishing to ourselves and to them. Truly Providence has ordered our footsteps and cast our lot in pleasant circumstances, when we were strangers in a strange land, and
among a people of a strange tongue. Truly He has opened
our way to learn that tongue, and we can learn it if we
are diligent.

Rents are high here, provisions and fuel dear. Strawberries, oranges, lemons, etc., are in market, as well as
green peas and other vegetables, and melons. It is, in
fact, a state of advanced spring or early summer. The
peaches, pears and figs are perhaps one third their size on
the trees, while the flowers are in full bloom.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 439

NOVEMBER IN CHILI.

'Tis the spring of the year, all the fountains are full.
All nature is pregnant with life and with love ;
A chorus of voices ascend from each pool,
A myriad of songsters enliven the grove.
To her nest in the Andes, the condor retires,
The winds from Magellan no longer prevail,
And Sol. with the north breeze returning, inspires
New life on the zephyr, and love on the gale.
The forest is clad in its robes of fresh greenWherc the dove sings an anthem, his mate to decoy.
The orchard is dressed as a holiday queen,
And the rose bud is bursting with fulness of joy.
The orange, the olive, the fig and the vine
Are clothed as in Eden, with innocent bloom;
The earth is an altar of incense divine,
Exhales a sweet odor of richest perfume.
The young of the flock bound exulting away
While their dams nip the blade, 'mid the dewdrops of morn.
And groups of young children are sportive and gay;
Yet my heart, 'mid this gladness, is sad and forlorn.
I sigh for the storms of November to come,
The frost, and the snow-drifted plain I would see;
The bleak, wintry blasts of my own mountain home,
And the storm-beaten glaziere are dearer to me.
The chime of the sleigh-bell again I would hear,
The low moaning tempest in harmony ro11—
It would speak of my country and kindred so dear;
Oh! this would be music indeed to 'my soul.

With sentiments of _ the most endearing aifection,
I remain yours, &c.,

P. P. PRATT.
I255 F _ _ ,1: F.  r ,. ;,;.l
.___ ___. '#\ 5--. H¢.,£_":: N," .- _,_  i .f.
1   ~~  i:;:3 ~%*:,,js;9}l, (W s Q s x: y!

CHAPTER XLIX.

Valparaiso :—Quillota:—Letter to President Brigham Young.

January 19, 1852.

E have continued to reside in Valparaiso, and to
study Spanish diligently until this day. We make
much progress, being already able to understand in part
that which we read in the Spanish Scriptures, and in the
daily papers, as well as in history. We have also gatheral much general information of the countries of Spanish
America, their manners, customs, laws, constitutions, institutions—-civil, religious, &c.

Revolutions have been in progress more or less in
nearly all Spanish America during the past year.

In Chili the present revolution has ended with the loss
of many thousand lives, and without success.

In Buenos Ayres it still rages, and a great battle is
soon expected between the combined armies of Brazil and
Montevideo on the. one part, and Buenos Ayres on the
other—the two -armies amounting to near twenty-five
thousand men each, as reported.

Priesteraft reigns triumphant in all these countries, as
by law established; and by law paid and supported—by
marriages and christening fees, forgiving sins, etc.

In Chili the charges are as follows: Twenty-five dollars for a marriage, and one dollar for christening.
For forgiveness of sins there are various prices to suit
the circumstances of the customers.

We depa.rted from Valparaiso in a cart drawn by oxen,

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 441

and arrived on the morning of the twenty-fifth at Quillota—a small town situated in a beautiful and fertile valley on a river thirty-six miles from Valparaiso. '

Here we have hired a house and live with a widow
and two daughters, young ladies of fifteen and seventeen; they are very sociable, and much pleased with us.
They can read Spanish, and they take every possible
pains to teach us the language. They are very frank
and friendly, and seem as much void of guile as little
children.

I read to them in the Spanish Testament, which pleases
them much, as they have never read it.

The people in this town seem to be a neat, plain, loving and sociable people; very friendly, frank, and easy
to become acquainted with. They are mostly white, intelligent, and good looking; very plain and simple in
dress and manners. The houses are mostly neat and
comely, and are situated on a line with the mud walls
which separate the streets from the gardens and vineyards.

The houses are built of sun dried brick, plastered and
whitewashed outside and inside; with brick iloors and
tiled _roofs. Many of them, however, have no floors except the earth, and but few of them have glass windows.
The streets are straight, and cross at right angles. A
clear, cool stream runs in the centre of each street, and
vast rows of tall stately poplars, as well as fruit trees
and vines adorn the entire vale, both in town and country.

A mountain or round hill, perhaps 500 feet in height,
rises in the midst of the town, and is surrounded on all
sides by the level of the fertile, well watered and well
cultivated plain. This hill is near our residence, easy of
access, and commands a view of the whole valley with
its farms, orchards, vineyards, towns, streets, river and
water ditches, fertile as Eden, and stretching away till
lost in the dim distance; or bounded by lofty hills and

442 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

mountain chains, whose lower swells are checked with
fences and houses, and covered with {locks and herds,
while their bosoms are rugged with rocky precipices, and
checquered by dark ravines, or mantled with clouds; while
the rugged summits repose in solemn grandeur on the

' bosom of the clear blue sky, unobscured by clouds or any

of the gloomy shadows of the lower world.

The land of this valley is extremely fertile, and easily
irrigated by. small canals from the river.

The whole taken in at one view from the summit of
the centre hill, presents one of the most beautiful scenes I
ever beheld in the old or new world.

On the top of this mountain is a place for retirement
and prayer, which I intend to use every evening about sunset or twilight. Figs, plums, pears, peaches, apples, oranges, grapes, and, indeed, most' kinds of fruit are very
plentiful here. A quarter of a dollar will purchase
enough for three of us to eat in one day. The figs and
plums are sweet as honey, and will melt in the mouth.
There is not much need of other food. The grapes,
peaches and apples are not generally ripe yet.

Having dwelt in Quillota one month we returned to
Valparaiso, and on the 2d of March embarked on board
the ship ttDracutll for San Francisco; weighed anchor
on the 5th of March, and sailed out of port with a light
breeze.

The following is the copy of a letter written to President Young during the voyage from Chili to San Francisco :

SHIP ll DRAcUtr,ll PACIFIC OCEAN, 1at.r18.}

March 13, 1852.
Pmasmnncr YOUNG.

Dear Brothcr—We are well. Elder Rufus Allen, myself
and wife, sailed from San Francisco, September 5, 1851,
for Chili, S. A., and arrived in Valparaiso, November 8passage sixty-three days. From that time to the present

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 443

has been devoted to the study of the Spanish language
and the laws, constitutions, geography, history, character,
religion, manners, customs, revolution, and events of
Chili and Peru in particular, and of Spanish America in
general.

By intense application I soon became able to read with
a degree of understanding and interest in that language.
I have already read through the Spanish Testament;
while, in the same language, I have copied in writing
many of its most important passages, and have read them
over perhaps twenty times—committing some of them to
memory.

I have also read a small work, on Natural History of
Chili, near three times through, in which are many curious and important facts in relation to the wars with
that brave and patriotic nation of freeman called the Arraucanians. These have maintained their liberty and independence unimpaired for 300 years against the combined
powers of old Spain and of all her colonies, sustaining a
defensive war, with but little cessation, for near 200
years, without firearms or other modem means of defence.
Some of their history I hope to translate and publish

hereafter.
I have also read the Spanish school geography of Chili,

and some other works, while a constant perusal of their
newspapers, and those of Peru and Buenos Ayres, have
given me a general insight into their governments, laws,
politics, religion, revolutions, hopes feelings and prospects.

The civil wars, and my own pecuniary circumstances,
but more particularly the Want of language, prevented my
travelling much in the country, or even visiting the Arrancanians. I, however, visited a small town in the interior,
forty miles, and lived there one month.

On the second day of March we embarked on this ship
bound for San Francisco, without a sufliciency of the
language to turn the keys of the gospel as yet to these

444 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

nations. We staid till all our means were exhausted and
sought and prayed diligently for our way to open; but
we could neither speak the language suiliciently to preach
the gospel nor find any way to earn our living, so we

found it necessary to return to California while we still _

study the language on board.

We have one fine young man in the cabin who is very
useful to us. He is a native Chilian, reads and converses fluently in Spanish, is conversant with the Scriptures, which we read together and converse upon. He
has borrowed the Spanish Bible of me and is reading it
by course. I have told him of our doctrine, baptism,
Church persecution, settlement in the mountains, and of
the Book of Mormon. Also of the evils of adultery,
dnmkenness, gambling, and other sins, and. the wickedness of the Catholic abominations. He has taken the
whole in good part, and talks of going to the mountains
with us. What is very remarkable for a Chilian, he
neither smokes nor drinks. He has some means, and is
going. to California to make more. We pray much in
secret that God will open his heart and give him to us
for a help in the ministry.

The Chilians are a mixed race of Spanish and Indian
blood——say four fifths Indian—-consequently coarse features,
black hair and eyes, low foreheads, high cheek bones,
broad faces, and in most cases copper color in its various
shades and degrees, whilst a few are white and even fair
and beautiful. In general they are ignorant and devoted
Catholics. Probably more than one half of them can neither
read nor write. Their knowledge of arts and industry is
extremely limited. In manners they are simple, frank, and
extremely sociable and apparently affectionate, but subject
to a small low meanness in their dealings, and to trifling
thefts. There are, however, many honorable exceptions to
those faults or evil habits.

The Bible is not in general use among them, being proAUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 445

hibited by their religion; but I found many who had
read it, and all, so far as I tried the experiment, seemed
willing to hear it read. Some said they could understand
it better when I read it than when it was read by their
own natives. I spoke freely to many against their priestcraft and errors; showed them the true mode of baptism,
etc., which very seldom gave offence.

They frequently told me of the abominations of their
priests, and how they administered all the ordinances for
money, at so much per head. The constitution establishes the Roman Catholic religion, supports it out of
the treasury, and prohibits all others. There is, notwithstanding this prohibition, a Church of England and an
American Congregational Church in Valparaiso.

The latter I visited and conversed with the minister.
He said there was no diiliculty in landing religions books
or papers and circulating the same, although the press is
not free to print or publish any religion but the Catholic.
He had imported and distributed Bibles in Spanish, and
had placed them for sale in the bookstores. Foreign
books are landed free of duty.

The revolution which raged so violently this season in
Chili professed to be in favor of universal suifrage, and
of absolute liberty of conscience, of speech, and of the
press. The masses, so far as I am able to judge, are
warm revolutionists, but they donlt like to fight. The
revolution cost some 5,000 lives, and ended in a general
amnesty, without any alteration of the Government. But
the people are sanguine in their hopes-—they think to
accomplish their liberties in a few years. In the provinces of Bueuos Ayres a long civil war has
raged, which is now. about terminating in favor of the
more liberal party, aided by Brazil.

Peru is tranquil. The public prints of Lima, its capital, have interested me much—they are in Spanish, and
I have spent days in their perusal. The Government of

446 AUToB1oGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Peru is much influenced by England and the United
States. Its constitution guarantees liberty of the press,
of speech, and of worship. But it seems to have remained a dead letter on these points till the present year,
in which the Congress Peruana has made a special law
to carry out these general principles of liberty, making
special provision for the liberty of other worship, and for
Protestants to otiiciate in the holy sacraments of matrimony
and of burial, which is a step ahead of even Protestant
England (where all must go to the National Church for
these things).

Peru has also made a special treaty with Great Britain,
in which all these liberties are guaranteed to British subjects there. These liberal measures have alarmed tt His
Holiness]! the Pope of Rome, to such an extent that he
has issued his letter of disfellowship of the Government
Peruana, ' in which he denounces all these liberal measures as antz'- Catholic, unchristian and heretical.

This otiicial document, in 'the hands of the Archbishop
of Peru and of his clergy, was brought to bear with considerable power against the liberal proceedings of the Government-; but, in the meantime, a very learned and talented
man (I suppose a clergyman), called Dr. Vigel, and many
other writers come out against the Pope in the columns of
the public prints. They denounce him in no measured
terms as a usurper of more power than Peter of old, who,
they say, meddled not with governments, wealth, or any
other thing, but to preach the gospel and catch fish.

They boldly inquire of tt His Holiness tt tt Wherets Peterls
salary! crown! title! palace, etc.? where his dictations of
political government W They then inform him that Peru is
a free and independent sovereignty, and will not be dic- tated to by any foreign power whatsoever. They refer tt His

Holiness it to Simon Magus, who wished to purchase the
gift of God with money. Remind him and the public how
much it has cost certain other governments to purchase

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 447

remission of sins for similar oifences, and inquire how
much poor erring Peru will have to pay to His Holiness
for the remission of the great sins she has committed in
giving her citizens the liberty to worship as they please;
and to marry, die and be buried in such manner as seemeth
to them good.

Such writings have a wide circulation in Peru, and are
popular, but are also opposed by lengthy replies and defences ou the part of the more orthodox clergy. All these
things go to show that the press, as well as the mind, is
beginning to exert its freedom in the countries where, for
three centuries, all intellect has slept, and all freedom of
thought been crushed-—buried—under the incubus of the horrid institutions of the great Mother of Abominations.

Should Peru sustain her liberties, a field is opened in
the heart of Spanish America, and in the largest, best informed and most influential city and nation of South
America, for the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the fulness of the gospel to be introduced. '

Four fifths, or perhaps nine tenths of the vast population
of Peru, as well as of most other countries of Spanish
America, are of the blood of Lehi. iTis true they are degraded. Civilization is at a low ebb; and modesty and.

virtue, in the sense they are understood among the more
polished nations, may hardly exist among them, even in
idea. Yet Jesus came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance. The whole need no physicians, but
those who are sick.

New Granada has also revolutionized in favor of the same
great principles of liberty; while the revolution in Northern
Mexico, and other movements of a like nature in other
parts, all go to show that a door is opening more wide
than can be filled very soon in the Spanish language, unless
God shall raise up (as in England) thousands of native
teachers of the fulness of the gospel.

I had much desire to go to Peru at this time: but an

448 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT.

empty purse and imperfect tongue, which has only barely
begun to stammer in that language, together with the want
of books or the means to print them, with other circumstances,  combined to cause me to wait a little till I
could study the language more fully; while, in the meantime, I return to where I can communicate more fully with
the Church at home, with the various missions on the
islands and with my family, for whom I must do something as speedily as possible, if God will open my way.

I feel as though the Book of Mormon and some cheap
publications should be translated into Spanish and printed,
and then the key be turned to these nations while a living priesthood is accompanied by something for them to
read—-even those writings which have the promises of God,
the prayers and faith of the ancients, and the power and
Spirit of God to work with them in restoring the house of
Israel.

It is in my heart to translate the Book of Mormon and
some other works, and to print the same in Spanish as
soon as I have the language suiiiciently perfect. As printing is very expensive in all parts of the Pacific, it may
be wisdom to go to England and get some printing, and,
perhaps, some stereotyping done; and also, to bring out
two or three Elders from there with English passports, etc.,
to assist in Spanish America.

As these contemplated labors would be, under the blessing of God, a furtherance of the great work of laying the
foundation for the restoration of unnumbered millions of
the house of Israel and of J oseph—-even" of many nations
extending over a large and important portion of the earth
—I feel to labor with patience, and to take time to prepare the way before me and before these who will, in due
time, be sent unto them in power; knowing that God,
who has said certain things, will cause those things to be
performed in due time. .

If before half these things are accomplished I should

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OFA PARLEY P. PRATT. 449

return to the valley and sit in council with you and my
brethren, or even do the translation there, I hope I shall
not be counted a slothful servant; for I assure you that
I do all in my power, with all diligence, and with all the
prayer of faith I possess; and my earnest desire is to be
counted worthy to labor for the restoration of Israel until
it be accomplished.

I study the language all day and think of it, and even
dream and talk it aloud in my sleep, in which I sometimes
learn more than in the day. But it is no small work to
become familiar with the entire grammar, words and style
of a language, so as to write for publication.

If the Twelve Apostles will divide the European languages between them, and each become thoroughly versed
in one, so as to translate the fulness of the gospel and
turn the keys of the same, it will be one great step
towards the consummation; for a host of fellow laborers
would soon be raised up in each to cooperate with them,
and these languages command the influence and keys of
communication with most of the nations, tribes and languages of the earth. I trust and hope, also, that they will
soon be introduced into our University, and among the
Elders of Israel, in preference to the dead languages, or 0
those of less consequence. Paenue Oenm, lat. 3° N. }
March 27, 1852.

Dear BrotIwr—We have now sailed for' twenty-three
days and made nearly half the passage. We are well,
and the wind is generally fair, but now and then a calm.
Brother Allen and myself still study the language with
diligence, and still talk with the Chilian, who is also
reading diligently in our Spanish Bible.

The if Book of Mormon," if Voice of Warningf ete., have
been the rounds, and been read by the captain and mates;

but they will not believe in them, nor in the testimony of l

29

450 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PAnLEY P. PRATT.

mnen or angels. However, there is one intelligent, sober
young man, who is interested much.

A,pn'il 29th, lat. 27° N.—Fifty-live days have passed
like a dreary imprisonment to us, with but little to eat.
iWe live on a little poor, hard bread, probably baked some
two or three years ago, and some beans, and very poor
cdamaged salt beef and pork. We have no flour, potatoes,
sugar, molasses, rice, or other comforts, although we pay
ra good price for cabin passage.

We have not had one day of good sailing in a
month; it is either calms or light head winds. We seldom

sail more than from thirty to fifty miles in twenty-four*

hours. We are hungry, and weary, and lonesome, and
disconsolate. But, after praying much for a fair wind and
speed, we ilnd our prayers are not answered, and we have
given it up, and have asked our Heavenly Father to give
us patience and reconciliation to His will.

We are now some eight or nine hundred miles from

port, and our provisions (poor as they are) must fail us
soon. But live or die we trust in God and try to serve
Him.
There is no one on board who fears God or regards man,
as far as we know, except one of the sailors and ourselves.
The most horrid blasphemies resound in our ears every day
in the cabin and on deck, from captain and mate together,
with gambling and blackguardisrn.

We are shunned and hated because of our testimony,
and because our example is a reproof. But we mind our
own business, and study language and the Scriptures every
day.

The young man of which I speak is a Mr. Howard, from
the United States, who is well educated, and has read our
books with much interest during the passage, and has requested to be baptized and join the Church as soon as we
land. He is not accustomed to a seafaring life, and wishes
to _ go to the motmtains with us. He has been brought

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 451

up at school and in clerking. I think his calling is to
preach the gospel, but I have not yet even hinted this to
him.

Brethren, I want to see you all with a desire above all
other times of my life. I feel as though I wanted to sit

 

down with you and seek the powers and gifts of God and

the powers of Heaven, even that which shall be shed forth
for the restoration of the house of Israel. I

Oh, when will the time come? When shall the veil be
rent and the full powers of the apostleship be permitted
to be exercised on the earth? It must be before long or
no flesh be saved—for the powers of darkness prevail
abroad to that degree that it can even be felt physically.

There are none who know the Lord; none who seek
after the truth ; none who appreciate it when found; none
who incline to cease from sin. I had like to have said to
be found abroad in the earth. To jlnd one is like lighting
a candle and searching diligently for food among the dungeons of darkness, death and famine.

Adieu till we land.
Your brother,
P. P. PRATT.

 

 

CHAPTER:L

Arrival in San Francisoo:—Return to Salt Lake City:—-Second Mission to
the Pac.iflo:—Artic1es from the Press.

. FTER a long and tedious passage of seventy-nine days

we landed in San Francisco on the 21st of May,
having suifered severely for the last forty days for the
want of proper food.
C After resting and recuperating for a few days, my time
was again devoted to the ministry in the Church at San
Francisco and San Jose, and in visiting, studying language,
writing to the other missionaries, and in the preparations
for our homeward journey, until near the end of July;
and I would here add, that, through the kindness of my
brethren and friends, near twelve hundred dollars in money,
mules and a wagon was contributed to assist me in my mission and for my journey home, being given at various times
after my arrival from Chili.

I found the Saints in the above named places possessed
of some faith and kindness, benevolence and charity. They
were also endeavoring to serve the Lord, and to set good
examples of life, and they met often to worship and
edify each other and as many as came to their meetings.
Many attended their meetings and listened with interest,
and some were baptized and added to the Church.

I urged the principles of the gathering with all the energy of the gift of God within me, but seemingly almost
in vain. The world and the gain thereof seemed to have
a strong hold and influence over them. After a trial for
months, I only obtained three men to go with me, for

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 4533

Deseret, besides brother Allen. These were Wm. Follett,
Thomas Dual and Elisha Hyatt; with these I started on
the steamer it Sea Birdll about the last of July.

We landed in St. Pedro after three days, and on the
14th day of August we arrived all safe in San Barnardino, where we were kindly received by brother Amasa
Lyman and the Saints in general, whom we found well
and prosperous. We camped near sister Richls, and were
entertained by them very hospitably. t

Sunday, 15th.—Met with the Saints for worship and
preached to them. It was a meeting full of interest, well
attended by both sexes; good singing, good instruction,
the sacrament, and in the afternoon a Sabbath school.

Their meeting house is large and commodious, and is used
for school purposes every day.

August 20th.—'—Brother C. C. Rich arrived in good health
from Salt Lake City with seventeen men, making their
journey in twenty-two days without loss or accident, having six wagons. Reports well of the grass and water.
Tells of much rain on the desert and in Deseret. Brings
good news of all things there, and letters from my family
who were all alive and well. A

Sunday, 22d.—Had a joyful meeting with brother Amasa
Lyman, C. 0. Rich and the Church. After meeting we
three of the Twelve met and appointed certain young men
to study the Spanish language, with a View to a mission
hereafter, and brother Stout to teach a. class in Spanish,
in this place, to consist of such young men.

September 4th.—Attended a harvest feast in the bowery,
or meeting house. The entire people made this feast, and
assembled to enjoy it. The room was richly and tastefully ornamented and set oif with evergreens, specimens of
grains, vegetables, etc.

Meeting opened by prayer and singing, and a few remarks from myself and others, after which the entire day
and evening was spent in feasting, dancing and speaking.

454 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PABLEY P. PRATT.

Every variety almost which the earth produced, or skill
could prepare, was spread out in profusion and pa-rtaken
of by all—-citizens, strangers, Spaniards or Indians—with
that freedom and good order which is characteristic of the
Saints.

The dances were conducted with decorum and propriety.
Old and young, married and single, grandsire and child,
all mingling in the dance so far as they chose, without a
jarring spirit to mar their peace.

With an address from A. Lyman, a few words from
C. C. Rich and myself, and benediction, we closed, about
nine P. M., one of the most interesting assemblies of the
Saints in this place.

Tuesday, 14th.——All being ready, we took leave of the
Saints in San Barnardino, and commenced our journey at
nine olclock, A. M.

Brothers Rich and Lyman, with several other friends,
accompanied us a few miles, and ex teams and teamsters
accompanied us for three days, to haul us over the Cajon
Pass, where we took leave of them, and at evening
organized our company as follows :—P. P. Pratt and wife,
Rufus Allen, William Follett, Clark Ames, Samuel Gould,
Andrew Calhoun and wife, Elisha Hyatt wife and child,
Thomas Dowel, John Hyatt, John Green, G-eorge Clark.
John Green was appointed captain of the guard. In all,
eleven men, four women and one child.

We were soon joined by live Spaniards, who had near
forty animals, mostly horses, who accompanied us for some
hundreds of miles, and joined us in guarding, etc. Their
animals being poor and unshod, we left them on the Rio
Virgin. We met a company of twenty-four emigrants near
the Salt Spring.

On the Muddy our camp was thronged with near sixty
Indians, in a state of nudity, bringing with them green
corn, melons, and dressed skins for sale, or exchange for
clothing. They were all good natured and glad to see us;

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. rnrrr. 4155
some of them accompanied us twenty-five miles, held our
horses, guns, etc., and assisted us up the hills. C

After twenty days we all arrived in safety at Santa.
Clara, about one hundred miles from the settlement in Iron
County.

Ocwber 7 th.—All arrived in safety in the settlement in
Iron County, Utah, and were kindly received and entertained by the Saints.

I called on sister Robinson in the twilight of evening,
and asked for the dinner which I had spoken for one and
a half years before. We were kindly received by her and
others.

We tarried three days in Parowan Fort and preached to
the Saints.

Taking leave of the Saints we resumed our journey.
Nothing worthy of note transpired during the rest of the
journey, which was two hundred and fifty miles, mostly
among the settlements, where we were kindly entertained.

On the 18th, near midnight, I arrived home. I found
my family in usual health.

On my arrival home I found my wife, Mary Ann Frost,
and my two children, Olivia and Moroni, who had arrived
from Maine, where they had been for several years. The
two children were glad to see me, but their mother had
for several years been alienated from me. I, however, supported her until the following spring, when she applied for
and obtained a bill of divorce; after which, with the two
children, she removed to Utah County.

I spent the remainder of the autumn in the ministry, and
in overseeing and assisting in farming, fencing, etc. I

I was also chosen a member of the Legislative Council,
to which I devoted forty days, commencing in December,
1852. Occupied with these duties, and with the study
of Spanish, the year 1852 was brought to a close.

January, 1853.-—'I.'his month was mostly occupied in the
legislative councils.

456 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

April 6th.—I attended a General Conference, on which
occasion the corner stones of the Salt Lake Temple were
laid by the first Presidency, Twelve and others. it The
Temple Block is forty rods square, the lines running
north and south, east and west, and contains ten acres.
The centre of the Temple is one hundred and fifty-six
feet six inches due west from the centre of the east line
of the block. The length of said house, east and west, is

SALT LAKE TEMPLE, IX PROCESS OF ERECTION

one hundred and eighty-six and a half feet, including
towers, and the width ninety-nine feet. On the east end
there are three towers, as also on the west. Draw
a line north and south, one hundred and eighteen and a
half feet, through the centre of the towers, and you have
the north and south extent of ground plan, including

pedestal?

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRAT1. 457

I devoted the remainder of the season to the ministry,
and to farming, building, etc., not wholly neglecting the
study of Spanish. .

At the August election I was returned to the Legislative
Council by unanimous vote, and in December following I
attended its session till the end of the year.

January, 1854.—Still in legislative session, which adjourned the latter part of this month.

The remainder of the winter was spent in the ministry;
in the active duties of a Regent of the University of
Deseret (being one of a Committee on the Deseret Alphabet
and a New System of Orthography) ; in teaching a class in
the Spanish language; in ministering in the ordinances of
the endowments in the house of the Lord; and in studying, writin g, etc.

At a General Conference, held on the 6th day of April,
I was appointed to a second mission to California. Donations were contributed to aid me in said mission.

May 5th.—I took leave of my family and friends in Salt
Lake City and started on my second mission to California.

Brother Thurston, a young man who had a mission to
the isles, accompanied me. We had a small wagon, drawn
by two mules.

At Provo we joined Governor Young and train on their
trip south, and travelled with them as far as Cedar City.
At Parowan we were joined by elders Silas Smith and
brother West, who had also been selected by the conference as missionaries to the islands.

At this place brother Young gave me the parting hand
and blessed me; and also brother Kimball rose up and
blessed me, and, as he gave me the parting hand, promised many good things. He said 1 should be blest, and
my posterity forever.

Here we parted—brother Young and company on their
return, while I and my company proceeded on our Pacific Mission.

458 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

Near Cedar City we were joined by other missionaries,
and our company now consisted of twenty-four men and
one woman.

Nothing of particular note occurred on our journey, and
on June 9th we arrived safely and in good health and
spirits at San Barnardino, and were kindly entertained by
elders C. 0. Rich and A. Lyman.

After resting a few days I here left the main company
and started with brother J. W. Stewart in a carriage for
the port of San Pedro-—distance, eighty-five miles. The
road was good, and we camped out two nights and arrived on the 14th, and were kindly received by Messrs.
Alexander & Co., who kept the warehouse.

Here I unexpectedly met with a company of Saints
from Australia, under the direction of elder William Hyde,
and we mutually rejoiced in meeting friends.

I set sail on the steamer if Southernerll for San Francisco
on June 24th, and had kind treatment and passage free
in cabin. We had head winds and were driven back
three times, being five days longer than usual on the
passage, arriving there on the 2d of July in safety. In
a few days I went to San Jose Valley, and at brother
Cheeneyls I found my wife Elizabeth, in very poor health
—she having come on business a few months previous.
We rested a few days at brother Cheeneyls and were
kindly entertained.

VVe then returned to San Francisco, and about the
10th of July the other missionaries arrived from San
Barnardino. I met brothers Tanner and McBride, who had
been on a mission to the Sandwich isles and had returned. Brother Tanner had purchased a vessel in
order to transport the Elders both ways and to emigrate
the Saints; but we could not pay for it and fit it for
sea, notwithstanding I ran in debt to help him, so we had
to sell it at a great loss.

We now commenced holding meetings, circulating books,

 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or puzuizr r. PRATT. 4.50

tracts, and in every way we could, to notify and warn
the people.

I devoted the time I could spare from the ministry to
writing my history and for the press.

Some time in August elders George Q. Cannon, J.
Hawkins, Bigler and Farran, of the Island Mission,
landed, and brother Cannon assisted me some forty days
in copying my autobiography.

About the last of August the following was published
in a weekly paper, called the Ohrmzicle, of San Francisco:

A PROPHET I8 AMONG US.

Mr. Parley P. Pratt, of Salt Lake notoriety, is among
us, and we knew it not. He has just addressed a letter

to Mr. J. S. Hittell, whose it proposed course of lectures
against Christianity ll appeals to have caught the Prophetls
attention.

As Mr. Prattls letter, which is written on the blank
leaf of a printed Latter-Day Saintls circular, is curious
and characteristic, we give a copy of it. We also give
a copy of the circular itself. To enable the reader to
understand Mr. Prattls allusions in the letter, he had better first glance over Mr. Hittellls advertisement in another
column. One would scarcely have thought that Mr. Pratt
could seriously expect to make converts to his faith in
this it desperately wicked " California-—t-he very hell on
earth of the it Mormons? But so it seems to be. We
give him and his cause all the publicity we can, by

publishing his circular gratuitously.

SAN FRANCISCO, September 1st, 1854.
MR. JNO. S. HITTELL.
Sz'r—What do you mean by the term if Christianity W
If you mean the system taught by Christ and his Apostles, as recorded in the ii New Testamentf you need give
yourself or the public no uneasiness, for no such system

A69 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or ~ PARLEY P. PRATT.

has ubled the earth for the last thousand years at
least, so far as we have any knowledge, except in the
single instance of its restoration in the United States by
the Prophet Joseph Smith; and even this has been misnamed ii Mormonismfl and driven to the mountains of Utah.

In short, this Christianity of the New Testament is a
system of visions, angels, revelations, prophecyings, gifts,
miracles, etc. Such a system you can never oppose—it
speaks and acts for itself; its votaries know what they
experience, see, hear and feel. ,

As to the modern systems-—the forms without power,
they are not worth opposing; they are dying of themselves before the power and intelligence of truth made
manifest by ii Mormonism?

I am happy to subscribe myself
The friend of truth and man,
PARLEY P. PRATT.

CIRCULAR.

Repent! ye people of California. For know, assuredly,
the Kingdom of God has come nigh amto you.

Mr. Pratt, missionary from Salt Lake, will impart instruction on the fulness of the Gospel to individuals, families, or congregations who may desire it.

Having authority of Jesus Christ he will also baptize
by immersion in water for remission of sins, and administer the gift of the Holy Spirit by the laying on of
hands to all penitent believers in Christ who will covenant
to cease from sin, and serve God with all their hearts.

Mr. Pratt will accept, with pleasure, any invitations
from his fellow citizens to preach in their houses, halls or
churches, without respect. to party or sect.

.When not otherwise engaged, he will hold public meetings
at his residence on each Sunday, at the usual hours; also,
prayer meetings on Thursdays, at two P. M.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 461

The following appeared in the Olwistian Advocate of San
Francisco, September 22 :

CASE OF DEFAMATION.

P. P. Pratt, an Apostle of iiMormonism,ll takes us to
task in no measured terms for our Imregenerate temerity,
"in daring to quote from the Richmond Despatch Dr. Ferrisls
account of the ii Mormon ll community at Salt Lake. To
have a man possessed of divine authority, and capable of
raising the dead, threaten us so, is truly awful. Men
have pursued us with bludgeons and revolvers before, but
this thing of being sent straight down to the bottom of
the bad place, is a sprinkle more terrific than carnal
weapons.

We are half inclined to repent, as much as we can,
without doubting a word of Dr. Ferrisls description. A

Our readers will rejoice to know, from an apostle of Joe
Smithism, that all lyings, and deceivings, and priestcrafts
and whoredoms shall be done away. Here is the letter:

Woe to you, priests, editors, hypocrites! You love to
publish lies to destroy the innocent. You condemn the just,
and he doth not resist you.

Read your Christian Advocate of September 15, headed
ii The Mormonsfl and tremble ; for God will not suEer such
lies to be- published with impunity. it Forf thus saith
the Lord: ii all lyings, and deceivings, and priestcrafts
and whoredoms shall be done away, and whosoever will
not repent and come unto my beloved Son, will I cut
off from among- the people, and I will execute vengeance
and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as
have not heardf '

Now, Messrs. Heath, Taylor, Blain and Philips, you
know in your own hearts that you have published lies
enough about the it Mormons ll to sink you and those who
patronize your publications to the lowest hell with murderers.

462 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

You know the people of Salt Lake to be an innocent
community, therefore, repent quickly, or your damnation is
sealed, and your hands will be found dripping with innocent blood. Yours, etc.,

P. P. PRATT.

_ A few more such will cause us to retire to private
life.—[Eda.
A CHALLENGE.

Editorls Chronicle .-—I perceive by the tone of the press
that politicians, moralists and religionists are in trouble
about Utah and Polygamy. iiWar!ll it war P if blood P and
it destructionll to the poor heathen Mormons! But, thanks
to the pious Methodists, the Mormons are going to be converted ilrst. Missionaries are going to be sent to them.

It is the right of the President of the United States to
appoint a Governor, and to send troops to Utah. The
citizens of that territory know this, and have no objections.
But suppose a Governor and troops went there to interfere with the rights and liberties of the people and trample on the laws, why then, of course, the aggressors, in
common with all others, are amenable to the civil courts,
and are liable to fine, imprisonment or execution, according
to their crimes. Even if they only threaten, they might
be bound over to keep the peace. The courts of Utah
have never yet been found remiss in the execution of the
laws.

What is the particular crime alleged against the Governor and citizens of Utah, for which they are threatened with
destruction or conversion?

We will be told it is Polygamy. Well, it sin," says the
Apostle, if is the transgression of law? We should greatly
prefer conversion to murder, and here permit me to suggest a plan for a wholesale conversion, without a drop of
blood or even the trouble of a journey to Utah.

I am here in California as an oiiicial member and rep 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 463

nesentative of the Church in Utah, for which I can produce credentials. I am willing to meet a convention of
the ablest lawyers and clergy to be found in our country,
and I hereby pledge my honor that I will publicly renounce Polygamy, and that the Church I represent will do
the same, on the following conditions, viz :

The Old and New Testaments, the Constitution and laws
of the United States, and the laws of Utah Territory
shall be their standard; and if in all this wide range one
item of law can be found wherein God, angels, men,
prophets, apostles, the Son of God or the Holy Spirit
have made plurality of wives a crime, a transgression of
law or an immorality, then, on these conditions, we will
renounce Polygamy. But till this is done we shall hold
the law of God on the subject of matrimony, including a

plurality of wives, as a most sacred institution, binding on

our own consciences, in the free exercise of which we claim
the protection so freely and fully guaranteed by the constitution of our common country.

If editors in general throughout the country will please
publish this, it may tend to investigation and enlightenment, either of the it poor, ignorant Mormonsf or of those
who think them so far out of the way.

SANTA. CLARA, November 22d, 1854. P- P- P3*TTDecember 6th.—I returned to San Francisco, and on the
second evening attended a discussion at the Mercantile
Library Association, on the subject of Governor Young,
the Utah Mormons and the general government. Spoke
several times, and was appointed to make the opening

speech in one week from that time on the same subject,
and to be answered by Rev. Mr. Briggs.

mom THE DAILY " ALTA cALuronNrA!

Mr. Parley P. Pratt, for whom we have considerable
respect as a man and as a teacher, coupled with as much

-- 464 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

admiration of his talent as the doctrines which he employs
to defend it will admit of, Mr. Parley P. Pratt appears to
have walked into the temples of our money changers in
this city, and fairly put to flight all reason and philosophy
by the boldness of his attack upon the Christian Church.

Our readers will remember Mr. Pratt as the self-confessed Apostle of Polygamic Mormonism in California», and
his last exploit was to draw upon him the {ire of a room
full of debaters in the San Francisco Mercantile Library
Association, and then commenced a bombardment of the
citadel of their reason, and silenced or rendered useless
every gun! For several weeks Mr. Pratt has been wheeling and charging his squadron of polygamic arguments in
full sight of all our church doors and lecture rooms, and
even advanced in person to the foot of our pulpits to proclaim himself the defender of a new faith, flinging the
glove even into the ministers desk.

Up to the present time, we believe, no David has gone
forth against this Philistine to meet him on either point
of law, morality or religion, which he declares himself
ready to engage an enemy upon.

We naturally ask, why is this? In a city with so
many well supported churches and able divines, can no one
be found to match this champion of the Mormons? Or
are the abhorrence and contempt of such doctrines, and
scorn of their advocates so great as to stifle the power
of expression among our worthy controversialists? Either
of these causes, we consider fallacious and bad. Passion
should play no part in the impulses of Christian minds,
and we much doubt the propriety of contemning a doctrine
because of its low origin, or despising argument because
it may not present a respectable exterior. Missionaries are
sent to the heathen; and why should discussion be denied
heathenistic doctrines when they -are brought to our own
very doors?

We have very worthy and respectable street preachers in

 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PLRLEY P. PRATT. 465

San Francisco, and we do not see how a religious discussion with a Mormon would profane the walls of ' any one
of our churches, or taint the reputation of any of our
ministers of the gospel.

Mr. Pratt seems to have the best of the law on his
side so far as the situation of the Salt Lake people is
concerned; under our territorial regulations there really
appears to be no law to prevent Polygamy.

December 9th.—Returned to Santa Clara by steamer and
stage, and found all well. '

Sunday, 10th.—Preached twice to an attentive and somewhat numerous audience in a large and commodious hall.
Visited and wrote history the four following days, and instructed such as sought me.

Friday, 15th.—Repaired again to San Francisco in company with some five of my friends, and at evening attended
the discussion. The place was crowded, and God gave me
His Spirit, and truth triumphed.

30

 

CHAPTER LI.

REPLY TO THE REV. MR. BRIGGS

Ox THE SUBJECT or ran Expnnumcr or rm: Rmrronrrnnirr or Hm
EXCI-ZLLBNCY Govxaxon Yomm, or UTAH.

Y friend, Mr. Briggs, in the fulness of his charity as

a it peacemakeril the other evening kindly, gently,

and in a Christian-like manner merely suggested a few

pious ideas concerning myself; such as theft, robbery,

murder, etc., being considered no crime by me and the

ii Mormonsf provided these crimes were committed on the
Gentiles, and in favor of the Church treasury, etc.

This puts me in mind of the good, peaceable Quaker
who said to a poor (log which he wanted killed, til will
not kill thee, but I will give thee a bad name? So he
cried, it Mad dog! Mad dog!" And on hearing this cry
the people soon despatched the poor animal.

Perhaps my friend thinks to get the Mormons killed oif
in the same pious and Christian-like manner. Even should
he succeed in his peaceful, pious purposes, it would not be
the first time that the blood of martyrs has stained our
soil through the iniiuence of such Christian benevolence.

I am truly sorry to see so worthy a fellow citizen—so
pious a ,man——one so full of charity and benevolence-—so
uninformed, so utterly at fault on the most familiar subjects of Bible history and morality, or of right and wrong,
as to insinuate that there is no difference between Polygamy
and adultery; between a house full of wives and children
and a house full of harlots.

He takes Polygamy, adultery, theft and murder, and comAUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 467

pounds them all together as crime! And then seems to
infer that a man would steal, commit adultery, etc., simply
from the fact that he has a house full of wives and
children! And even my good friend, the learned and
candid Mr. Hittell, although very just in the main drift of
his argument, the other evening seemed to recognize no
very clear distinction between Polygamy and adultery, or
between a man having his own wife or wives, or robbing
a neighbor of his wife.

Sir, in justice to myself and the cause I represent, and
in charity to those whose judgments are so warped by
tradition and custom; whose otherwise keen perceptions
are so blunted by Roman superstitions and Puritan littleness, I must call the attention of these gentlemen to the
recognized standard; of all Christian nations-—ii The law

and Testimony l'—and give them a lesson on the first prin-'
ciples of right and wrong, or of virtues and vices, according to the laws of God and nature.

I will state the question direct, as inferred or inquired,
by my friend the it peace maker? What is the diiference
between a house full of wives and children or a. house of
it ill famefl or of iiharlots W

Sir, I will tell you. The one leads to life and the other
to death»—I mean lit_erally—-or, in plainer language, one
rightly conducted, under the blessings and law of God,
multiplies, preserves and trains our species in the highest
order of physical, moral and intellectual endowment; illls
the world with cities; gives rise to nations; and has given

to the world its principal rulers, kings, prophets, apostles,°

and, finally, its Messiah, and is the lineage and order
through and in which all nations shall be blessed.

The other perverts the order of nature; prostitutes the
most holy principles and affections to the vilest of purposes; checks the reproduction of our species; spreads
disease and death as a sweeping pestilence through the
world; degenerates the race; and if it fills the world at

468 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

all, fills it with a mean, grovelling, sickly, puny, lustful,
deformed and miserable race of beings, whose misfortune
is that they were born at all.

Such were the people of the flood; the people of Sodom
and the Canaanites, who were so far degenerated that the
Lord in mercy interfered, and doomed them to utter destruction, that nations and races so degenerate should no
longer propagate their species: and then, by his own holy
laws of marriage, repeopled those same countries with a
better race.

As polygamists Abraham and Jacob were the friends of
God; were worthy to converse with Him, and to receive
His blessing on themselves and their wives and children;
worthy of associating with angels from Heaven, and of
being tilled with the holy and pure spirit of prophecy and
of revelation; while, for their sakes, kings were reproved,
saying, it touch not mine own anointed, and do my prophcts no harm?

As a polygamist Jacob gave twelve tribes to the world
instead of two, which was the number born by his first
intended, his beloved Rachel. While, on the other hand,
his sons visited a whole city with the sword, because its
ruler had seduced their sister Dinah.

As a polygamist Moses beheld the face of God, and was
filled with His glory to that degree that his face shone
like that of an angel.

As an adulterist, a prince of Israel, named Ziniri, was
killed in the very act by Phineas the priest, the grandson
of Aaron; which act of justice so pleased the Lord that
he stayed the plague which was consuming the camp on
account of their whoredoms.

The law of God regulating and sanctioning Polygamy was
thundered from Mount Sinai in awful majesty, from the
mouth of the God of Israel, although it had existed before, and also among the eternal and unchangeable principles of morality, virtue and purity.

 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 469

While, on the other hand, the same God, in a voice of
thunder, proclaimed, if Thou shalt not commit adultery, nor
covet thy neighborls wife, or anything that is thy neighborlsf

As a bigamist, Elkanah, who had two wives, became the

father of Samuel, the Prophet; he being a child of pro- ,

mise, obtained by the fervent prayer of Hannah, his
mother, in the Holy Temple, and by her vows devoted tb
the service of the Temple from his childhood. While, on
the other hand, had, he been a child of whoredoms, instead of a child of bigamy, he would have been excluded
from the house of the Lord, and his children after him,
for ten generations.

The first revelation ever given to this child of bigamy
rebuked the priests, the sons of Eli, Hophni and Phineas,
for their whoredoms and other sins, and revealed their
dooms In fulfilment of his words these two fornicators
fell in battle while bearing the very Ark of God.

As a polygamist, David, the anointed King and Prophet
of Israel, was called a man after Godls own heart; and
God himself expressly declares, by the mouth of Nathan
the Prophet, that he gave him his wives.

While, as an adulterer with the wife of Uriah, and the
murderer of her husband, he is reproved by the word of
the Lord; and, although he sorely repented, yet the child
of his adultery died; and his punishment was, that the
sword should not depart from his house; that his wives
should be taken from him and given to another; and his
own salvation was suspended for ages—the Apostle Peter
himself declaring, in his day, that the patriarch, David, had
not yet ascended into Heaven.

As polygamists, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are approved
and commended by Jesus Christ, who expressly declares
that, if many shall come from the east, and from the west,
and from the north, and from the south; and shall set
down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
God? While, at the same time, he declares that, if those

470 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

wicked and adulterous persons, who, in that age, considered
themselves the children of the kingdom, should be thrust
out." I sincerely hope my mistaken friends here will learn,
ere that eventful day, to distinguish between a house ot'
Polygamy and a crowd of adulterers; but they might by
mistake consider the kingdom of God a house of ill fame,
and go with the wrong crowd.

Sir, the Apostle Paul sets forth Abraham, the polygamist, as the father of the faithful; worthy of all imitation,
as heir of the eternal covenants and promises; in whose
seed all nations shall be blessed. He shows, most clearly,
that the gospel introduces us into the family of polygamists; makes us children of Abraham, and heirs to the
same covenants.

On the other hand, this same Apostle declares that adulterers and fornicators shall not inherit the kingdom of
God.
Again, sir, John the Revelator describes the eternal Jerusalem of Heaven, the Royal City of our God, as peopled
and governed by the great family of polygamists; which,
in its lineage, includes Jesus and the holy prophets and
apostles of all ages. The pearly gates are embellished with
the names of twelve polygamists, the sons of four women
by one man.

While, on the other hand, this same John expressly dcclares, that the place for all liars, sorcerers, whoremongers
and adulterers is outside; and that there shall in no
wise enter into the city anything that defileth or maketh
a lie. '

Now to come to Utah. There, sir, the law of God is
honored ,- by it we determine what is virtue and what is
vice. Here, sir, if nowhere else in Christendom, our vir.
tuous wives and children, given us by the law of God, are
our glory; our crown of rejoicing ; our kingdom in embryo,
big with thrones of power and immortality. There, sir,
the local administration carries out the principles of the

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. rizATT. 471

glorious Constitution and laws of our common countryeven to the protection of prophets and apostles, who have
dared to restore the Laws of God, and to organize and
regulate their household by the same. AndSir, I have yet to learn by what constitutional or moral
right a local State sovereignty makes a crime of that
which, rightly conducted, never has been recognized as a
crime by God, or angels, prophets or apostles, or even by
the Saviour of the world. .

I have yet to learn by what right a State of this
Union dooms a man to prison for a conscientious act, in
embracing the everlasting covenant, made with Abraham
and the fathers; while, at the same time, a fornicator, who
by the law of God, is worthy of death, runs at large, or,
at most, pays a fine for his damnable deeds of seduction,
and then is at liberty to repeat them, while his purse
will hold out to pay the repeated fines and damages.

I have yet to learn that a State has the constitutional
right to deprive a Mormon, a Jew, or even a Mahomedan
or Pagan of his most sacred rights of conscience in regard to marriage, relations or family ties; while they are
regulated by the recognized laws of the Bible, or of most
civilized nations of ancient and modern times.

Now, sir, let me say that, on account of the corrupt institutions, and the prevalence of whoredoms in modern
Christendom, the race is degenerated ; the cities and nations
are corrupted till earth groans; the heavens weep; the
sun will, ere long, veil his face in shame; the moon be
arrayed in crimson blushes; the starry heavens tremble;
the planets be thrown from their orbits, and tremble for
very anguish; while plagues, earthquakes, storms and tempests sweep the earth, and famine and the sword devour
the wicked; while fire consumes the mystic Babel, the
great whore of all the earth.

Then will prevail the kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ; if and the saints shall possess the

472 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PBA'.l".l.'.

kingdom and the greatness of .the kingdom under the.
whole heaven," while the meek inherit the earth; and the
house of Israel, under the new and everlasting covenant
of eternal matrimony, blossom and bear fruit, and fill the
face of the world with cities. .

Men, brethren and fathers: It is for the hope of Israel
the eternal laws, promises and covenants of God made to
the fathers, that myself and the if Mormons ii are called
in question. - H

We believe the prophets, sir, and, therefore, expect the
wreck of nations; the casting down of thrones; the crash
of states, and the winding up of all mere human institutions ; while a new dynasty, as a universal Theocracy, shall
succeed and stand forever. .

The nucleus of this kingdom, sir, is formed; this grain
of mustard seed is planted and has spmng up, and is beginning to grow and flourish in the heart of our country,
under the fostering care and constitutional guarantee of the
very best human government now existing on this earth.

Sir, God raised up the United States and influenced her
constitutional institutions for the very purpose of shielding
and protecting the church in the wilderness, and all men
in their liberties, and of throwing a guard around His embryo kingdom till He should come, whose right it is to
reign and subdue all enemies under his feet.

His kingdom, sir, when organized, in the United States, is
a constitutional kingdom of God. It has the perfect liberty
and right, guaranteed by our institutions, to organize itself
under the administration of prophets and apostles, and to
receive the ministration of angels, and of visions and revelations from Heaven.

Sir, one of the strongest reasons I urge for the reappointment of Governor Young is, that as a polygamist,
civilian and an ecclesiastic, he has given the strongest proof
of his skill in the science of government, whether of
Family, Church or State.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 473

Sunday, 17.—Met with the Saints twice, and preached to
them, and were truly blessed; and partook of the ordinance of bread and wine, in remembrance of our Lord.
Next day I repaired to Oakland and met the Lyceums,
and made arrangements for discussing polygamy on the
next evening; and, according to appointment (Tuesday, 19),
met the Lyceum and a large assembly of both sexes, and
discussed the law of marriages till eleven olclock at night.
Truth was triumphant, and my adversaries confounded.

On the last of the month we convened a General Conference at Santa Clara, of two days, during which five
branches were represented—in all about one hundred and
twenty members. We had a joyful time, much good teaching, and many out to hear.

 

CHAPTER LII.

Statements Pertaining to the History of Joseph Smith :—Return to Utah :—
Ilome Mission :—Attend the Legislature at Fillmore :—The Standard of
Zion :—Return to Salt Lake City.

February 24th.

SAT for a large likeness, taken in daguerrotype, as a

keepsake for my family, being forty-seven years ten
months and twelve days old. I presented this to my son
Parley, to be handed down from generation to generation,
as long as it will last.

In March a Council was held at my oiiiee, and it was
concluded to remove the Conference of the 6th of April
next from Santa Clara to San Francisco, where I ' also
moved my Wife and made my home during the remainder
of my mission.

April 12th.—This is my birthday._ I am forty-eight years
old. I wrote letters for home today and sent a set of
books, viz., ii Book of Mormon," it Doctrine and Covenants," ii Hymn Bookfi it Voice of Warning,ll ii Harp of
Zion/l etc., to each of my wives and to Parley, Olivia and
Moroni, my elder yhildren; also, books to my younger
children, Alma, Nephi, Heleman, Julia, Lucy, Agatha, Belinda and Abinadi, Cornelia and Malona, and small presents
and candies for the little ones, Phebe, Hannahette, Mary,
Lehi and Moroni W., all as a birthday present or memorial.

In May I received a letter from President Young counselling me to return home this coming summer.

June 8th.—The sad news reached us to-day of brother
Silas Beckwith being murdered and buried. This Beckwith

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 475

was one of the Mormon Battalion in the Mexican war, and
was, at the time of his death, a worthy member and
teacher in the San Juan branch.

I visited his widow and orphans, and spent some hours
in the house of mourning. On my second visit I gained
and wrote down the following statements pertaining to the
history of Joseph Smith:

Mrs. Eunice Corinthia Deckwith, formerly Mrs. Lawn
(whose fatherls name was Joshua Twitchell), was the widow
of John Lawn, captain of a company of Illinois Militia, of
McDonough County, who guarded Joseph and Hyrum Smith
in Carthage Jail until the morning of the day they were
martyred, when himself and company were disbanded by
order of Governor Ford, and started for home, leaving the
prisoners in the hands of the Carthage Greys.

On ta-kin g leave of the prisoners he gave his hand,
received J osephls blessing, and heard him say most
solemnly: it Farewell, Captain Lawn; when you and your
men leave me my life guard is gone." Previous to this,
however, Joseph had read to him the fifty-fifth Psalm, and
told him to remember that chapter and read it to his
friends when he arrived home. One of the Carthage Greys
also read in reply the sixty-first Psalm.

Captain Lawn and his troops had marched about twelve
miles towards home when the news reached them of the
martyrdom! At this he exclaimed: it O that I had known
of this massacre, so soon to transpire! I would have remained, and, when the first ball was fired at the Smiths,
I would have fired the second through the body of the
villain who tired it or died in the attempt?

A man named Townsend; living in Iowa, near Fort Madison, was one of the mob who assaulted and forced in
the jail door. The pistol discharged by Joseph Smith
wounded him in the arm, near the shoulder, and it continued to rot without healing until it was taken off, and
even then it would not heal.

476 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY r. PRATT.

About six months after he was shot Mrs. Lawn saw
his arm and dressed it. He was then gradually rotting
and dying with the wound. He staid over night with
Mrs. Lawnls father, and groaned through the night without sleeping. _He asked the old gentleman what he thought
of Joseph Smith being a Prophet! He replied that he
did not know. if Wellf said Townsend, it I know he was
a Prophet of God! And, oh, that I had staid at home
and minded my own business, and then I would not have
lost my life and been tormented with a guilty conscience,
and with this dreadful wound, which none can heal Pl He
died two or three months afterwards, having literally rotted alive!

James Head, of McComb, was also one of the murderers
at the Carthage Jail; he was heard by Captain Lawn and
others to boast of it afterwards, and Captain Lawn drew
a pistol and chased him; but he ran away. He was
always gloomy and troubled from the time he helped to
murder the Smiths, and frequently declared that he saw
the two martyrs always before him! He had no peace.

A colonel of the Missouri mob, who helped to drive,
plunder and murder the Mormons, died in the hospital at
Sacramento, 1849. Beekwith had the care of him; he was
eaten with worms—a large black headed kind of maggotwhich passed through him by myriads, seemingly a half
pint at a time! Before he died these maggots were crawling out of his mouth and nose! He literally rotted alive!
Even the flesh on his legs burst open and fell from the
bones! They gathered up the rotten mass in a blanket
and buried him, without awaiting a coiiin!

A Mr. —, one of Missouri mob, died in the same hospital about the same time, and under the care of Mr.
Beckwith. His face and jaw on one side literally rotted,
and half of his face actually fell off ! One eye rotted out,
and half of his nose, mouth and jaw fell from the bones!
The doctor scraped the bones, and unlocked and took out

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY r. PRATT. 477

his jaw from the joint round to the centre of the chin.
The rot and maggots continued to eat till they ate through
the large or jugular vein of his neck, and he bled to
death! He, as well as Townsend, stank so previous to
their death that they had to be placed in rooms by themselves, and it was almost impossible to endure their presence, and the flies could not be kept from blowing them
while alive!

Wm. T. Head, an oilicer in Captain Lawn's company,
and tarrying in Carthage, testified that he saw a certain
man raise a large knife to strike off the head of Joseph,
when, all at once, and in the midst of a clear day, with
no cloud in sight, if a terrible clap of thunder rolled heavily, and forked lightnings flashed in the face of the murderers, and perfectly paralyzed a number of them.

" The ruiiian, who had raised his knife and had sworn
with a dreadful oath to take the head off Joseph, stood
perfectly paralyzed, his arm uplifted with the knife suspended in air, and could not move a limb. His comrades
carried him off, and all fled in terror from the scenef

These particulars, and many others, were related to me
by brother Beckwith previous to his death, and afterwards
by his widow and father-in-law, and others who were
conversant with them, and are believed. to be correct.

At a General Conference, held June 16—being the eve
of my departure—it was the unanimous voice of the meeting to give me a letter of commendation and fellowship
from the Conference to the Presidency of the Church in
Utah. Elder J. Crosby was set apart as President of the
San Francisco Conference, under my hands and others.

I gave them a few words of farewell and blessing, and
returned them my sincere thanks for their many marks of
kindness and hospitality to me and my wife while we sojourned with them; and I shall long remember the many
brethren who have generously assisted me with means
whereby I am enabled to pursue my journey home.

478 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

While on this mission I have been diligent in preaching, teaching, baptizing, visiting and ministering to the
sick, and writing for the press. I feel the Saints have
rejoiced under my teachings, and a goodly number have
been added to the Church.

June 20th.—I took leave of the Saints and friends at San
Francisco and started at noon, with my team, for my
home in Utah; crossed the ferry at Oakland ten miles on
a steamer, and drove twenty-live miles and stopped after

sundown at brother Nailels, near San Jose. After resting
a few days, and all being ready, we started from Dr.
Mclntyrels at nine oteloek A. M., with a company composed of

seven men, two women and one child, five wagons and
sixteen animals. I thanked God that, after thirteen months
and a few daysl absence, I was now ready to return to my
home in the peaceful valley of the Great Salt Lake.

August 18th.—After a long and wearisome journey of
some eight hundred miles we arrived safely home, and rejoiced to find all well.

Sunday, 19th.—I met the great congregation twice in the
Tabernacle and bowery; heard Orson Pratt and President
B. Young preach, "and spoke a few words myself. In the
evening met with the Quorum of the Twelve for prayer,
as usual.

On Monday I visited my wife Sarah and her two children, Julia and Teaneum, who resided on my farm ;. and,
from this date until the Conference of October 6th, my
time was engaged in the care and labors of my family,
and other duties, although I attended Sabbath meetings,
and sometimes preached.

The Conference appointed my brother Orson, and brother
Woodruff, and myself, with upwards of twenty others, to
a home mission in Utah Territory.

After Conference I spent my time mostly in the House
of the Lord, in administering in the endowments, until the
20th of October.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PLRLEY r. PRATT. 479

October 15th, Monday.—Agreeable to instructions from
President Young I called a meeting of a few of the
Twelve, and others concerned in the mission, and divided
the territory into missionary districts, and assigned to each
his labor, appointing Conferences, or general meetings in
each district.

Saturday, 20th.—Commenced my home mission by riding
seventeen miles to attend a general meeting in company
with O. Pratt, VV. W'oodruff and others, at Farmington,
Davies County. Good attendance and spirited preaching
on this day three times. Tarried at sister Haightls.

Sunday, 21st.—At half past eight olclock, A. M., held a _

council of the missionaries of the district, and appointed
the next quarterly meeting for the districts, to be held in
Bishop Stokerls ward on the 18th of November next, and
the second to be held December 15th, at ten oleloek, in
Bishop Kayls ward.

This day we held three meetings, which were well
attended, and greatly blessed with the spirit and power
of God. _

Monday, 22d.—Returned home and found all well.

November 1st.—Started with my carriage, accompanied by
my wife Belinda and child, my brother Orson Pratt and
VV. Vi-'oodrulf, and arrived at Ogden on the following day
at eleven olclock, A. M., and put up at President Farris.
Preached in the meeting house three times. The night
following a dreadful wind arose, which did some damage.
After travelling and preaching through the northern settlements nearly two weeks to large assemblies, who listened
with good attention, we returned home and found all
well.

Saturday, 17th.—Rode ten miles in my carriage with my
wife Mary, and brethren O. Pratt and VV. Vi". VVoodruif, to P. Sessionsl, and met with the Saints in a
Quarterly Conference.

Sunday, 18th.—Met a crowd out of doors, on the south

430 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

side of the school-house, at Bishop Stokerls. I preached in
the forenoon, and brothers Joseph Young and Erastus
Snow in the afternoon. Many were out and the good
spirit prevailed.

Next morning returned home and found all well.

December 3d.—Bid farewell to my family and started in
my carriage with Agatha, my wife, and O. Pratt and W.
W. Phelps as passengers, for the city of Fillmore, to attend the Legislative Assembly.

Friday, 7 th.—A1-rival at Fillmore at 1 P. M. in a heavy
snow storm. Put up with brother Bridges.

Sunday, 9th.—Attendcxl meeting twice. Preached in the
morning and listened to O. Pratt in the afternoon.

Monday, 10th.—Attended the council of the Legislature
and witnessed the organization, and was unanimously
elected chaplain of the council. "Accepted and was sworn,
and entered upon my duties, being charged by the
President, Hon. H. C. Kimball, to instruct and exhort the
members and others in their duties. I prepared an address on the laws of marriage and morals, which was delivered to the council on the twenty-first. This was so
favorably received that the Governor and President called
for the reading of it before the joint session. It was accordingly read by the clerk on the thirty-first of December. On motion, it was unanimously voted to have it
printed in the Deseret News ,- and, on motion, a vote of
thanks was carried unanimously.

January 1st, 1856.

Wrote a letter to the New York Herald, and, in the
evening, attended a dance in the Legislative Hall. It was
a line party, where old and young engaged in the dance
till near midnight.

From this time till the adjournment of the Legislative
Assembly nothing worthy of record transpired.

 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PABLEY P. PRATT. 481

THE STANDARD OF ZION.

0, Saints, have you soon, o'er you mountain's proud height,
The day star of promise so brilliantly beaming ?
Its rays shall illumine the world with its light,
And the ensign of Zion, exultingly streaming,
All nations invite to walk in its light,
And join to maintain the proud standard of rightThe Standard of Zion, 0 long may it wave
Oler the land of the £ree and the home of the brave!

Our motto is peace, and the triumph of right;
And we joyfully hail the Millennial dawning,
When man can emerge from a long dreary night
And bask in the sunboams of Zion's bright morning. g
The white flag so rare, still floating in air,
Proclaims 'mid the mountains that peace is still there. *Let the Standard of Zion eternally wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave.

Though earth and its treasures should melt in the fireThe planets be riven with the trumpets' loud thunder,
The sunlight of Heaven wax dim and expire,
And the veil of eternity parted asunder,
Yet firm and unshaken the truth shall remain,
And the heirs of the priesthood forever shall reign,
And the Standard of Zion eternally wave
Oler the land of the free and the home of the brave.

Fxumoas Couxcn. Cmuuana, January 8, 1856.

Tuesday, 15th.—I attended a festival of the Legislature
in the State House, where all were treated to abundance
of oysters, fruits, wines, etc., by the Hon. Secretary
Babbitt.

Friday, 18th.—The Legislature adjourned and all started
for home. We travelled about forty»five miles-—some of
the distance in about eight inches of snow—and camped
at night in a point of cedars. The cold was extreme,
but we emptial our carriage and kept a constant lire in
the stove. Sat up through the night, as there was not

room for all to lie down, and thus we passed the night..

31

432 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY UP. PRATT. ,

19th.—Rode twenty miles to breakfast; arrived in Nephi about ten olclock, nearly frozen; but a good breakfast and three_ hours rest revived us, and we started
again at 1 P. M. and rode to Payson, a distance of
twenty-five miles, and were kindly received by brother
Donich.

20th.—Started at ten A. M. Rode to Provo and dined
at brother Stewartls. Rode ten miles more, and were
entertained by Bishop Walker, of Pleasant Grove.

21st.—R0de thirty-five miles and dined at the Bishopls,
Unionville, and arrived home at sundown; found all my
family in tolerable health except my little daughter
Isabel, who had been sick with a fever and cold on the
lungs. I ministered to her and she speedily recovered.

Friday, 25th.—Spent the day with my family, and in a
meeting with a chartered company, called the Deserct
Road and Express Company, of which I was a member.

Saturday, 26th, and from thence to February 14th was
spent with my family, and in preaching occasionally in
the Tabernacle and in the different wards in the city.
Also in the oiiice of juryman on the Grand Jury of the

United States Court.
Tuesday, March 4th.—Attcndcd at the President's office

in the duty as a Regent of the University.

Neit day attended at the Presidentls oiiice as a Committee of the Regency in raising school books.

Thursday, 6tb.—Myself and family fasted and attended
meeting in the fourteenth ward school-house, and at evening visited at brother Southworthis, and attended another
meeting in the ward.

Having been elected a delegate of Salt Lake County to
a Convention called by the people of the Territory of Utah,
to form a Constitution for the State of Deseret, I attendal the daily sessions of the Convention for ten days,
ending March 27, 1856. My time, after the adjournment
of said Convention, was devoted to laboring on the farm,

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or P.uz_Lm' P. PRATT. ' 483

garden, and administering in the various duties of my
calling, writing history, etc., until the Semi-annual Conference, which convened April 6th and closed on the 8th.
This Conference was held under a bowery adjoining the
Tabernacle, and was attended by six or eight thousand
people. At this Conference several hundred persons were
called to go on missions to the United States, England,
Australia, the Sandwich Islands and other parts of the
earth. The Presidency enjoined upon me the duty of
setting apart and ordaining those who were called for
their several missions, in which I was assisted by the rest
of the Twelve and some of the Presidents of Seventies.

About this period, or immediately after Conference, I
was taken sick with a fever and came nigh unto death,
which sickness continued about two weeks.

Mary 26th.—Accompanied by Elder Gates I started on a
mission of preaching, visiting and instructing the Saints
in the southern part of the Territory; d1u'ing which tour
we held meetings at Union Fort, American Fork, Pleasant
Grove, Provo, Payson, Summit, Nephi, Fillmore. Beaver,
Paragona, Parawan, Cedar City and Harmony.

On my return to Salt Lake City called and preached
at the different towns and settlements on the route, arriving home June 27, 1856.

While at home my time was occupied in attending meetings, instructing and speaking words of comfort and encouragement to the Saints, and writing my history, assisted
by my wife Kezia, as copyist.

     
  

~t 1_ u A. . H- 7- . -. -. ~——E>\ I  ~rv.- \ at
t" 1'-'.g_ .' " *7,-":)T"—: kt:-""5\ 3.wE\ 

, . _ ,._.__

 r-' . 3* t. .
  '-"F1"-.-.- .-..--g:---- \  -52*: —
'_ "' 'fmc¥ n n -I '. \- . _ . *_'

  
  

CHAPTER LIII.

JOURNAL 01" EASTERN MISSION.

URING the summer, after my return from the South,

I performed several home missions or preaching tours

through Davis, Weber and Box Elder Counties, and in September receivexi an appointment to take a mission to the

States, for which I received the following letter of appointment:
UTAH TERRITORY, PRESIDENTS OFFICE, }
GREAT SALT LARE CITY, Sept. 10, 1856.

ELDER PARLEY P. PRATT.

Dear Brothcr—As you are about to leave on your
mission to the States, we feel to give you a word of
counsel for your guidance.

We expect that your principal occupation will be to
travel and preach the gospel in different places, as you
shall be led by the spirit of the Lord.

We are informed that there is quite a large number of
Saints in the southwestern part of Virginia, which it is
our wish you shall visit and instruct in the principles of
the gospel.

Owing to the extra duties of delegate being placed upon
brother John Taylor, it is suggested that you also aid him
in writing for The Mormon, and such other duties as
may devolve upon you by the united counsel of brethren
now in charge on that mission. ,

As you are expected to return the ensuing season, we
do not consider that it would be wisdom for you to have

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 435

the burden of the mission to rest upon you, but rather
that you should aid the brethren for the brief period
which you will remain with them.

If brother Snow should be able to resume The Luminary, we should be pleased to have you assist him also in
writing for that publication.

We believe that, by thus devoting your time during the
ensuing winter, you will render the brethren now upon
that mission effective aid, and be a comfort and consolation to the brethren and Saints who shall have the pleasure of your ministerial administrations, and be blest with
your society in this your short visit to the Saints in the
States; and that the Lord will bless you abundantly with
His spirit, and enable you to perform your mission with
honor and satisfaction to yourself, and His divine acceptance, is the prayer of

Your brethren in the Gospel of Christ,

Bmarum YOUNG,
HEBER C. KIMBAIL,
J. M. GRANT,
First Presidency of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-Day Saints.

After receiving the foregoing appointment my time was
employed chieliy in settling up my business and preparing
for the journey eastward.

Sqotcmbcr 7, 1856.—I preached my farewell discourse in
the Tabernacle, in which I bore testimony to the Book of
Mormon and of the calling of Joseph Smith, and of his
Presidency and Apostleship. At noon, the same day, gave
instructions and strict charge to my son, Parley P., concerning my business, and the duties that would devolve
upon him in my absence.

At 5 P. M. met with my quorum in prayer, in which
President Young and others laid their hands upon my
head and set me apart for my mission to the States486 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

confirming and scaling upon my head all the keys and
powers of the eternal priesthood, so far as they were held
upon the earth—ii and that "I should always be numbered
among those that were faithful to the priesthood, both in
this life, in the world of spirits and in the resurrection?

September 11.—Bid farewell to my family and friends
and started on my eastern mission in company with several
Elders and friends, who were going to the States. We
met, on the journey across the plains, several companies,
chiefly from Europe. Some of them were companies traveling with 0:: teams, and several hand cart companies. The
first hand cart company we met was near Green River,
which consisted of two hundred and thirty men, women
and children. These had crossed the plains from Iowa
City-—some 1,200 miles—the women as well as men drawing hand carts and the children walking. They had travelled twenty miles a day and sometimes' more. Their
faces were much sunburnt and their lips parched; but
cheerfulness reigned in every heart, and joy seemed to
beam on every countenance. The company gathered around
us and I.trie<l to address them, observing that this was
a new era in American as well as Church history; but
my utterance was choked, and I had to make the third
trial before I could overcome my emotions. We passed on,
nothing worthy of note occurring until we arrived at Fort
Kearney.

October 17 .—We arrived at Fort Kearney; here the
death of A. W. Babbitt, and others with him, was confirmed. The commanding oiiicer of the fort came to me
and said that he had an account of Babbittls death from the
Indians themselves; and that he had obtained his papers
and accounts, which he would deliver to Babbittls wife, if
she would come. We pursued our long and wearisome
journey through Iowa and Illinois. On the way we saw
Xauvoo and the ruins of the Temple in the distance.
This called up reflections which I will not attempt to de 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 487

scribe. I thought of the Temple and city in their glory;
of the twenty thousand Saints once busy there; of the
vast congregations once assembled there in prayer and
praise; of the martyred Prophets and Saints; of the
wholesale murder and plunder perpetrated by ruthless
mobs. I thought of my once happy but now fallen country. I greatly desired relief by tears, but tears would not
come to my relief. I felt too deeply; but I felt some relief in assuring myself that at last justice would triumph
and righteousness reign.

November 18.—We landed in St. Louis after a long and
toilsome journey of over two months. Here I remained,
attending public meetings with the Saints; visiting, instructing, writing history, and writing for The Mormon,
then published by Elder John Taylor in New York; visiting and preaching at several places in Missouri and Illinois, until the 16th of December, when I left St. Louis for
New York—travelling by railroad. I stopped at Cincinnati,
where I arrived at 4 A. M. on the 17th. Here I found
some Saints, who took me and my baggage, and extended
to me the hospitality of their homes. I remained in Cincinnati, preaching, conversing with the Saints and others,
writing correspondence for The Mormon, history, etc.,
until the 22d, when I took leave of the Saints and
started by railway for Philadelphia, where I arrived
on the 24th—mcctin g there President John Taylor and
other brethren, who kindly greeted me. Here I remained preaching, visiting, conversing, writing history, corresponding with Tho Mormon, etc., until the 31st, when I
took the 10 A. M. train for New York, where I safely
landed the same day—thus closing another year of my
changeful, varied and eventful life. It leaves me among
strangers, and yet in my own native State—a pilgrim and
almost a stranger in the very city where, twenty years
ago, I labored, toiled, prayed, preached, wrote and published the message of eternal truth.

438 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Oh, how darkness prevails! How ignorant, blind and impenetrable are the minds of men! My Father in Heaven,
Thy will be done. As a blank of another year of my life
is about to commence to be filled up, I will close the volume of the book I have been writing, commending myself
to God and the guardianship of his angels; asking, in the
name of Jesus Christ, that my sins and follies, up to this
date, may be blotted out, and that my labors and records
may be accepted; then I will retire to rest with a conscience void of offence, and with a calm and resigned confidence in my Heavenly Father. If I am privileged to
awake in the morning of a new year, I will commence a
new book or volume of my life.

January 1st, 1857 .--Thank God for a new year and for
the preservation of my life and health. Spent the day in
visiting with President Taylor and others, and at 5 P. M.
repaired to the Latter-Day Saints Hall, where I met with
some four hundred persons, mostly members of the Church,
in a public party.

Judge Appleby called the meeting to order; I opened
by prayer. President Taylor made a few remarks, after
which there were songs, recitations, speeches, and amusements of various kinds, refreshments, etc., which lasted till
eleven dclock, alter which I addressed them, bearing testimony of the restoration of the priesthood and gospel by
Joseph Smith; was followed by President Smith and Taylor. While in this party we received news of the safe
landing of two hundred and twenty Saints from Europe on
the ti Columbiall My time was occupied in visiting the
Saints, meeting in Council with the brethren, writing, etc.,
until the 5th, when I met in the evening with brothers
Taylor, Smith, Snow and Appleby in Council at brother
Taylorls residence. After opening by prayer I was chosen
to preside, and brother Appleby acted as clerk. Brother
Snow made a statement in relation to the financial condition of the emigration under his agency. We agreed to

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 489

make this a matter of prayer, and to solicit and influence
means into that channel as far as possible. At 7 P. M.
brother Taylor having furnished an upper room in his
residence, the before-named persons, five in number, met
in a room for prayer, in which we humbled ourselves and
called on the Lord for remission of our sins and the light
of the Spirit of God to guide us in our several duties.
W'e also asked for means, and for our way to be opened
up to enable us in all things to magnify our callings;
dedicating ourselves renewedly to the service of God. After
this we continued in Council until a late hour.

January 6th.—I visited Mr. George W. Pratt, No. 89 Gold street, on the subject of genealogy—he being the son of
Zadoc Pratt, ex-Member of Congress, and descended from
the same parentage as myself, our progenitors being among
the early settlers of the New England Colonies. I conversed with him very agreeably for half an hour, and
learned that he was in correspondence with brother Orson,
in Liverpool, on the subject of our ancestry in England.

January 7 th.—I was in council all day at brother Taylorls residence with the brethren of the Twelve. We resolved to concentrate our energies this year in forming settlements on or near the Platte River, on the route of our
emigration, according to the instructions of President Young.
We voted that the Mormon be continued, and that it is
not expedient for brother Snow to resuscitate the 1 Imminary at present. Next day bid farewell to the brethren,
and took the train for Trenton, N. J. Here I was kindly
received by brother Hurdley and family, where I remained
for two days, the weather being very cold.

Saturday, 10th.—Joseph Asay came with a carriage and
conveyed me about four miles into the country to his house.
This day I completed a communication for the Mormon on
spiritual communication in modern times.

Sunday, 11th.—Preached to a small congregation in a
school house, and returned with brother Asay and spent

490 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

the evening in instruction—several of the Saints from Trenton being there. Spent the time writing, visiting and conversation with the friends here until the 14th, when I took
leave of my kind friends in Trenton; taking the cars for
Tacony, where I arrived at noon, went to sister Conradls,
where I was received with every conceivable kindness.
After dinner preached to them and read the revelation on
marriage. God blessed me to open their understandings,
teaching -things of the kingdom. Here I wrote a communication for the Mormon called the it Looking-glass ;" conversed with and instructed the family on many things.

Saturday, 17 th.—Returned to Philadelphia and stayed at
brother Harmerls; received this evening letters from home,
dated November 4th, at which time several of my family
were sick. I invoked the blessing of God upon them that
they might be healed and comforted.

Sunday, 18th.—Though the wind was very high and extremely cold, attended with a severe snow storm, I repaired
to meeting and preached to a few in the morning, and at
night attended meeting again in our own hall, the Spirit
of God being among the Saints in the meeting.

Monday, 19th.—Sti1l being very snowy, cold and windy,
remained at the house of brother Harmer and wrote to my
family.

Sunday, 20th.—Railroad travel being obstructed by drifts
of snow, I visited at Peter Rensimerls; stayed all night
and talked to him, his wife and others, till a late hour.

On the next day wrote a poem on it My Fiftieth Yearf
which was responded to by John Taylor, both of which
were published in the Mormon at New York! Returned
to Tacony in the evening and repaired to the house of
sister Conrad; the family came together and I taught them
the gospel. Next day visited with the family, taught them
and some of their friends who came in, the principles of
the gospel.

' These poems will be found in the latter part of this work.

 

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT. 491

Thursday, 24th.—Bade farewell to my kind friends in
Tacony, took the train for Philadelphia, where I arrived
at halffpast nine. Attended the Saints meetings at Washington Hall three times this day; addressed the people
morning and evening; communed with them; heard their
testimony in the afternoon. We were blessed through the
day with the Spirit of God and had much joy.

February 1st.—Attended meetings three times in Washington Hall, Philadelphia. Preached in the morning repentance to the Saints and preparation for the great restoration. In the evening preached on the Resurrection to a
crowded house, and bid the Saints farewell.

Tuesday, 3d.-—Wrote, visited sister Fenton, and there spent
the evening in an agreeable company of some fifteen of the
Saints. We sang and prayed, feasted and rejoiced, and
taught them as we were led by the Spirit. Elder Angus
M. Cannon being with me in this and nearly all my visitings and meetings in this city. A happier companion is
seldom found.

Wednesday, 4th.—Spent the evening at a tea party; at
ten olclock we sang, ff When shall we all meet againlll etc.
Knelt down and prayed. This was my farewell of Philadelphia and the Eastern States. I then took a final
leave of the Saints, and, accompanied by Elder Cannon,
started for the railway. Here I met with brother and
sister Beers, and some others who had come to see me
off. I took the train for Pittsburg, where I safely arrived
February 5, at 2:30 P. M. Took the train at three for
Mansfield, Ohio, where I landed safely at 1:30 next moming. Stayed at a hotel, and on the 6th took train at
12 M. and arrived at Hanover, Huron County, Ohio,
at 4 P. M. Here a neighbor volunteered to carry me
half a mile to my brother, Nelson Prattls. We were overjoyed to see each other after twenty-one years absence.
He had a wife and three children living,  a son,
Edwin Delano Pratt, aged twenty years; and two daugh492 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

ters, Helen Orisa, aged fourteen, and Aurelia Fenettn, aged
twelve years. Remained and visited with my brother and
family; talked, read, reasoned, etc., until the 11th, when
I had a call from a young school teacher named Pratt,
perhaps a distant relative, who had a spirit of inquiry
and was teachable. We conversed much, and I lent him
some books. As he and others were soliciting a meeting,
I finally consented to appoint one for Thursday evening
at the school house near my brotherls. In fuliilment of
this appointment I preached to a large congregation in a
capacious school house.

Friday, 13th.——At noon took leave of my brother Nelson
and his family, who accompanied me to the railroad station, and bid me an affectionate farewell. This night,
about eight olclock, the locomotive ran over and killed a
horse, and was thrown off the track with a number of
cars, some of which were broken. By this accident we
were hindered some six hours, during which time we sat
in the cars and slept as best we could. Arrived in Columbus, Ohio, at 4 A. M. Here we stopped and slept at
a hotel until 9 A. M. At 1 P. M. started for Cincinnati, where I arrived at dark, and was kindly received
by brother Meriweather and family.

Sunday, 15th.—Met with the Saints three times; taught
them repentance and reformation of life: stayed at brother
Walkerls.

Monday, 16th.—In the evening Mr. Alberger and Dr. Darling called to see me, and spent the evening in conversation ou the various phenomena of Spiritualism. Mr. Alberger related to me the circumstances of the introduction of
a secret order, called the Patriarchal Order, which order,
he said, was introduced by spirits in Cincinnati a short
time previously by means of a stone, with a new alphabet
and a key to read the same. He also made me a present
of the stone, or rather a pattern of the same in plaster
of Paris, with the alphabet thereon and key to read the

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 493

same. Also a printed pamphlet containing the ceremonies
of the it Patriarchal Order? and the forms of initiation of
members into the same, with a request that I would take
them to Salt Lake and exhibit them to the Council there.

The following day, wrote an article for the Cincinnati
Gazette, in defence of Utah. In the evening met with the
the Saints, and preached at Thos. Shorels. The next day
was very rainy; visited at brother Mei-iweatherls, and
found brother Geo. A. Smith there, just arrived from Virginia. He had spent some time in Washington City, in
company with John Taylor, who was one of the delegation, but as no encouragement was given for the admission of Utah at the present session, the petition was withdrawn.

Friday, 20th.—Wrote for The Mormon, visited with brother
Smith, etc. My communication to the Cincinnati. Gazette
in defence of Utah, appeared in this dayls paper. We
mailed several copies of the paper to the members of
Congress, and to The Mormon.

Sunday, 22d.—Attended at Melodian Hall at 10:30 A. M.,
and heard an excellent discourse from Elder G. A. Smith.
At 2:30 P. M. I preached on first principles, and in the
evening met the Saints at brother Shords, and reorganized
the Cincinnati Branch. Elder Joseph Bean was unanimously chosen to preside, and was ordained a High Priest
under the hands of G. A. Smith and myself. Brother Benjamin E. Styles was reappointed clerk. At ten olclock we
sung it When shall we all meet againil

We appointed and set apart brother D. O. Ridout to a
mission in southwestern Virginia We blessed and administered to several. A man named James Raliston came
to us and expressed his faith in the gospel as he had
heard us preach it the day before. Many of the Saints
now gathered in to see us, and contributed means to help
us, and manifested their love in every way that was in
their power. We bid them farewell about 2 P. M., and

 

 

494 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

took the train for St. Louis, at which place we arrived
safely about midnight.

Tuesday, 24th.—Called and stayed at brother Boardmanis.
Here, for the first time, heard of the sudden and unexpected
death of President J. M. Grant, who died. in Salt Lake
City, in November last. He was a great and good man,
called away in the full vigor of manhood. He has gone to
his rest, but we are left to mourn.

Wednesday, 25th.—On repairing to the omce found letters
from home, also one from sister Ruth Sayers, who crossed
the plains. with us on our outward trip from Salt Lake
City. I also read in the Western Standard, a paper published by George Q. Cannon in California, a confirmatory
account of the death of President J. M. Grant. We found
the Saints in St. Louis well and prosperous. After spending some time in the oliice in council I repaired to brother
RestelPs, and was kindly received by sister Restell and sister
Pollard. This night I was taken very sick.

March 1st.—I found myself quite well again, and, being

Sunday, I met with the Saints three times and had good
attendance. I preached in the forenoon, and Erastus Snow
and others in the afternoon. We had Sacrament, and the
gift of the Holy Ghost was upon us. Brother Snow spake
by it in great wisdom.

The spirit of reformation is abroad in the St. Louis
branch, but the adversary also has a great hold there.

Monday, 2d.—VVe met with the Saints and assisted President Snow to confirm twenty-nine souls, who were baptized
in the font there. At 7 P. M. the same evening met

with the brethren in council.
Much instruction was given to the Elders by Presidents

Snow, Smith and myself.
Tuesday, 3d.—Assisted President Snow at the oliice, on
the Deseret alphabet, etc.

The above is the last extract from the journal of President Parley P. Pratt.

 

 

CHAPTER LIV.

Family Letters :—" My Fiftieth Year :"—RespOnse by John Taylor.

NEW YORK, January 3d, 1857.

Y DEAR SON PABLEY: I am well; how are you!
Please write and let me know. I long to see and
hear from you.

I am getting along very comfortably. You will see by
the enclosed how if Mormonism " keeps printers and editors
busy. Give my best love to all the family, and especially to the children. Remember me to Olivia and Maroni. Do the best you can for me and my family, and
try to get a good education; and try by prayer and
doing right to cultivate an acquaintance with the Spirit
of the Lord. '

Read the enclosed letter to the family, and then have
it carefully laid away as a part Of my history.

Now, my son, farewell.
God bless you. Amen.
Your affectionate father,

P. P. PRATT.

A NEW YORK, January 3d, 1857.
MY DEAR FAMILY:

A happy New Year to each of you. I am well. I
spent Christmas in Philadelphia in a public party of the
Saints—-say 300 persons—assembled in a large hall neatly
furnished and lighted. There were prayers, hymns, songs,
recitations, comic, tragic, sublime and ridiculous. There

496 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

was some music and dancing, merry making, eating and
drinking till midnight. I did not dance, but I preached
and bore testimony. ~

On the following Sunday I preached twice in the same
hall, some 500 persons being present.

On Wednesday, December 31st, I arrived in this city
and put up with President John Taylor. This closed the
year 1856.

January 1st, 1857 .—I attended a public party of the
Saints here from 5 P. M. till midnight. It was like
the one in Phi1adelphia—-only there was no dancing.
About 400 persons were present. During this party the
news arrived of the landing of 220 Saints at Castle
Garden direct from Europe, all in good health and
spirits. These we visited next day in company with
Presidents Taylor, G. A. Smith, and E. Snow, who are
here now, and we shall hold a council. The Saints here
are mostly emigrants from Europe and very poor. I am
now well clothed, and God has opened my way to obtain suiiicient funds for travelling expenses.

A letter from my brother Nelson announces that all is
well there, and they are overjoyed to hear that I am to
visit them. He is trying to sell and go to the valley.

Brother Orson writes to me that all is well with him.

I have gone as far East as I intend to go. I hope
soon to commence to return westward, visiting my brother
Nelson as I go. The darkness which broods over this
country can be felt—it is no place for me. I feel like
going to the frontiers and fitting out as soon as grass
grows.

The whole country is being overwhelmed with the most
abominable lying, mockery, and hatred of the Saints, and
with all manner of corruption. The legions of spirits
are let loose and are working wonders. All things are
ripen ih g for a universal overthrow of all human power in
this land.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT. 497

I am almost an intruder wherever I go. I am a
stranger and the world knows me not. There are a few
of the Saints and others who will hear us, and not ex, actly demand a vote of thanks, although some of them

would think it a great condescension for which we ought
to thank them.

0, God, let me retire from such a generation into dens,

caves, deserts, mountains—an3gchere. But I will say no
more about them. I feel for my family and pray for
them continually. I hope they with me may have grace
to endure to the end, and be saved in the kingdom of
God. _
My history is mostly completed. It will probably not
be published in my day. Should anything happen to
me, and the record be preserved, I wish it carefully compiled, copied, and taken care of.

O I I I I I I

My feelings, and the affections of my heart, I will not
attempt to describe, but will express them in person
when I return. Should I never return, he assured they
are as warm and as tender as ever, and I think a little
more so. .

I hope you will not be cast down or borrow any
trouble about me because I admit an if, as to my safe
return. I have no doubt but that I shall return in
safety and live to a good old age. But still I must acknowledge that I do anticipate with a great deal of
pleasure the change of worlds. And, every day that I
work on my history, I naturally think that the word jimls
will soon be added to the end. ' ' * *

Write when you can via California and Panama. Now
God bless and preserve you all, even to little Mathoni.

Amen.
Yours ever,

P. P. PRATT...

To my wife HANNAHETTE and others.
32

 

 

498 AUTOBIOGRAPHY or PARLEY P. PRATT.

MY FIFTIETH YEAR.

I AM tiny years old! I have lived to see
Seven times seven and a Jubilee.
That period famed in the days of yore J
As a grand release for the humble poor;
When the pledgld estate was again restorid,
And the bondman freeid from his tyrant lord.
When man his fellow was bound to forgive,
And begin anew to think and to live.
The nations have hailld the year of my birth
As a Jubilee to the groaning earth!
The triumphs of steam over land and sea
Have stampid the age of my Jubilee.
I have markld its progress at eviry stride,
From the day it was launchid on the Hudsonis tide
Till it conquerld the ocean—graspid the land,
And joinid the world in a common band.
I have livid to behold the lightnings yield
To the mandate of man, and take the field,
As a servant-runner to bear the news
In an instant, where its lord might choose.

And, scarce less strange, I have livid to behold
A Mormon Sage, with his wand of gold,
Overturn the world, and toss it up
As a teller of Fortunes would his cup.f
All these are facts; but of little worth,
Compared with a Prophet restored to earth.
I have seen his day and have heard his voice,
Which enraged a world, while the meek rejoice.
i I have read the fate of all earthly things:
The end of thrones, and the end of kings.

* The first steamboat was launched in 1817, on the Hudson River, by Robert Fulton.

1' An American soldier, of the Mormon Battalion, discovered the gold mines in Calltornla in 1847.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

I have learned that truth alone shall stand,
And the Kingdom of God fill every land.

I have seen that Kingdom rolling along,

And taking its seat lmid the mountains strong;
While the nations wondered, but could not tell
To what these wondrous things would swell.

I have wandered far, over land and sea,

To proclaim to the world its destinyTo cry to the nations, repent and live,

And be ready the bridegroom to receive.

I have wandered far—I have wandered wide,

From Maine to the wild Missourils tide;

And over the Atlanticls sea-girt isles

Full many a weary thousand miles.

I have trampled the deserts burning sands
And the snow-clad mountains of unknown lands.
lMid the crystal waters of Deseret

I have pulled the oar and cast the net.

I have climbed the steeps lmid the golden ore,
And roamed der the lone Paciilc shore.

I have ploughed its bosom many a day

To visit the nations far away.

I have stood on Chilils distant shore,

Where the Polar Star is seen no more.

I have gazed on the Andes heights of snow,
And roamed lmid the new-ery3p1eins below.

I have toiled with the great in freedomls cause,
And assisted to give to a State its laws.

I have lain in a dungeon, bound in chains,

And been honored in Courts where Justice reigns.

In a thousand joys, and a thousand fears

I have struggled on through my fifty years.
And now, by the law of God, I am free;
I will seek to enjoy my Jubilee.

I will hie me home, to my mountain dell,

499

 

500 AUT OBIOGRAPHY or rmmv P. PRATT.

And will say to the it Christian ll world——farewell!
I have served ye long——; ltwas a thankless task;
To retire in peace is all I ask.

Another fifty years will fully prove
Our message true, and all our motives love.
Then shall an humble world in reverence bow,
And hail the Prophets so rejected now.
Kings shall revere, and nations incense bring
To Zionls temple and to Zionls King.
I shall be there and celebrate the day
'Till twice ten titties shall have passed away.

—————<-+5-.————_.

A RESPONSE TO P. P. PRATTS ii FIFTIETH YEAR?

BY JOHN TAYLOR.

THOU art it fifty years old ll—I am glad to see
That thou now canst hope for a Jubilee.
Go rest thee, my friend, for weary and long
Thou hast faithfully striven with a wayward throng;
With a world environed with errorls chain
Thou hast wrestled and struggled, but not in vain.
On thy native shore and on foreign land
Thou hast battled for truth with a master hand,
And their cities, and towns, and hamlets have rung
With the sound of ttth, with the voice of song;
And thousands in Zion do now rejoice,
Wholve read thy works or heard thy voice,
And millions have seen thy bosom swell
V'Vith celestial truths thou lovlst so well.

Let drivelling sycophants bow the knee
To that chameleon shrine, popularity,
And with honeyld lips, bound with mammon's spell,
Plaster over the vices they (land not tell,
And with wheedling, whining, canting tongue,

 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

Daub oler the deeds of a hellish throng.
lTwas thine the mask from their loathsome face

To rend, and exhibit their foul disgrace.

Thou hast grappled with sages in error rife,
Thou hast taught to the erring the way of life;
With flaming words and a burning pen
Thou hast bearded gaunt priestcraft in his den,
And said to BaaPs grizzly priests, avaunt!

I dare you in your dark, ghastly haunt.

And the canting, craving minions fled

At the truths thou penned and the words thou said.
With Elijahls faith and Elijahls rod,

Thou despised their power and detied their god,
And made the canting hirelings cower

Beneath the trut-his keen withering power.

Thou showld them their systems were doomld to fall,
That it Upharsinll was written on Babells wall.
Thou hast spent lmidst their hordes a busy life;
Thou art leaving the den of their Babel strife.
Let others now lmid the nations roam,

And hie thee away to thy mountain home.

If, sleeping at night, the weary may
Forget the cares and toils of day;
And if by God to man is given
A day of rest in every seven;
If the pledgd possession could be restored,
On the grand release by J ehovahls word;
If the debtor-is bonds could then be broke,
And the slave be freed from a mastefs yoke,
And the very land a partaker be
Of the general jubilant Jubilee;
If all bonds were broken on that day,
And chains and manacles thrown away;
If throughout the land, by every tongue,
All joined in the joyous Jubilee song;

501'

 

 

502 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF PARLEY P. PRATT.

If debtors and slaves and earth were free,
Thou oughtest to have a Jubilee. .

If a wish from a sincere friendly heart
Can to thee any comfort or joy impart;
If a fervent prayer to the God of grace
Could smooth thy path in thy onward race,
That prayer would be, may grace be given
To wend thy onward course to Heaven.
Maylst thou abound in corn and wine,
And the blessings of plenty now be thine;
May thy family all be free from care,
And a husbandis and father's plenty share;
May thy sun go down with glory- rife,
And dying mayist thou burst into life;
And, when sleeping among the silent dead,
Have the blessings of millions on thy head;
And living with God, maylst thou be free,
And partake of an endless Jubilee.

FINI8.

APPENDIX.

 

Soon after the last extract from his journal, President P. P. Pratt left St

Louis for Arkansas, where he was followed by three bloodthirsty wretches,

who had previously declared their intention to kill him. To aid them in their
sanguinary designs they preferred fictitious charges against him, from which
he was honorably discharged by a United States Court at Van Buren.
These assassins then followed him and murdered him in cold blood, near

Van Buren, Arkansas, May 13, 1857.
We extract the following, in relation to his death, from The lllormoa of

A May 30, published in New York, John Taylor, Ed.:

ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT P. P. PRATP.

" Our readers will doubtless be startled with the above announcement; our
heart is deeply pained to say it, but we have no reason for doubting the
sad intelligence that has reached us, though, as yet, only by the way of
the public press. A few days ago we were advised of his apprehension
near Fort Gibson; and, close upon the receipt of that information, we learned.
by telegraphic despatch, that he had been assassinated near Van Buren,
Arkansas, May 13. * * *

"As we have not the space this week that we require to enter into details, and may, before another issue, receive additional information on the
subject, we shall only say, for the benefit of those who are interested, that
his assassins followed him some twelve miles from the place of trial, and,
taking advantage of his lonely position, shot him.

it Though we deeply deplore the loss to the Church of such a great and
upright man, and the bereavement to his family, yet we mourn not. His
life has been one of honor and faithfulness; his days have been well spent
in the service of his God; his name is revered by thousands and tens of
thousands, and will be honored by millions yet unborn; while that of his
cowardly assassins, and those who have cheered them on to this damning
deed, and who now rejoice over their crime, will be loathsome, and a stink
in the nostrils of God and good men."

The following is extracted from the Millennial Star of July 4, 1867, and
written by his brother, Orson Pratt, who was then Editor of the Star:

ii APPENDIX.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF PARLEY P. PBA'1'l'.

"This great Apostle and martyr of the nineteenth century was born on
the 12th day of April, 1807, in Burlington, Otsego county, State of New
York. He was the third son of Jared and Charity Pratt; Jared was the
son of Obadiah and Jemima Pratt; Obadiah was the son of Christopher
and Sarah Pratt; Christopher was the son of William and Hannah Pratt;
William was the son of Joseph Pratt; Joseph was the son of Lieutenant
William and Elizabeth Pratt, who were found among the first settlers of
Hartford, Connecticut, in the year 1639. They are supposed to have accompanied the Rev. Thomas Hooker and his congregation, about one hundred
in number, from N ewtown, now called Cambridge, Massachusetts, through a
dense wilderness, inhabited only by savages and wild beasts, and became the
tlrst founders of the colony at Hartford, in June, 1636.

" This ancient pilgrim, William Pratt, was a member of the Legislature
for some twenty-five or thirty sessions; and the General Court gave him
one hundred acres of land in Saybrook, Connecticut, for service performed
as lieutenant in the Pequot war; he was one of the judges of the first
Court in New London County. Parley P. Pratt is a lineal descendant, of
the seventh generation, from that distinguished pilgrim and humble pioneer
to the New World.

" The youthful days of our martyred brother were characterized by the
soberness and thoughtfulness of manhood. Though from adverse circumstances his education was extremely limited, yet he displayed, even in youth,
an originality of mind seldom exhibited. In September, 1830, he, being led
by the Spirit of the Lord from his home in the State of Ohio, came several hundred miles eastward, where he fortunately obtained a copy of one
of the most remarkable works of modern times—the Book of Mormon. He
read the same, was convinced of its divine authenticity, and travelled in
search of the highly favored men of God who had seen angels and heard
the voice of the Almighty. He soon succeeded in finding some of them,
from whom he learned that about live months previous the first Church of
the Latter-Day Saints had been organized. He requested baptism, and was
immediately after ordained an Elder. The same month he visited Canaan,
Columbia County, New York—the county where he had spent many of his
youthful days-—and after preaching a few times in different neighborhoods,
and baptizing Orson Pratt, his brother, he returned to Seneca County.

"Receiving a revelation through Joseph the Prophet, he, in company with
three or four others, performed a mission, some fifteen hundred miles, to
the western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and was among the first
of the Saints to stand upon that choice land where the City of Zion is
hereafter to be built, preparatory to the second advent of our Saviour.

APPENDIX. iii

" In the spring of 1831 he returned to the northern part of Ohio, where he
met Joseph the Prophet. In the summer he again performed a mission
through Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Missouri, preaching, baptizing and building
up the Church.

"In the autumn of 1833 he and about twelve hundred men, women and
children were driven by a murderous, furious mob from their own houses
and lands in Jackson County, Missouri. Two hundred houses were burned,
cattle shot, hay stacks and grain burned, many whipped until their bowels
gushed out; others killed, and the afflicted remnant driven across the river
into Clay County.

" Soon after this Elder Pratt performed a long journey of about fifteen
hundred miles east, preaching repentance and strengthening the Saints.

"In 1834 he again returned to Clay County, Missouri, omciating in his
holy calling wherever he went. _

"In 1835, having returned to the northern part of Ohio, he was chosen
and ordained one of the Twelve Apostles of this last dispensation , and the
same year performed a lengthy journey through Pennsylvania, New York,
and several of the New England States, and returned again to Ohio.

"In 1836 he visited Canada, and established a large branch of the
Church in Toronto, and other branches in adjoining towns.

"In 1837 he visited New York City, where he founded a large branch
of the Church.

"In 1838 he removed to Caldwell County, in the western boundaries of
Missouri; and in the same year another dreadful persecution commenced
against the Saints, and they were for the third time driven from their own
houses and inheritanees, and their property to the amount of millions was
destroyed; some scores of defenceless men, women and children were murdered; scores of others incarcerated in dungeons, among whom was the subject
of this memoir; the balance, about fifteen thousand, were exterminated from
the State, and found refuge in Illinois. Elder Pratt was kept in prison,
without trial, about eight months, when, by the kind providence of God, he
made his escape; an account of which is published in the Miuennial Star,
Vol. VIII, pages 129, 145 and 161. Immediately after gaining his liberty
he published a history of the Missouri persecution, written while in prison.
The drst edition appeared in Detroit in 183:).

"In 1840 he visited England, and in the town of Manchester commenced
the publication of a periodical entitled the lllillennial Star, which has continued until the present time——this being the nineteenth volume.

" In 1841 he was appointed the President over all the British Conferences,
and remained in. this high and honorable station until the autumn of 1842,
during which he edited the Star, superintended the Saintsl emigration, and
published several small but interesting works. The following winter he

 

 

iv APPENDIX.

returned to Illinois, where he continued laboring in the ministry for one or
two years.

" About the beginning of the year 1845 he was appointed the President
over all the Churches in the New England and Middle States, his headquarters being at New York City, where he published a periodical entitled
The Prophet. In the summer he returned to N auvoo.

"In February, 1846, he was again driven from his home by a ruthless
mob. Some fifteen or twenty thousand Saints were also driven from the
United States about the same time, with the loss of houses, and lands, and
an immense amount of property, which the mob are in the unmolested possession of until the present day. After wading through unparalleled sufferings with his family, he and the sudering Saints succeeded in reaching the
Indian country at Council Bluifs, and being called by the Holy Ghost,
through the Prophet Bringham Young, to go to England, he left his family
upon the broad prairie, without house or scarcely any food, to comply with
the word of the Lord. He arrived in England, assisted in setting the
Churches in order, and in strengthening the Saints throughout the British
islands.

"In the spring of 1847 he returned to his family and brethren; and in
the summer and autumn of that year he removed to Great Salt Lake Valley,
and sulfered incredible hardships until the harvest of 1848.

"He assisted in forming a Constitution for the Provisional Government of
Deseret, and was elected a member of the Senate in the General Assembly;
and was afterwards elected to the Legislative Council when Utah became a
Territory of the United States.

"The year 1851 he was sent on a mission to the Pacific islands and to
South America. .

"In ihe summer of 1855 he returned over the Sierra Nevada mountains
to his home, and' occupied a part of his time in preaching in the various
settlements of Utah, and at other times laboring with his own hands in
the cultivation of his farm. The following winter he olliciated as chaplain
in the Legislative Council at the State House in Fillmore City.

"In the autumn of 1856 he accompanied about twenty missionaries across
the plains to the States. During the winter and part of the following
spring he visited the Saints at St. Louis, Philadelphia, New York and
other places, preaching, writing and publishing the glad tidings of the
kingdom of God.

"And finally, on the 13th of May, 1857, he fell a noble martyr for the
cause of truth, which he had advocated with such untiring perseverance for
nearly twenty-seven years. His last great and magnanimous act, in trying
to rescue helpless innocence from the fury of their savage persccutors, will
be handed down to unborn generations as an imperishable monument to his

 

 

APPENDIX. V

praise; while his wicked, brutal murderers, and all e that gave countenance
to the diabolical deed, shall gnaw their tongues for pain, and perish, and
be forgotten.

tiA.mong the numerous writings of this martyred Apostle may be mentioned flrst-, the iVoice of Warning,' printed in New York in 1838, and
which has since passed through many editions, and been translated into
several foreign languages; second, his i History of the Missouri Persecutions;'
third, his iPoems;' fourth, his iK.ey to Theology ;' a masterly production,
lately published. The History of his Life,' up to near the time of his
martyrdom, was written by himself, and is now about ready for the press;
this will doubtless prove to be one of the most interesting works proceeding from his pen.

"0, how pleasant is the death of a righteous person! he lays down his
body with a sure and certain hope of comin'g forth from the tomb in the
morning of the drst resurrection, to reign as a mighty King and Priest of
the Most High God, to sit enthroned in eternal glory, ruling with power
and dominion for ever and ever.

" O, kind hearted, affectionate brother! how dearly we loved thee in life!
how joyous to our soul were the words of life which iiowed from thy
month by the pure spirit of inspiration! how lovely still is our remembrance of thee! We weep not for thy death, for it was glorious! Thou
hast left us only for a short moment, and we shall soon embrace thee
again! Thy llftieth year had but just rolled away, and now thy Jubilee
has come! Rest in thy Father's house, with all the noble martyrs of the
nineteenth century, until the Jubilee of the earth shall also come; then
shalt thou return and reign triumphantly with all the redeemed of Adamis

H

race.
From the following letter, written only about four months prfbr to his

martyrdom, he plainly indicates that his pilgrimage and -"personal history in
this world," were near their close: '

" Nnw Yonx, Uxrrnn Burns,
January 2d, 1857.}

"Dear Brother OnsoN—I received your kind letter on the 30th December,
1856. I was thereby glad to hear from you and of your welfare.

"I am well; I spent about a month in St. Louis; I then came on to
Cincinnati and stayed four days, drawing mu houses. I arrived in Philadelphia the day before Christmas—was present next day at a grand party
in that city, in Washington Hall. It was a fine time. Sunday last I
preached three times to a full house

" I arrived here on Wednesday last; found Presidents Taylor and Smith

aswellasusual

V1 APPENDIX.

"Yesterday I attended a party here, in the Ss.ints' Hall; it was an interesting affair, some four hundred persons being present. We were entertained
with songs, prayers, preaching, praying, recitations, eating, drinking, etc.

" In the midst of our eveningls enjoyment the news arrived of the arrival of the Columbia, with a ship load of Saints from England. To-day we
accompanied brother Taylor to see them. All well, but a rough passage;
no deaths. The weather is mild here, and the winter so far very fine.

"I have not yet seen the Pratt family, of whom you speak, but I think
I willvisittheminadayortwo.

"You ask how long I will stay in the States. I answer, till spring. I
willthengohome,ifGodwill,ifIhavetogowithahandcart. This
country is no place for me; the darkness is so thick I can literally feel
it. I cannot obtain the least assistance here for my family; a tight match
to obtain travelling expenses.

" I have heard nothing from home since October 1st, but I hope to hear
soon. I congratulate you on the marriage of your nrst born, and hope
you will soon become a grandfather.

"Now, 'dear brother Orson, be of good courage-—our pilgrimage will soon be
over,andourpersmaalhc2story£ntJu1sworldw£IJnamralIycmn¢to0w
word FIN IS.

"As to my history, I have it now complete from my birth up to to-day.
It will contain about as much reading as the Book of Mormon. I would

, publish it, in part or in full, if gold was plentiful. * * *

"I have written to Nelson Pratt and received an, answer; he is well.
I am going there soon, if all is well. _

"I am to start from St. Louis for home just as early in the spring as
the weather will permit. Farewell! God bless you.

" I am your own brother,
" P. P. Pun."

GENEALOGY.

 

Tm: following correspondence, extracted from a letter from my brother,
Orson Pratt, Sen., dated at Washington, D. C., March 10th, 1853; throws
a clear light upon our ancestry, back as far as the earliest settlements of
the Pilgrim Fathers in Saybrook and Hartford, Conn.

" My dear brother PARLEY—I embrace the present opportunity to write a
few lines to you. * * *

"It affords me much joy to be able to inform you that I have obtained
the names and some knowledge of our ancestors back for many enerations.

" The genealogy runs thus: Our father, Jared Pratt, was s son of
Obadiah, who was the son of Christopher, who was the son of William
Pratt, who was the son of Joseph Pratt, who was the son of Lieutenant
William and Elizabeth Pratt, who is supposed to have come with his
brother, John Pratt, from Essex County, England, about the year 1633,
who were found among the first settlers of Hartford, Connecticut, in the
year 1639. They are supposed to have accompanied the Rev. Thomas
Hooker and his congregation, about one hundred in number, from Newtown,
now called Cambridge, Massachusetts, through a dense wilderness, inhabited
only by savages and wild beasts, and became the first founders of the
colony at Hartford, Connecticut, in June, 1636, and thence to Saybrook
about the year 1646.

tt The way I came by this information is as follows: Seeing a short
editorial in some of my exchange papers, that there was an attempt being
made to search out the lineal descendants of Lieutenant Wm. Pratt, and
that the Rev. Frederick W. Chapman, of South Glastenbury, Conn., was
engaged in that work, I immediately addressed a letter to him, 'ving him
the names of Jared, Obadiah and Christopher, and asking him gr all the
information he was in possession of in relation to our ancestors. He immediately sent me a letter and two printed circulars. The following is a

copy of the letter:
SOUTH Gusrsmsunr, March 6th, 1853.

"Dear Sir—-I have just received your favor. It affords me pleasure to
be able to show you the connecting links between your grandfather, Obadiah Pratt, and the first settler, William Pratt, who came with the company
that located at Hartford, Conn. He received a portion of land in the first
distribution in February, 1639. He married Elizabeth Clark, daughter of
John Clark, of Milford, Connneetlcut, about the same time. He had eight
children. Of these, two were born in Hartford. He removed to Saybrook

in 1645. His third child, Joseph Pratt, born at Saybrook, August 1st, 1648.
SECOND GENERATION.

J .
Swap] hclmiigm ghfarned September, 1686.

Thirteen children—hve by a former wife. William one of the children.

THIRD GENERATION.

William Pratt, .
Hannah Hough, }M.med October 3, moo.

viii GENEALOGY.

Six children, viz:
Joseph, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . .bom April 13, 1703.
Ephraim,. .. .............. . . .. .. . ~ -* 1, 1705.
Margaret,.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . it " 1, 1708.
Christopher,...................... it Nov. 4, 1712.
Elizabeth, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *i Jan. 20, 1717.
Experience,. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . it Sept. 28, 1720.

FOURTH GENERATION.
°h*i9*°Ph°' Pmtv 3-Married June 14, 1739.

Sarah Pratt,
Children:

Stephen,.. . . . . . . .  born June 30, 1740, at Saybrook.
Obadiah, . . . . . . . . . . . .. *l Sept. 14, 1742, "
Sarah,.... ........ .. " March 23, 1745.

Hannah, . . . . . . . . . . . .. *t Aug. 6, 1747.

Chalker,.. . . . . . . . . . .. " Feb. 14, 1750.

Samuel, . . . . . . . . . . . ..

"I want very much to get all the descendants of the last six. Your
letter was the first clue to any of them which I have received. It is more
dimcult to trace the descendants of Joseph than any other of the six children of William Pratt. In fact, they seem to have disappeared from Saybrool:
about a century ago.

it I have already collected about two thousand of the descendants of William Pratt. There are probably not less than live thousand. Robert Chapman,
my ancestor, was married about two years after William Pratt. I have
collected ever live thousand of his descendants, and the work—a volume of
three hundred to three hundred and iifty pages—is nearly ready for the press.
I shall be able to collect most of the descendants of William if those whom
I address will answer my letters and lend a helping hand.

it May I rely on you to aid me in collecting the descendants of Christopher
Pratt?

" Is your father living? If so, he may be able to inform you where the
brothers and sisters of his grandfather Christopher resided—or, perhaps, give
the post-office address of one of the descendants of each family.

ttHe can, of course, give me some account of his uncles and aunts.
Please write immediately and inform me. I want the marriage of Stephen,
when and to whom—and of Obadiah, when and to whom, and the names
of their children—dates of birth; and so of Sarah and the others.

" You can, of course, give me a list of your grandfather's children.
Also give the name of your mother, and date of your father's marriage,
with a list of all his children.

it I enclose two circulars. There is a Pratt, ex-Governor of Maryland; I
know not his address; if you can ascertain, please forward one. Let me
hear from you soon. Respectfully yours,

Farmnnrcx W. Crumux.

" Now, my dear brother Parley, when I received the foregoing letter I
wept like a little child; I was so overjoyed that I could not refrain from
weeping. '

ti There are none among all the descendants of our ancestor, Lieutenant
William Pratt, who have so deep an interest in searching out his descendants as ourselves. We know that the God of our fathers has had a hand
in all this. He it was who brought our ancestor William from England,
and estahlished him in this choice land of promise, given to us by virtue
of the covenant made with our ancient father, Joseph, the son of Jacob.

"The Lord God of our fathers has multiplied them in this land, and

GENEALOGY. ix

made them almost a nation within a nation. Blessed be the name of our
God, for He remembereth his covenants forevermore.

"He has wrought upon the hearts of his servants, our relations, though
unknown to them, to inquire out the genealogy and history of our fathers,
upon the promised land. Yea, blessed be the name of the Lord God of
Joseph and of Israel, for he hath given into our hands the keys of the
priesthood and the doctrines of salvation, that we might stand as saviors
upon Mount Zion, in behalf of our ancestors and their lineal descendants.
Let us, my dear brother Parley, take hold of this matter in earnest, and
assist our kindred in the laudable enterprise which they have undertaken.

it I have no records with me and my memory is weak. Therefore, I
hope you will search up all the family records, and all the verbal information within your reach—with names, dates, births, places, marriages and
deaths, and forward without delay.

" Does our father's sister, aunt Lovina Van Cott, or yourself know anything about the descendants of Stephen, Sarah and others, the brothers and
sisters to our grandfather, Obadiah? How shall we get a clue to them?
Is it possible to find out any descendant of either of the brothers _or sisters
of Christopher Pratt, of Saybrook, our great-grandfather ? Who, and when
did our grandfather, Obadiah, marry ? How many children had Obadiah ?
Whom did they many, and when 7 How many children had each of our
uncles and aunts, the brothers and sisters of our father? And how many
children and grandchildren has each of these cousins ? In short, all the
descendants of our great-grandfather, Christopher, are wanting.

* * * Send all the information you can gather to Mr. Chapman.
It might not be amiss to send him your i History of the Persecutionf
your i Voice of Warning,' and such other works as you may be the
author of ; and also, if you see proper, a biographical sketch of your life.
I have forwarded to him all of my works. * * * I have also sent
him all the information in my power concerning our kindred. * *

" I sent a letter last evening proposing to take some fifty or a hundred
dollars worth of the records as soon as published. These will supply
myself and brothers and our rising families. I also proposed to search out,
if possible, the ancestors of William Pratt, in England. I expect to visit
England in April or May, and shall probably be absent two or three months.

"This from your younger brother,
" To Paansr P. PRATT. A 203302: Paxrr."

After receiving the foregoing, I gathered the little information I could,
in so new a country as Utah Territory, and adding it to that which I
knew myself, the result or summary of the whole is as follows-—for a
portion of which I am indebted to the family records of my aunt, Lovina
Van Cott, and to her memory, she being still living, and near my residence in Salt Lake City.

Our great-grandfather, Christopher Pratt, of Saybrook, Conn., had six children, as follows, viz:

Stephen,. . . . . . . . . . . .born June 30, 1740, at Saybrook.
Obadiah,. . . .. ..... .. a Sept. 14, 1742, "
Sarah, . . . . . . . . . . . .. it March 28, 1745.

Hannah, . . . . . . . .. . . . " Aug. 6, 1747.

Chalker, . . . . . . . . . . . . . " Feb. 14, 1750.

Samuel, . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Our grandfather, Obadiah Pratt, son of Christopher and Sarah Pratt, born
in Saybrook, Conn., September 14, 1742, received in marriage Jemina Tolls,
born in New Haven, Conn., August 11th, 1754. Date of marriage not
known. He died in Canaan, Columbia County, New York, March 2, 1797.
His wife died in Washington, Dutchess County, New York, Nov. 24, 1812.

I GENEALOGY.

Eleven children, as follows:
Jared,....born in Canaan, Columbia County, N. Y., November 25, 1769.
H H H

Barnabas,. C C March 4, 1771.
Samuel,... C C C C C February 2, 1773.
Rhoda.,.... C C C C C May 30, 1776.
William,... C C C C C May 21, 1777.
Sarah,.... ** " " C " September 3, 1781.
Obadiah,.. C C C C C July 30, 1784.
Lovina,... C C C C C August 6, 1787.
Ira, ..... .. a " " i* " October 10, 1739.
Ellis,. . . . .Twin sister of Ira, lived five days. October 10, 1789.
Allen, . . . .born in Canaan, Columbia County, N. Y., May 3, 1793.

Our father, Jared Pratt, son of Obadiah and Jemima Pratt, received in
marriage Mary Carpenter, daughter of Samuel Carpenter, of New Lebanon,
N. Y. She bore him one daughter, named Mary, and afterwards died.
This daughter married a Mr. Brown, of New Lebanon, and bore one son,
named Jerome Brown. She afterwards lost her husband, and was married
to Samuel Big-alow, of New Lebanon; they may be still living at that place.

Our father, Jared, afterwards received in marriage Charity Dickison,
daughter of Samuel Dickison, of Bolton, N. Y. I remember seeing him
once (Dickison) when a small boy.

Our father, Jared, died at Detroit, Michigan, of a fever, November 5,
1839, being near seventy years of age. He died in the house of his
eldest son, Anson, who buried him some three or four miles north or
northeast from Detroit, in Michigan.

Our mother, Charity, died of cholera in the house of her son Anson, at
St. Joseph, Missouri, May 20, 1849, and was buried in the graveyard 01
that town, and a tombstone erected to her memory.

Their children, five in number, were as follows:

Anson, born January 9, 1801, died May 26, 1849.

William D., born September 3, 1802, Town of Wooster, New
York, died September 16, 1870, Salt Lake City.

Parley P., born April 12, 1807, in Burlington, Otsego County,
New York.

Orson, born September 19, 1811, in Hartford, Washington 00.,
New York.

Nelson, born May 26, 1815.

 

 

,. /

, I 3
  x.
,f -H d;
L, ' E _!
' 1% ,
1'
-I .

 

Digitized by C:-00813

Digitized by C:-00813

