

                             Project Canterbury

                            Tracts for the Times
                                 [Number 74]

                            Catena Patrum No. I.

   Testimony of Writers in the later English Church to the Doctrine of the
                           Apostolical Succession
     __________________________________________________________________

     The Baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven or of men? And they
     reasoned among themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven, He
     will say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him? But if we shall
     say, Of men, we fear the people; for all hold John as a prophet.

     PERSONS who object to our preaching distinctly and unhesitatingly
     the doctrine of the Apostolical succession, must be asked to
     explain, why we may not do what our FATHERs in the Church have done
     before us, or whether they too, as well as we, are mistaken, or
     injudicious theorists, or Papists, in so doing? This question is
     here plainly put to them; and at the same time the attention of
     inquirers, who have not made up their minds on the subject, is
     invited to the answer, if any is forthcoming, from the parties
     addressed.

     The doctrine in dispute is this; that CHRIST founded a visible
     Church as an ordinance for ever, and endowed it once for all with
     spiritual privileges, and set His Apostles over it, as the first in
     a line of ministers and rulers, like themselves except in their
     miraculous gifts, and to be continued from them by successive
     ordination; in consequence, that to adhere to this Church thus
     distinguished, is among the ordinary duties of a Christian, and is
     the means of his appropriating the Gospel blessings with an evidence
     of his doing so not attainable elsewhere.

     The passages quoted below contain, it is presumed, this doctrine;
     but they are not intended as more than tokens and suggestions of the
     full testimony, contained in the works of their great authors.


    BILSON, BISHOP.--Perpetual Government of Christ's Church, ch. ix. p.
                                     105

     It will happily [haply] be granted the Apostles had their
     prerogative and pre-eminence above others in the Church of CHRIST;
     but that limited to their persons, and during for their lives, and,
     therefore, no reason can be made for their superiority, to force the
     like to be received and established in the Church of CHRIST for all
     ages and places; since their office and function are long since
     ceased, and no like power reserved to their successors after them. I
     do not deny but many things in the Apostles were personal, &c. ...
     yet, that all their gifts ended with their lives, and no part of
     their charge and power remained to their after-comers, may neither
     be confessed by us, nor affirmed by any, unless we mean wholly to
     subvert the Church of CHRIST ... The Scriptures, once written,
     suffice all ages for instruction; the miracles then done, are for
     ever a most evident confirmation of their doctrine; the authority of
     their first calling liveth yet in their succession; and time and
     travel, joined with GOD'S graces, bring pastors at this present to
     perfection; yet the Apostles' charge to teach, baptize, and
     administer the LORD'S Supper, to bind and loose sinners in heaven
     and in earth, to impose hands for the ordaining of pastors and
     elders, these parts of the Apostolic function and charge are not
     decayed, and cannot be wanted in the Church of GOD. There must
     either be no Church, or else these must remain; for without these no
     Church can continue.

     HOOKER, PRESBYTER AND DOCTOR.--Ecclesiastical Polity, Book v. § 77

     In that they are CHRIST'S ambassadors and His labourers, who should
     give them their commission, but He whose most inward affairs they
     manage? Is not GOD alone the FATHER of spirits? Are not souls the
     purchase of JESUS CHRIST? What angel in heaven could have said to
     man, as our LORD did unto Peter, "Feed my
     sheep,--preach--baptize--do this in remembrance of Me. Whose sins ye
     retain, they are retained; and their offences in heaven pardoned,
     whose faults you shall on earth forgive?" What think we? Are these
     terrestrial sounds, or else are they voices uttered out of the
     clouds above? The power of the ministry of GOD, translateth out of
     darkness into glory; it raiseth man from the earth, and bringeth GOD
     Himself from heaven; by blessing visible elements it maketh them
     invisible graces; it giveth daily the HOLY GHOST; it hath to dispose
     of that flesh which was given for the life of the world, and that
     blood which was poured out to redeem souls; when it poureth
     malediction upon the heads of the wicked, they perish; when it
     revoketh the same, they revive. O wretched blindness, if we admire
     not so great power; more wretched if we consider it aright, and,
     notwithstanding, imagine that any but GOD can bestow it! To whom
     CHRIST hath imparted power, both over that mystical body which is
     the society of souls, and over that natural which is Himself, for
     the knitting of both in one, (a work which antiquity doth call the
     making of CHRIST'S body,) the same power is in such not amiss both
     termed a kind of mark or character, and acknowledged to be indelible
     "Receive the HOLY GHOST; whose sins soever ye remit, they are
     remitted; whose sins ye retain, they are retained." Whereas,
     therefore, the other Evangelists had set down, that CHRIST did
     before His suffering promise to give His Apostles the keys of the
     kingdom of heaven, and being risen from the dead, promised moreover
     at that time a miraculous power of the HOLY GHOST, St. John addeth,
     that He also invested them even then with the power of the HOLY
     GHOST for castigation and relaxation of sin, wherein was fully
     accomplished that which the promise of the keys did import. Seeing
     therefore, that the same power is now given, why should the same
     form of words expressing it be thought foolish?

                                 Ibid. § 68.

     Now the privilege of the visible Church of GOD (for of that we
     speak) is to he herein like the ark of Noah, that, for any thing we
     know to the contrary, all without it are lost sheep; yet in this was
     the ark of Noah privileged above the Church, that whereas none of
     them which were in the one could perish, numbers in the other are
     cast away, because to eternal life our profession is not enough.

           BANCROFT, ARCHBISHOP.--Sermon preached at Paul's Cross

     This hath ever been reckoned a most certain ground and principle in
     religion, that that Church, which maintaineth without error the
     faith of CHRIST, which holdeth the true doctrine of the Gospel in
     matters necessary to salvation, and preacheth the same, which
     retaineth the lawful use of those Sacraments only which CHRIST hath
     appointed, and which appointeth vice to be punished, and virtue to
     be maintained, notwithstanding in some other respects, and in some
     points, it have many blemishes, imperfections, nay divers and sundry
     errors, is yet to be acknowledged for the Mother of the faithful,
     the House of GOD, the Ark of Noah, the pillar of Truth, and the
     spouse of CHRIST. From which Church whosoever doth separate himself,
     he is to be reckoned a schismatic or an heretic

     There are many causes set down by the said ancient FATHERs, why so
     many false prophets do go out into the world; but I will only touch
     four; whereof I find the contempt of Bishops especially to be one;
     for unto them, as St. Jerome saith, ever since St. Mark's time, the
     care of Church Government hath been committed; they had authority
     over the rest of the ministry "that the seed of schism might be
     taken away, &c."

     Read the Scriptures, but with sobriety; if any man presuming upon
     his knowledge, seek further than is meet for him, besides that he
     knoweth nothing as he ought to know, he shall cast himself into a
     labyrinth, and never find that he seeketh for. GOD hath bound
     Himself by His promise unto His Church of purpose, that men by her
     good direction might in this point be relieved; to whose godly
     determination in matters of question, her dutiful children ought to
     submit themselves without any curious or wilful contradiction. I
     could bring many authorities to this effect.

    ANDREWS, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--Sermons on Whitsunday, No. 9. (Works, p.
                                    695.)

     The HOLY GHOST may be received more ways than one. He hath many
     spiramina; polutropoV, "in many manners" He comes; and multiformis
     gratia He comes with. He and they carry the name of their cause; and
     to receive them is to receive the SPIRIT. There is a gratum faciens,
     the saving grace of the SPIRIT, for one to save himself by, received
     by each, without respect to others; and there is a gratis data
     (whatever become of us) serving to save others by, without respect
     to ourselves. And there is cariV diakoniaV, the grace of a holy
     calling, for it is a grace, to be a conduit of grace any way. All
     these; and all from one and the same SPIRIT.

     That was here conferred, (in John xx. 22.) was not the saving grace
     of inward sanctimony; they were not "breathed on" to that end. The
     Church to this day gives this still in her ordinations, but the
     saving grace the Church cannot give; none but GOD can give that. Nor
     the gratis data it is not. That came by the tongues, both the gift
     of speaking divine languages, and the gift of apofqeggesqai,
     speaking wisely, and to the purpose: and (we know) none is either
     the holier or the learneder by his ordination.

     Yet a grace it is. For the very office itself is a grace; mihi data
     est hæc gratia, saith the Apostle, in more places than one; and
     speaks of his office and nothing else. The Apostleship was a grace,
     yet no saving grace. Else, should Judas have been saved. Clearly
     then, it is the grace of their calling (this) whereby they were
     sacred and made persons public, and their acts authentical, and they
     enabled to do somewhat about he remission of sins, that is not (of
     like avail) done by others, though perhaps, more learned and
     virtuous than they, in that they have not the like mitto vos, nor
     the same accipite that these have.

               Ibid.--Sermon on Absolution. (Appendix, p. 90.)

     The power of remitting sin is originally in GOD, and in GOD alone.
     And CHRIST our SAVIOUR, by means of the union of the Godhead and
     manhood into one person, by virtue whereof "The Son of man hath
     power to forgive sins upon earth."

     This power being thus solely vested in GOD, He might, without wrong
     to any, have retained and kept to Himself, and without means of word
     or sacrament, and without ministers, either apostles or others, have
     exercised immediately by Himself from Heaven. But we should then
     have said of the remission of sins, saith St. Paul, "Who shall go up
     to heaven for it, and fetch it thence? for which cause," saith he,
     "the righteousness of faith speaketh thus, Say not so, &c."

     Partly this, but there should be no such difficulty to shake our
     faith, as once to imagine to fetch CHRIST from heaven for the
     remission of our sins; and partly also, because CHRIST, to whom
     alone this commission was originally granted, having ordained
     Himself a body, would work by bodily things, and having taken the
     nature of a man upon Him, would honour the nature He had so taken,
     for these causes; that which was His, and His alone, He vouchsafed
     to impart, and out of His commission to grant a commission, and
     thereby to associate them to Himself, (it is His own word by the
     prophet) and to make them sunergous, that is cooperatores, workers
     together with Him (as the Apostle speaketh) to the work of
     salvation, both of themselves and of others. From GOD then it is
     derived; from GOD and to men. * * *

     Now if we ask, to what men? the text is plain. They to whom CHRIST
     said this Remiseritis, were the Apostles.

     In the Apostles, (that we may come nearer yet) we find three
     capacities as we may term them, 1. As Christians in general. 2. As
     preachers, priests, or ministers, more special. 3. As those twelve
     persons, whom in strict propriety of speech, we term the Apostles.

     Some things that CHRIST spake to them, He spake to them as
     representing the whole company of Christians; as his Vigilate.

     Some things to them, not as Christians, but as preachers or priests;
     as His Ite prædicate Evangelium and his Hoc facile; which no man
     thinketh all Christians may do.

     And some things to themselves personally: as that He had appointed
     them witnesses of His miracles and resurrection, which cannot be
     applied but to them and them in person. It remaineth we inquire, in
     which of these three capacities CHRIST imparted to them this
     commission.

     Not to the Apostles properly; that is, this was no personal
     privilege to be in them, and to die with them, that they should only
     execute it for a time, and none ever after them. GOD forbid we
     should so think it. For, this power being more than needful for the
     world, (as in the beginning it was said,) it was not to be either
     personal, or for a time; then those persons dying, and those times
     determining, them in the ages following (as we now in this) that
     should light into this prison or captivity of sin, how could they or
     we receive any benefit by it? Of nature, it is said by the heathen
     philosopher, that it does neither abundare in superfluis, nor
     deficere in necessariis. GOD forbid, but we should ascribe as much
     to GOD at the least, that neither He would ordain power superfluous
     or more than needed, or else, it being needful, would appropriate it
     unto one age, and leave all other destitute of it; and not rather,
     as all writers both new and old take it, continue it successively to
     the world's end.

     And as not proper to the Apostles' persons, so neither common to all
     Christians in general, nor in the persons of all Christians conveyed
     to them. Which thing the very circumstances of the text do evict.
     For He sent them first, and after inspired them; and after both
     these, gave them this commission. Now all Christians are not so
     sent, nor all Christians inspired with the grace or gift of the
     SPIRIT, that they were here. Consequently, it was not intended to
     the whole society of Christians. Yea, I add, that forasmuch as these
     two, both these two, must go before it, Missio and Inspiratio, that
     though GOD inspire some laymen, if I may have leave so to term them,
     with very special graces of knowledge to this end, yet inasmuch as
     they have not the former, of sending, it agreeth not to them,
     neither may they exercise it, until they be sent, that is, until
     they have their calling thereunto.

     It being then neither personal nor peculiar to them as Apostles, nor
     again common to all as Christians, it must needs be committed to
     them as ministers, priests, or preachers; and consequently to these
     that in that office and function do succeed them, to whom this
     commission is still continued. Neither are they, that are ordained
     or instituted to that calling, ordained or instituted by any other
     words or verse than this (John xx. 23). Yet not so, that absolutely
     without them, GOD cannot bestow it, on whom or when Him pleaseth; or
     that He is bound to this means only, and cannot work without it.
     For, gratia Dei non alligatur mediis, the grace of GOD is not bound
     but free, and can work without means either of word or sacrament;
     and as without means, so without ministers, how and when to Him
     seemeth good. But speaking of that which is proper and ordinary, in
     the course by Him established, this is an ecclesiastical act,
     committed as the residue of the ministry of reconciliation to
     ecclesiastical persons. And if at any time He vouchsafe it by others
     that are not such, they be in that case Ministri necessitatis, non
     officii, in case of necessity ministers, but by office not so. * * *

     The remission of sins, as it is from GOD only, so it is by the death
     and blood-shedding of CHRIST alone; but for the applying of this
     unto us, there are divers means established. * * * In the
     institution of Baptism there is a power to that end. * * 2. Again,
     there is also another power for the remission of sins, in the
     institution of the Holy Eucharist. * * 3. Besides, in the word
     itself there is a like power ordained. "Now are you clean," saith
     CHRIST, (no doubt from their sins) propter Sermonem hunc. And the
     very name giveth as much, that it is entitled, "The Word of
     Reconciliation." 4. Further there is to the same effect a power in
     prayer, and that in the priests' prayers, "Call for the Priests,"
     saith the Apostle, "and let them pray for the sick person, and if he
     have committed sin, it shall be forgiven him." All and every of
     them, are acts for the remission of sins: and in all and every of
     these, is the minister required, and they cannot be dispatched
     without him.

     But the ceremonies and circumstances that here (John xx. 23.) I find
     used, prevail with me to think, that there is somewhat here imparted
     to them, that was not before. For it carrieth no likelihood, that
     our SAVIOUR bestowing on them nothing here, but that which before He
     had, would use so much solemnity, so diverse and new circumstances,
     no new or diverse grace being here communicated. * * * take it to be
     a power distinct from the former, and (not to hold you long) to be
     the accomplishment of the promise made (Matt. xvi. 19.) of the power
     of the keys, which here in this place and in these words is
     fulfilled; and have therein for me, the joint consent of the
     FATHERs. Which being a different power in itself, is that which we
     call the act or benefit of absolution; in which, as in the rest,
     there is in the due time and place of it, an use for the remission
     of sins.

         HALL, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--On Episcopacy, Pt. iii. p. 9.

     And for you, my dearly beloved brethren at home, for CHRIST'S sake,
     for the Church's sake, for your souls' sake be exhorted to hold to
     this holy institution of your blessed SAVIOUR and His unerring
     apostles, and bless GOD for Episcopacy. Do but cast your eyes a
     little back, and see what noble instruments of GOD'S glory He hath
     been pleased to raise up in this very Church of ours out of this
     sacred vocation; what famous servants of GOD, what strong champions
     of truth, and renowned antagonists of Rome and her superstitions;
     what admirable preachers, what incomparable writers, yea, what
     constant and undaunted martyrs and confessors, &c. ... Neither doubt
     I but that it will please GOD, out of the same rod of Aaron, still
     to raise such blossoms and fruit, as shall win Him glory to all
     eternity. So you are to honour those your reverend pastors, to hate
     all factious withdrawings from that government, which comes the
     nearest of any Church upon earth to the Apostolical Let me therefore
     confidently shut up all with that resolute word of that blessed
     Martyr and Saint, Ignatius "Let all things be done to the honour of
     GOD, give respect to your bishop as you would GOD should respect
     you. My soul for theirs which obey their bishop, presbyters, and
     deacons; GOD grant that my portion may be the same with theirs." And
     let my soul have the same share with that blessed Martyr that said
     so. Amen.

       LAUD, ARCHBISHOP AND MARTYR.--Conference with Fisher, xvi. 29.

     "I am with you always unto the end of the world." Yes most certain
     it is,--present by His SPIRIT; or else in bodily presence He
     continued not with His Apostles, but during His abode on earth. And
     this promise of His spiritual presence was to their successors;
     else, why "to the end of the world ?" The Apostles did not, could
     not, live so long. But then to the successors the promise goes no
     farther, than "I am with you always," which reaches to continual
     assistance, but not to divine and infallible.

     "The Comforter the HOLY GHOST shall abide with you for ever." Most
     true again; for the HOLY GHOST did abide with the Apostles,
     according to CHRIST'S promise thus made, and shall abide with their
     successors for ever, to comfort and preserve them.

                               Ibid.--xxv. 15.

     CHRIST promised the Keys to St. Peter. (Matt. xvi.) True; but so did
     He to all the rest of the Apostles (Matt. xviii. John xx.) and to
     their successors as much as to his St. Augustine is plain, "If this
     were said only of St. Peter, then the Church hath no power to do
     it," which GOD forbid! The keys therefore were given to St. Peter
     and the rest in a figure of the Church, to whose power and for whose
     use they were given. But there's not one key in all that bunch, that
     can let in St. Peter's successors to a "more powerful principality"
     universal than the successors of the other Apostles had.

      BRAMHALL, ARCHBISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Vindication of the Church of
                           England.--Discourse III

     I do also acknowledge that Episcopacy was comprehended in the
     Apostolic office, tanquam trigonus in tetragono, and the distinction
     was made by the Apostles, with the approbation of CHRIST; that the
     angels of the seven Churches in the Revelation were seven Bishops;
     that it is the most silly ridiculous thing in the world, to
     calumniate that for a Papal innovation, which was established in the
     Church before there was a Pope at Rome: which hath been received and
     approved in all ages since the very cradle of Christianity, by all
     sorts of Christians, Europeans, Africans, Asiatics, Indians, many of
     which never had any intercourse with Rome, nor scarcely ever heard
     of the name of Rome. If semper, ubique, et ab omnibus be not a
     sufficient plea, I know not what is.

     But because I esteem them Churches not completely formed, do I,
     therefore, exclude them from all hopes of salvation? or esteem them
     aliens and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel? or account
     them formal schismatics? No such thing. First, I know there are many
     learned persons among them who do passionately affect Episcopacy;
     some of which have acknowledged it to myself, that their Church
     would never be rightly settled, until it was new moulded. Baptism is
     a sacrament, the door of Christianity, a matriculation into the
     Church of Christ: yet the very desire of it in case of necessity, is
     sufficient to excuse from the want of actual Baptism. And is not the
     desire of Episcopacy sufficient to excuse from the actual want of
     Episcopacy, in like case of necessity? or should I censure these as
     Schismatics?

     Secondly, there are others, who though they do not long so much for
     Episcopacy, yet they approve it, and want it only out of invincible
     necessity. In some places the sovereign prince is of another
     communion; the Episcopal chairs are filled with Roman Bishops. If
     they should petition for Bishops of their own, it would not be
     granted. In other places the magistrates have taken away Bishops:
     whether out of policy, because they thought that regiment not so
     proper for their republics, or because they were ashamed to take
     away the revenues, and preserve the order, or out of a blind zeal;
     they have given an account to GOD: they owe none to me. Should I
     condemn all these as schismatics for want of Episcopacy, who want it
     out of invincible necessity?

     Thirdly, there are others who have neither the same desires, nor the
     same esteem of Episcopacy, but condemn it as an Anti-christian
     innovation, and a rag of Popery. I conceive this to be most gross
     schism materially. It is ten times more schismatical to desert, nay,
     to take away (so much as lies in them) the whole order of Bishops,
     than to subtract obedience from one lawful Bishop. All that can be
     said to mitigate this fault is, that they do it ignorantly, as they
     have been mistaught and misinformed. And I hope that many of them
     are free from obstinacy, and hold the truth implicitly in the
     preparation of their minds, being ready to receive it, when GOD
     shall reveal it to them. How far this may excuse (not the crime but)
     their persons from formal schism, either a toto or a tanto, I
     determine not, but leave them to stand or fall to their own Master.

     But though these Protestants were worthy of this contumely, yet
     surely the Romanists are no fit persons to object it, whose
     opinastrety did hinder an uniform reformation of the Western Church.
     Who did invest Presbyters with Episcopal jurisdiction, and the power
     of ordaining and confirming, but the Court of Rome, by their
     commissions and delegations, for avaricious ends? And could they
     think that the world would believe, that necessity is not as strong
     and effectual a dispensation, as their mercenary Bulls? It is not at
     all material, whether Episcopacy and Priesthood be two distinct
     orders, or distinct degrees of the same orders, the one subordinate
     to the other; whether Episcopal ordination do introduce a new
     character, or extend the old. For it is generally confessed by both
     parties, Protestants and Roman Catholics, that the same power and
     authority is necessary to the extension of a character, or grace
     given by ordination, which is required to the Institution of a
     Sacrament that is not human but divine. These avaricious practices
     of that Court (though it be not commonly observed) were the first
     source of these present controversies about Episcopacy, and
     Ecclesiastical discipline, which do now so much disturb the peace of
     the Church.

               Ibid.--Vindication of Grotius.--Discourse III.

     Excuse me for telling the truth plainly; many who have had their
     education among Sectaries and Non-conformists have apostated to
     Rome, but few or no right Episcopal Divines. Hot water freezeth the
     soonest.

     He addeth, that "Grotius himself assures him (whom he hath reason to
     believe) that there were not a few such among the prelatical men."
     How! not a few such as these, who have apostated from the Church of
     England? For ingenuity's sake let him tell us where Grotius saith
     any such thing. Grotius hath not one word to his purpose, when it is
     duly examined. But this it is to confute books in less time than
     wise or modest men would require to read them.

     Hitherto, he is not able to show us any tolerable reason of his
     warning. But he showeth us the occasion, p. 82, "Those that unchurch
     either all or most of the Protestant Churches, and maintain the
     Roman Church and not theirs to be true, do call us to a moderate
     jealousie of them." This is far enough from proving his bold
     suggestion, that they have a design to introduce the Pope into
     England. So though all he say were true; yet he can conclude nothing
     from thence to make good his accusation or insinuation. I wish he
     would forbear these imperfect enthymematical forms of argument,
     which serve only to cover deceit, and set down both his propositions
     expressly. His assumption is wanting, which should be this: but a
     considerable party of Episcopal divines in England do unchurch all
     or most of the Protestant Churches, and maintain the Roman Church to
     be a true Church, and these to be no true Churches. I can assent to
     neither of his prepositions, nor to any part of them, as true, sub
     modo, as they are alleged by him.

     First, I cannot assent to his major proposition, that all those who
     make an ordinary personal uninterrupted succession of Pastors, to be
     of the integrity of a true Church, (which is the ground of his
     exception) have, therefore, an intention, or can justly be suspected
     thereupon to have any intention to introduce the Pope. The Eastern,
     Southern, and Northern Churches are all of them for such a personal
     succession, and yet all of them utter enemies to the Pope. Secondly,
     I cannot assent to his minor proposition, that either all or any
     considerable part of the Episcopal divines in England, do unchurch
     either all or most part of the Protestant Churches. No man is hurt
     but by himself. They unchurch none at all, but leave them to stand
     or fall to their own Master. They do not unchurch the Swedish,
     Danish, Bohemian Churches, and many other Churches in Polonia,
     Hungaria, and those parts of the world, who have an ordinary
     uninterrupted succession of Pastors, some by the names of Bishops,
     others under the name of Seniors, unto this day. (I meddle not with
     the Socinians:) they unchurch not the Lutheran Churches in Germany,
     who both assert Episcopacy in their confessions, and have actual
     superintendents in their practice, and would have Bishops, name and
     thing, if it were in their power. Let him not mistake himself: those
     Churches which he is so tender of, though they be better known to us
     by reason of their vicinity, are so far from being "all or most part
     of the Protestant Churches," that being all put together, they
     amount not to so great a proportion as the Britannick Churches
     alone. And if one secluded out of them all those who want an
     ordinary succession without their own faults, out of invincible
     ignorance or necessity, and all those who desire to have an ordinary
     succession either explicitly or implicitly, they will be reduced to
     a little flock indeed.

     But let him set his heart at rest. I will remove this scruple out of
     his mind, that he may sleep securely upon both ears. Episcopal
     divines do not deny those Churches to be true Churches, wherein
     salvation may be had. We advise them, as it is our duty, to be
     circumspect for themselves, and not to put it to more question,
     whether they have ordination or not, or desert the general practice
     of the universal Church for nothing, when they may clear it if they
     please. Their case is not the same with those who labour under
     invincible necessity. What mine own sense is of it, I have declared
     many years since to the world in print; and in the same way received
     thanks, and a public acknowledgment of my moderation from a French
     divine. And yet more particularly in my reply to the Bishop of
     Chalcedon, Pres. p. 144. and cap. i. p. 164. Episcopal divines will
     readily subscribe to the determination of the learned Bishop of
     Winchester, in his answer to the second epistle of Molineus.
     "Nevertheless, if our form (of Episcopacy) be of divine right, it
     doth not follow from thence, that there is not salvation without it,
     or that a Church cannot consist without it. He is blind who does not
     see churches consisting without it: he is hard-hearted who denyeth
     them salvation. We are none of those hard-hearted persons, we put a
     great difference between these things. There may be something absent
     in the exterior regiment, which is of divine right, and yet
     salvation to be had." This mistake proceedeth from not
     distinguishing between the true nature and essence of a Church,
     which we do readily grant them, and the integrity or perfection of a
     Church, which we cannot grant them, without swerving from the
     judgment of the Catholic Church.

    MEDE, PRESBYTER.--Sermon on Urim and Thummim. Works, Book 1. p. 186.

     The Ministers of CHRIST must be Lux Mundi, the light of the
     world--Vos estis Lux Mundi--"Ye are the Light of the World: Ye are
     the World's Urim," saith CHRIST unto His Apostles. "For the lips of
     the priest should preserve knowledge, and they should learn the law
     at his mouth." This light of knowledge, this teaching knowledge, is
     the Urim of every Levite; and therefore CHRIST, when He inspired his
     Apostles with knowledge of heavenly mysteries, He sent a new Urim
     from above, even fiery tongues of Urim from heaven. He sent no fiery
     heads, but fiery tongues; for it is not sufficient for a Levite to
     have his head full of Urim, unless his tongue be a candle to show it
     to others. There came, indeed, no Thummim [integrity or perfection]
     from heaven, as there came an Urim; for though the Apostles were
     secured from errors, they were not freed from sin; and yet we who
     are Levites must have such a Thummim as may be gotten upon earth;
     for St. Paul bids Titus in all things to show himself an example of
     good works, and this is a Thummim of Integrity. But, besides this
     Thummim, the Ministers of the Gospel have received from GOD more
     especially another Thummim, like unto that which was proper to the
     High Priest; namely, the power of binding and loosing, which is, as
     it were, a power of oracle, to declare unto the people the remission
     of their sins, by the acceptance of CHRIST'S sacrifice.

            MASON, PRESBYTER.--Vindiciæ Ecclesiæ Anglicanæ, i. 2.

     Anglican. Our Ministry is agreeable to Divine Scripture, and
     therefore holy. Nor do we doubt, that, when the Chief Shepherd shall
     appear, they who turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars
     for ever and ever. However, what is your argument against our
     ministry?

     Romanist. Can a man be a lawful minister without a lawful call?

     Anglican. Of course not.

     Romanist. If so, I pray tell we how the Anglican Chinch can defend
     her ministry. Surely I may address each of you in Harding's words to
     Jewel: "What say you, my master? You bear yourself as though Bishop
     of Salisbury; but how will you substantiate your call? What is your
     warrant for ministering in the Word and Sacraments?" &c. &c. ... I
     ask thee, Is your call inward or outward?

     Anglican. Both.

     Romanist. An outward call, to be lawful, must be either immediately
     from CHRIST'S mouth, as the Apostles were called, or mediately
     through the Church.

     Anglican. Well; we are called by GOD through the Church; for it is
     He who gives "Pastors and Doctors for the perfecting of the Saints."

     Romanist. They who are called by GOD through the Church, must derive
     their warrant and power by lawful succession from CHRIST and the
     Apostles. If you maintain you have proceeded from this origin, it is
     your business to prove it clearly to us; to set forth and trace your
     genealogy

     Anglican. The Ministers of the Anglican Church derive their
     imposition of hands in a lawful way from lawful Bishops, possessed
     of a lawful authority; and therefore their call is ordinary [not
     extraordinary, by miracles].

     Romanist. But whence have these Bishops derived their power?

     Anglican. From GOD, through the hands of Bishops before them, &c.
     &c.

        SANDERSON, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Divine Right of Episcopacy

     My opinion is, that Episcopal Government is not to be derived merely
     from Apostolical practice or institution, but that it is originally
     founded in the Person and Office of the Messias, our blessed LORD
     JESUS CHRIST; who, being sent by our heavenly FATHER to be the Great
     Apostle (Heb. iii. 1), Bishop, and Pastor (1 Peter ii. 25) of His
     Church, and anointed to that office immediately after His baptism by
     John, with power and the HOLY GHOST (Acts x. 37, 38), descending
     then upon Him in a bodily shape (Luke iii. 22), did afterwards,
     before His ascension into Heaven, send and empower His holy
     Apostles, in like manner as His FATHER had before sent Him (John xx.
     21), to execute the same Apostolical, Episcopal, and Pastoral
     Office, for the ordering and governing of His Church, until His
     coming again; and so the same office to continue in them and their
     successors unto the end of the world. (Matt. xxviii. 18-20.) This I
     take to be so clear, from these and other like texts of Scripture,
     that if they shall be diligently compared together, both between
     themselves and with the following practice of the Churches of
     CHRIST, as well in the Apostles' times as in the purest and
     primitive times nearest thereunto, there will be left little cause
     why any man should doubt thereof.

    HAMMOND, PRESBYTER, DOCTOR, AND CONFESSOR.--On the Power of the Keys.
                                   Preface

     That the prime act of power enstated by CHRIST on His Apostles, as
     for the governing of the Church, (and exercising or banishing all
     devils out of it,) so for the effectual performing that great act of
     charity to men's souls, reducing pertinacious sinners to repentance,
     should be so, either wholly dilapidated, or piteously deformed, as
     to continue in the Church, only under one of these two notions,
     either of an empty piece of formality, or of an engine of state and
     secular contrivance, (the true Christian use of shaming sinners into
     reformation, being well nigh vanished out of Christendom,) might by
     an alien, or an heathen, much more by the pondering Christian, be
     conceived very strange and unreasonable, were it not a little clear
     that we are fallen into those times, of which it was foretold by two
     Apostles, that in "these last days, there should come scoffers,
     walking after their own lusts," &c. ... I shall design to infer no
     further conclusion, but only this, that they which live ill in the
     profession of a most holy faith but especially they that discharge
     and banish out of the Church those means which might help to make
     the generality of Christians better, have the spirit of Antichrist
     working in them, even when they think themselves most zealously
     busied in beating down his kingdom. What those means are which might
     most effectually tend to the amending the lives of Christians, I
     shall need no farther to interpose my judgment, than, 1st, by
     submitting it to CHRIST, who put the keys into the Apostles' hands,
     on purpose as a means to exemplify the end of His coming 2nd, by
     minding myself and others what the Apostles say of this power, that
     it was given them proV oikodomen, to build up the Church of CHRIST,
     &C.

     Chapter 3. The only difficulty remaining on the point, will be, who
     are the Apostles' successors in that power; and when the question is
     asked of that power, I must be understood of the power of governing
     the Church peculiarly, (of which the power of the keys was and is a
     principal branch,) for it must again be remembered that the Apostles
     are to be considered under a double notion, first, as planters, then
     as governors, of the Church Which distinction being premised, the
     question will now more easily be satisfied, being proposed in these
     terms; who were the Apostles' successors in that power, which
     concerned the governing their Churches which they planted? and
     first, I answer, that it being a matter of fact, or story, later
     than that the Scripture can universally reach to, it cannot be fully
     satisfied or answered from thence ... but will in the full latitude,
     through the universal Church in these times, be made clear, from the
     recent evidences that we have, viz. from the consent of the Greek
     and Latin FATHERs, who generally resolve that Bishops are those
     successors.

     TAYLOR, BISHOP, CONFESSOR, AND DOCTOR.--On Episcopacy. Introduction

     Antichrist must come at last, and the great apostasy foretold must
     be, and this not without means proportionable to the production of
     so great declensions of Christianity. "When ye hear of wars and
     rumours of wars, be not afraid," says our blessed SAVIOUR, "the end
     is not yet." It is not war that will do "this great work of
     destruction;" for then it might have been done long ere now. What
     then will do it? We shall know when we see it. In the mean time,
     when we shall find a new device, of which, indeed, the platform was
     laid, in Aërius and the Acephali, brought to a good possibility of
     completing a thing, that whosoever shall hear, his ears shall
     tingle, "an abomination of desolation standing where it ought not,"
     "in sacris," in holy persons, and places, and offices, it is too
     probable that this is preparatory for the AntiCHRIST, and grand
     apostasy.

     For if Antichrist shall exalt himself above all that is called GOD,
     and in Scripture none but kings and priests are such, "dii vocati,
     dii facti," I think we have great reason to be suspicious, that he
     that divests both of their power, (and they are, if the king be
     Christian, in very near conjunction,) does the work of Antichrist
     for him; especially if the men whom it most concerns will but call
     to mind, that if the discipline or government which CHRIST hath
     instituted is that kingdom by which He governs all Christendom, (so
     themselves have taught us,) when they (to use their own expressions)
     throw CHRIST out of His kingdom; and then either they leave the
     Church without a head, or else put Antichrist in substitution.

     We all wish that our fears in this and all things else may be vain,
     that what we fear may not come upon us; but yet that the abolition
     of episcopacy is the forerunner, and preparatory to the great
     Apostasy, I have these reasons to show, at least, the probability.
     First, &c. * * *

     Sections 2 and 3. This government was by immediate substitution
     delegated to the Apostles, by CHRIST Himself, "in traditione
     clavium, inspiratione Spiritûs, in missione in Pentecosto." This
     power so delegated, was not to expire with their persons; for when
     the great Shepherd had reduced His wandering sheep into a fold, He
     would not leave them without "guides to govern" them, so long as the
     wolf might possibly prey upon them, and that is, till the last
     separation of the sheep from the goats. And this CHRIST intimates in
     that promise, "Ero vobiscum (Apostolis) usque ad consummationen
     seculi." "Vobiscum;" not with your persons, for they died long ago:
     but "vobiscum et vestri similibus," with Apostles to the end of the
     world. And, therefore, that the Apostolate might be successive and
     perpetual, CHRIST gave them a power of Ordination, that by imposing
     hands on others, they might impart that power which they received
     from CHRIST.

           HEYLIN, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--On Episcopacy, i. 6.

     The Church, at his (St. John's) departure, he left firmly grounded
     in all the points of faith and doctrine, taught by CHRIST our
     SAVIOUR, as well settled in the outward government, the polity and
     administration of the same, which had been framed by the Apostles,
     according to the pattern and example of their LORD and Master. For
     being that the Church was born of seed immortal, and they
     themselves, though excellent and divine, yet still mortal men, it
     did concern the Church, in a high degree, to be provided of a
     perpetuity, or, if you will, the immortality of overseers, both for
     the sowing of this seed, and for the ordering of the Church, or the
     field itself. This, since they could not do in person, they were to
     do it by successors, who by their office were to be the ordinary
     pastors of the Church, and the Vicars of CHRIST. Now, if you ask the
     FATHERs who they were that were accounted in their times and ages
     the successors of the Apostles, they will with one accord make
     answer, that the Bishops were.

                   ALLESTRIE, PRESBYTER.--Sermons, No. 16.

     The separateness of the functions of the Clergy, the
     incommunicableness of their offices to persons not separated for
     them, is so express a doctrine both of the letter of the text, and
     of the HOLY GHOST, that sure I need not to say more, though several
     heads of probation offer themselves; as first the condition of the
     callings, which does divide from the community and sets them up
     above it. And here I might tell you of "bearing rule," of "thrones,"
     of "stars," and "Angels," and other words of a high sense, and yet
     not go out of the Scripture bounds, although the dignity did not die
     with the Scripture age, or expire with the Apostles; the age as low
     as Photius words it thus, [To apostolikon, k. t. l.] "That
     Apostolical and Divine dignity, which the Chief Priests are
     acknowledged to be possessed of by right of succession." Styles
     which I could derive yet lower, and they are of a prouder sound than
     those the modest bumble ears of this our age are so offended with.
     But these heights, it may be, would give umbrages; although it is
     strange that men should envy them to those, who are only exalted to
     them, that they may with the more advantage take them by the hands
     and lift them up to heaven. Those nearesses to things above do but
     more qualify them to draw near to GOD, on your behalf, that these
     your Angels also may see the face of your FATHER which is in heaven,
     and those stars are, therefore, set in CHRIST'S right hand, that
     they may shed a blessing [blessed?] influence on you from thence

     The censures of the Church, the burden of the keys, which (passing
     by the private use of them in voluntary penitences, and discipline
     upon the sick,) as they signify public exclusion out of the Church,
     for scandalous enormities, and readmission into it upon repentance,
     have been sufficiently evinced to belong to the governors of the
     Church. The exercise of them is so much their work, that St. Paul
     calls them "the weapons of their spiritual warfare, by which they do
     cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself
     against the knowledge of GOD, and bring into captivity every thought
     to the obedience of CHRIST," (2 Cor. x. 4, 5.) a blessed victory,
     even for the conquered, and these the only weapons to achieve it
     with. If those who sin scandalously, and will not hear the
     admonition of the Church, were cast out of the Church, if not
     religion, reputation would restrain them somewhat; not to be thought
     fit company for Christians, would surely make them proud against
     their vices. Shame, the designed effect of their censures, hath
     great pungencies; the fear of it does goad men into actions of the
     greatest hazard, and the most unacceptable; such as have nothing
     lovely in them, but are wholly distasteful ... Now, the infliction
     of these censures is so much the work to which Church governors are
     called by the HOLY GHOST, that they are equally called by Him to it
     and to Himself; both are alike bestowed upon them. "Receive the HOLY
     GHOST; whose sins ye retain, they are retained." (John xx. 22.) And
     in the first derivations of this office, it was performed with
     severities, such as this age, I doubt, will not believe; and when
     they had no temporal sword to be auxiliary to these spiritual
     weapons.

           PEARSON, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--On the Creed, Article ix.

     [After considering the Church as one, by reason of its one
     foundation, faith, ministry of sacrament, hope, and charity, he
     continues,--]

     Lastly, all the Churches of GOD are united into one by the unity of
     discipline and government, by virtue whereof the same CHRIST ruleth
     in them all. For they have all the same pastoral guides appointed,
     authorized, sanctified, and set apart by the appointment of GOD, by
     the direction of the SPIRIT, to direct and lead the people of GOD in
     the same way of eternal salvation: as, therefore, there is no Church
     where there is no order, no ministry; so, where the same order and
     ministry is, there is the same Church. * * *

     The necessity of believing the Holy Catholick Church appeareth first
     in this, that CHRIST hath appointed it as the only way unto eternal
     life. We read at the first, "The LORD added to the Church daily such
     as should be saved;" and what was then daily done hath been done
     since continually. CHRIST never appointed two ways to heaven; nor
     did He build a Church to save some, and make another institution for
     other men's salvation. "There is none other name under heaven given
     among men, whereby we must be saved," but the name of JESUS; and
     that is no otherwise given under heaven than in the Church. As none
     were saved from the Deluge but such as were within the ark of Noah,
     formed for their reception by the command of GOD; as none of the
     first-born of Egypt lived, but such as were within those habitations
     whose door-posts were sprinkled with blood by the appointment of GOD
     for their preservation; as none of the inhabitants of Jericho could
     escape the fire or sword, but such as were within the house of
     Rahab, for whose protection a covenant was made; so none shall ever
     escape the eternal wrath of GOD, which belong not to the Church of
     GOD. This is the congregation of those persons here on earth which
     shall hereafter meet in heaven. These are the vessels of the
     tabernacle carried up and down, at last to be translated into and
     fixed in the Temple.

     Next, it is necessary to believe the Church of CHRIST, which is but
     one, that, being in it, we may take care never to cast ourselves, or
     be ejected, out of it. There is a power within the Church to cast
     those out which do belong to it: for if any neglect to hear the
     Church, saith our SAVIOUR, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and
     a publican. By great and scandalous offences, by incorrigible
     misdemeanors, we may incur the censure of the Church of GOD; and
     while we are shut out by them, we stand excluded out of Heaven. For
     our SAVIOUR said to His Apostles, upon whom He built his Church,
     "Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and
     whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained." Again, a man may not
     only passively and involuntarily be ejected, but also may, by an act
     of his own, cast out or eject himself, not only by plain and
     complete apostasy, but by a defection from the unity of truth,
     falling into some damnable heresy; or by an active separation,
     deserting all which are in communion with the Catholick Church, and
     falling into an irrevocable schism.

             FELL, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.----On Ephesians, v. 9.

     Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers ... For the
     three first, some part of their function was temporary and
     extraordinary; in what was ordinary and perpetual, Bishops
     succeeded.

     BULL, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--Vindication of the English Church, § 24.

     We proceed, in the next place, to the constant visibility and
     succession of Pastors in our Church And here I make him this fair
     proposal: Let him, or any one of his party, produce any one solid
     argument to demonstrate such a succession of Pastors in the Church
     of Rome, and I will undertake by the very same argument to prove a
     like succession in our Church. Indeed, the Author of the Letter is
     concerned, no less than we are, to acknowledge such a succession of
     lawful pastors in our Church, till the time of the Reformation; and
     if we cannot derive our succession since, it is a hard case. But our
     records, faithfully kept and preserved, do evidence to all the world
     an uninterrupted succession of Bishops in our Church, canonically
     ordained, derived from such persons in whom a lawful power of
     ordination was seated by the confession of the Papists themselves.
     For the story of the Nag's head Ordination is so putrid a fable, so
     often and so clearly refuted by the writers of our Church, that the
     more learned and ingenuous Papists are now ashamed to make use of
     it.

       STILLINGFLEET, BISHOP.--Unreasonableness of Separation; Preface

     Unthinking people ... are carried away with mere noise and
     pretences, and hope these will secure them most against the fears of
     Popery, who talk with most passion, and with least understanding,
     against it; whereas no persons do really give them greater
     advantages than these do. For, where they meet only with intemperate
     railings, and gross misunderstandings of the state of the
     controversies between them and us (which commonly go together), the
     most subtle priests let such alone to spend their rage and fury; and
     when the heat is over, they will calmly endeavour to let them see
     how grossly they have been deceived in some things, and so wilt more
     easily make them believe, they are as much deceived in all the rest.
     And thus the East and West may meet at last, and the most furious
     antagonists may become some of the easiest converts. This I do
     really fear will be the case of many thousands among us, who now
     pass for most zealous Protestants; if ever, which GOD forbid, that
     religion should come to be uppermost in England. It is, therefore,
     of mighty consequence for preventing the return of Popery, that men
     rightly understand what it is. For, when they are as much afraid of
     an innocent ceremony as of real idolatry, and think they can worship
     images and adore the Host on the same grounds that they may use the
     sign of the cross, or kneel at the Communion, when they are brought
     to see their mistake in one case, they will suspect themselves
     deceived in the other also.

     When they find undoubted practices of the Ancient Church condemned
     as Popish and Antichristian by their teachers, they must conclude
     Popery to be of much greater antiquity than really it is; and when
     they can trace it so very near the Apostles' times, they will soon
     believe it settled by the Apostles themselves. For it will be very
     hard to persuade any considering men, that the Christian Church
     should degenerate so soon, so unanimously, so universally, as it
     must do, if Episcopal government, and the use of some significant
     ceremonies, were any parts of that apostasy Three ways, Bishop
     Sanderson observes, our dissenting brethren, though not
     intentionally and purposely, yet really and eventually, have been
     the great promoters of the Roman interest among us; (1) by
     putting-to their helping hand to the pulling down of Episcopacy (2)
     by opposing the interest of Rome with more violence than reason; (3)
     by frequently mistaking the question, but especially through the
     necessity of some false principle or other, which, having once
     imbibed, they think themselves bound to maintain, whatever becomes
     of the common cause of our Reformation.

       KEN, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Exposition of the Church Catechism

     I believe, O blessed and adorable Mediator, that the Church is a
     society of persons, founded by Thy love to sinners, united into one
     body of which Thou art the head, initiated by baptism, nourished by
     the Eucharist, governed by pastors commissioned by Thee, and endowed
     with the power of the keys, professing the doctrine taught by Thee
     and delivered to the saints, and devoted to praise and to love Thee.

     I believe, O holy JESUS, that Thy Church, is holy like Thee its
     Author; holy by the original design of its institution, holy by
     baptismal dedication, holy in all its administrations which tend to
     produce holiness; and though there will be always a mixture of good
     and bad in it in this world, yet that it has always many real saints
     in it; and, therefore, all love, all glory, be to Thee

     Glory be to Thee, O LORD my GOD, who hast made me a member of the
     particular Church of England, whose faith, government, and worship
     are Holy, and Catholic, and Apostolic, and free from the extremes of
     irreverence and superstition, and which I firmly believe to be a
     sound part of Thy Church universal, and which teaches me charity to
     those who dissent from me; and, therefore, all love, all glory be to
     Thee.

     BEVERIDGE, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--Sermon on Christ's Presence with His
                                  Ministers

     In the first place, I observe, how much we are all bound to
     acknowledge the goodness, to praise, magnify, and adore the name of
     the most high GOD, in that we were born and bred, and still live in
     a Church, wherein the Apostolical line hath, through all ages, been
     preserved entire, there having been a constant succession of such
     Bishops in it, as were truly and properly successors to the
     Apostles, by virtue of that Apostolical imposition of hands, which,
     being begun by the Apostles, hath been continued from one to
     another, ever since their time, down to ours. By which means, the
     same SPIRIT which was breathed by our LORD into His Apostles is,
     together with their office, transmitted to their lawful successors,
     the pastors and governors of our Church at this time; and acts,
     moves, and assists at the administration of the several parts of the
     Apostolical office in our days, as much as ever. From whence it
     follows, that the means of grace which we now enjoy are in
     themselves as powerful and effectual as they were in the Apostles'
     days, &c.

     And this, I verily believe, is the great reason why the devil has
     such a great spite at our Church, still stirring up adversaries of
     all sorts against it,--Papists on the one hand, and Sectaries on the
     other, and all, if possible, to destroy it; even because the SPIRIT
     which is ministered in it, is so contrary to his nature, and so
     destructive of his kingdom, that he can never expect to domineer and
     tyrannize over the people of the land, so long as such a Church is
     settled among them, and they continue firm to it

     As for schism, they certainly hazard their salvation at a strange
     rate, who separate themselves from such a Church as ours is, wherein
     the Apostolical succession, the root of all Christian communion,
     hath been so entirely preserved, and the word and sacraments are so
     effectually administered; and all to go into such assemblies and
     meetings, as can have no pretence to the great promise in my text.
     For it is manifest, that this promise was made only to the Apostles
     and their successors to the end of the world. Whereas, in the
     private meetings, where their teachers have no Apostolical or
     Episcopal imposition of hands, they have no ground to succeed the
     Apostles, nor by consequence any right to the SPIRIT which our LORD
     hath; without which, although they preach their hearts out, I do not
     see what spiritual advantage can accrue to their hearers by it, &c.

            SHARP, ARCHBISHOP.--Sermons, Vol. vii. Of the Church

     "Go," He says, "and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them,"
     &c. This commission of our SAVIOUR we may properly style the Charter
     of the Church; and mind, I pray, what is contained in it. Our
     SAVIOUR here declares the extent of His Church, and of what persons
     He would have it constituted. It was to extend throughout all the
     world, and to be made up of all nations. He here declares by whom He
     would have it built and constituted, viz., the Apostles. He here
     declares upon what grounds He would have it constituted, or upon
     what conditions any person was to be received into it, viz., their
     becoming the disciples of JESUS CHRIST, and undertaking to observe
     all that He has commanded. He here likewise declares the form or the
     method by which persons were to be admitted into this Church, and
     that was by being baptized in the name of the FATHER, and of the
     SON, and of the HOLY GHOST. And, lastly, He here promises the
     perpetual presence of His HOLY SPIRIT, both to assist the apostles
     and their successors in the building and governing this Church, and
     to actuate and enliven all the members of it Thus, I am sure, I have
     given the true notion of the Church, which the Scripture always
     intends, when it speaks of the Church as the Body of CHRIST, when it
     speaks of the Church which CHRIST purchased with His blood, when it
     speaks of the Church into which we are baptized, when it speaks of
     the Church to which all those glorious promises are made of the
     forgiveness of sins, of the perpetual presence and assistance of the
     HOLY SPIRIT, of the gates of hell never prevailing against it, and
     of everlasting salvation in the world to come; I say, that Church is
     always meant of the whole company of Christians dispersed over all
     the world, that profess the common faith, (though perhaps none of
     them without mixture of error,) and enjoy the administration of the
     word and sacrament, under their lawful pastors and governors: all
     these people, wherever they live, or by what name soever they call
     themselves, make up together that one Body of CHRIST which we call
     the Catholic Church.

             SCOTT, PRESBYTER.--Christian Life, Part ii. ch. 7.

     Another thing wherein those particular Churches, into which the
     Catholic Church is distributed, do communicate with each other, is,
     in the essentials of Christian regiment and discipline: for though
     the particular modes and circumstances of Christian government and
     discipline are not determined by divine institution, but left for
     the most part free to the prudent ordering and disposal of the
     governors of particular Churches, yet there is a standing form of
     government and discipline in the Church, instituted by our SAVIOR
     Himself, which, as I shall show hereafter, is this; that there
     should be an episcopacy, or order of men, authorized in a continual
     succession from the Apostles, (who were authorized by Himself) to
     oversee and govern all those particular Churches into which the
     Church Catholic should be hereafter distributed; to ordain, &c. &c.
     And this being the standing government and discipline of the
     Catholic Church, no particular Church or community of Christians can
     refuse to communicate in it, without dividing itself from the
     communion of the Church Catholic; I say, "refuse to communicate in
     it," because it is possible for a Church to be without this
     government and discipline, which yet doth neither refuse it, nor the
     communion of any other Church for the sake of it. A Church may be
     debarred of it by unavoidable necessities, in despite of its power
     and against its consent Though this instituted government is
     necessary to the perfection of a Church, yet it doth not therefore
     follow, that it is necessary to the being of it But though a
     community of Christians may be a true part of the Catholic Church,
     and in communion with it, though it hath no episcopacy; yet it is a
     plain case, that if it rejects the episcopacy, and separates from
     the communion of it, it thereby wholly divides itself from the
     communion of the Catholic Church.

    WAKE, ARCHBISHOP.--Exposition of the Doctrine of the English Church.
                                  Art. 15.

     The imposition of hands in Holy Orders, being accompanied with a
     blessing of the HOLY SPIRIT, may, perhaps, upon that account, be
     called a kind of particular sacrament. Yet since that grace, which
     is thereby conferred, whatever it be, is not common to all
     Christians, nor by consequence any part of that federal blessing
     which our blessed SAVIOUR has purchased for us, but only a
     separation of him who receives it to a special employ, we think it
     ought not to be esteemed a common sacrament of the whole Church, as
     Baptism and the LORD'S Supper are We confess that no man ought to
     exercise the ministerial office till he be first consecrated to it.
     We believe that it is the Bishop's part only to ordain. We maintain
     the distinction of the several orders in the Church and though we
     have none of them below a deacon, because we do not read that the
     Apostles had any, yet we acknowledge the rest to have been anciently
     received in the Church, and shall not therefore raise any
     controversy about them.

                               WAKE.--Art. 25.

     Professing in our Creed a Holy Catholic Church, we profess to
     believe not only that there was a Church planted by our SAVIOUR at
     the beginning, that has hitherto been preserved by Him, and ever
     shall be to the end of the world; but do in consequence undoubtedly
     believe too, that this universal Church is so secured by the
     promises of CHRIST, that there shall always be retained so much
     truth in it, the want of which would argue that there could be no
     such Church.

             POTTER, ARCHBISHOP.--On Church Government. Chap. v.

     First, then, it must be shown, that the office and character of all
     persons, who are admitted into holy orders, extends over the whole
     world, and it is manifest, in the first place, that the Apostles had
     a general commission to "teach and baptize," and to execute all
     other parts of their office in all nations. As the bishops of the
     Church have been shown to succeed the Apostles in all the parts of
     their office which are of standing and constant use in the Church;
     so we might reasonably conclude, though we have no farther proof of
     it, that the office and character of bishop, and consequently of
     inferior ministers, extends over all the world, because those of the
     Apostles, their predecessors, did so; since there is scarce any
     reason why the Apostles' authority should be universal, which will
     not hold, at least in some degree, for the same extent of authority
     in the bishops, as will appear from some of the following
     considerations:--

     There is but one Catholic Church, whereof all particular Churches
     are members, and therefore, when any spiritual privilege or
     character is conferred on any particular Church, it must be
     understood to extend over the whole Catholic Church: thus by
     Baptism, men are not only made members of the particular Church
     where they happen to be baptized, but of the Catholic Church over
     the world and therefore whoever has been lawfully baptized in one
     Church, has a right to partake of the LORD'S Supper, and other
     Church privileges, in all other Churches, where he happens to come;
     whereas, if baptism only admitted men into some particular Church,
     they must be re-baptized, before they can lawfully be received to
     communion in any diocese, where they have not been baptized already.

     If it was not thus in holy orders, that they who have received them
     in one place, retain them in others; no minister could have
     authority to preach the Gospel or to administer the sacraments, or
     to exercise any other part of his functions beyond the particular
     district in which he was ordained; the consequence whereas is
     manifestly this, that the gospel of CHRIST must not be propagated,
     nor any churches erected, in countries where they had not stood even
     since the Apostles' times. For since there can be no ministers
     without ordination, as was before proved, so then they, who have
     been ordained in one country, may lawfully exercise their respective
     functions in others, where there are no ordained ministers already
     settled, or else those countries must remain for ever without
     ministers, and consequently without sacraments and other public
     offices of religion.

                   NELSON, CONFESSOR.--Festivals and Fasts

     The Church being a regular society founded by CHRIST, distinct from
     and independent of all other worldly societies, must naturally make
     us suppose that He instituted some Officers for the government of it
     [The] Powers peculiar to the superior Order being necessary for the
     good government of the Church, it is plain in fact they did not
     expire with the Apostles. But, as our SAVIOUR "glorified not Himself
     to be made an High Priest," but had His commission from GOD the
     FATHER, so after His resurrection, He invested the Apostles with the
     same commission His FATHER had given unto Him: "As My FATHER hath
     sent Me, even so send I you: and He breathed on them, and said unto
     them, Receive ye the HOLY GHOST." In which commission is plainly
     contained the authority of ordaining others, and a power to transfer
     that commission upon others, and those upon others to the end of the
     world. And to show that it was not merely personal to the Apostles,
     our SAVIOUR promises to be with them and their successors in the
     execution of this commission, "even unto the end of the world." ...
     This commission the Apostles and their successors exercised in all
     places, and even in opposition to the Rulers that then were; so that
     the Church subsisted as a distinct society from the state, for above
     three hundred years, when the civil government was only concerned to
     suppress and destroy it. Indeed when the Church received the benefit
     of incorporation and protection from the state, she was content to
     suffer some limitation as to the exercise of these powers, and
     thought herself sufficiently recompensed by the advantages that
     accrued to her by the incorporation.

      KETTLEWELL, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--Practical Believer, ii. 6.

     Question. There remains yet one instance of the Communion of the
     Primitive Christians, mentioned by St. Luke, viz. their "continuing
     in the Apostles' fellowship." (Acts ii. 42.) I pray you what is
     meant by that?

     Answer. Owning their authority and continuing under their
     government. They were appointed by CHRIST, as His deputies, to
     govern His Church; and, therefore, to adhere to them, as the
     delegates of CHRIST, is called living "in their fellowship."

     Q. But how can we live in their fellowship, and adhere to their
     government, now they are dead?

     A. By adhering to and owning the authority of our own Bishops, who
     are their successors, and rule the Church in their stead.

     HICKS, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Treatise on the Episcopal Order, § 2.

     Can you, Sir, when you consider that Bishops are appointed to
     succeed the Apostles, and, like them, to stand in CHRIST'S place,
     and exercise their kingly, priestly, and prophetical office over
     their flocks; can you, when you consider this, think it novel, or
     improper, or uncouth, to call them spiritual princes, and their
     dioceses principalities?--when they have every thing in their office
     which can denominate a prince? For what is a prince but the chief
     ruler of a society, that hath authority over the rest to make laws
     for it, to challenge the obedience of all the members, and all ranks
     of men in it, and power to coerce them, if they will not obey? And
     now, Sir, I pray you attend to what follows, and then tell me, if
     the office of a Bishop contains not every thing that is in the
     definition of a chief or a prince. St. Ignatius, who was St. John's
     disciple, writes of the Bishop in his Epistle, &c.

                 LAW.--Second letter to the Bishop of Bangor

     "The priests of the sons of Levi shall come near; for them hath the
     LORD thy GOD chosen to minister unto Him, and to bless in the name
     of the Lord." (Deut. xxi. 5.) Now, my LORD, this is what we mean by
     the authoritative administration of the Christian clergy: whether
     they be by way of benediction, or of any other kind. We take them to
     be persons whom GOD has chosen to minister unto Him, and to bless in
     His name. We imagine that our SAVIOUR was a greater priest and
     mediator than Aaron, or any of GOD'S former ministers. We are
     assured that CHRIST sent His Apostles, as His FATHER had sent Him;
     and that, therefore, they were His true successors; and since they
     did commission others to succeed them in their office by the
     imposition of hands, as Moses commissioned Joshua to succeed him,
     the clergy who have succeeded the Apostles, have as divine a call
     and commission to their work, as those who were called by our
     SAVIOUR; and are as truly His successors as the Apostles themselves
     were.

                              Ibid.--Postscript

     The third objection against this uninterrupted succession is this:
     that it is a popish doctrine, and "gives Papists advantage over us."
     The objection proceeds thus: "We must not assert the necessity of
     this succession, because the Papists say it is only to be found in
     them." I might add, because some mighty zealous Protestants say so
     too.

     But if this be good argumentation, we ought not to tell the Jews, or
     Deists, &c., that there is any necessity of embracing Christianity,
     because the Papists say, Christians can only be saved in their
     Church. Again, we ought not to insist upon a true faith, because the
     Papists say, that a true faith is only in their communion. So that
     there is just as much Popery in teaching this doctrine, as in
     asserting the necessity of Christianity to a Jew, or the necessity
     of a right faith to a Socinian, &c.

         JOHNSON, PRESBYTER.--Unbloody Sacrifice, Part II. Chap. 3.

     The Eucharist is one, as offered by priests, who are one by their
     commission. It is very evident that it was not only our SAVIOUR'S
     intention, but His most passionate desire, that, as all His Apostles
     received their commission from Him, so they might execute it with
     such a harmony and consent of mind, that there might not be the
     least jarring between them; for thus He prays for them; "Keep
     through Thine own name those whom Thou hast given Me, that they may
     be one, as We are." And the foundation of our SAVIOUR'S wishes and
     expectations for so perfect an union between His Apostles was this,
     as is expressed by Himself, "I have given them the Words which Thou
     gayest Me," that is, He had committed to them the same treasures of
     Divine truth which the FATHER had before committed to him, &c. After
     His resurrection, He does, with great solemnity, tell them, "As My
     FATHER sent Me, even so send I you;" from which words it is evident,
     that the commission of all the Apostles was one and the same; that
     it was such a commission as CHRIST Himself in His human nature, had
     received from His FATHER; and even they who were not of the same
     order with the Apostles, but only inferior Presbyters under them,
     yet by deriving their authority from the same fountainhead, and
     exercising it in conformity to the instructions which they received
     from them, they still kept the "unity of the SPIRIT in the bond of
     peace." It was upon this account that Ignatius, Cyprian, and others,
     represent the whole college of Bishops throughout the whole world as
     one person, sitting in one chair, attending one altar; and that,
     therefore, is the one Eucharist which is celebrated by this one
     priesthood: and St. Clement of Rome allows nothing to be offered
     without the inspection of the high priest; and, therefore, when a
     new altar is erected, a new Bishop ordained in opposition to the
     former, then there is just occasion to ask that question, as St.
     Paul did, "Is CHRIST divided?" When two several pastors assume to
     themselves the privilege of offering and consecrating the Sacrament
     not only in two distinct places, but in contradiction to each other,
     and by two several inconsistent claims; then it is evident, that one
     of them acts by no commission, for if the true Eucharist can be had
     in two opposite assemblies, then CHRIST'S flesh ceases to be one.

    DODWELL, CONFESSOR.--Discourse on the one Priesthood, one Altar. Ch.
                                     12.

     I observe that the Hierophanta, in their mysteries represented a
     Divine Person. The same, in all probability, were the thoughts of
     the primitive Christians, concerning their Bishops. This I take to
     be the true design of that description of the Majestatic Presence in
     the Revelations, to represent the Divine Presence, and assistance in
     the Church, in as lively a way as possible, according to the ways of
     Mystical Representation received in those times ... St. John being
     particularly to affect the Churches he writes to, those of the
     Lydian or Proconsular Asia, with a very feeling sense of the Divine
     presence among them, (which might add the greater authority to his
     several exhortations respectively,) he represents our SAVIOUR in a
     human visible shape; and that the rest of the scene might be
     suitable, (that is, sensible also as well as Himself,) he personates
     the Angels by their visible Bishops, that so CHRIST might be
     apprehended as present with the Bishops, as GOD was supposed to be
     wherever these Seven Spirits were, which were peculiarly deputed to
     represent the Majestatic Presence. This I take to be the reason why
     he confines his number, not that by any geographical distinction
     those seven cities were incorporated into a body, more than others
     of that province, but that he had particular regard to that number
     of those Angels of the presence. Therefore he makes seven
     candlesticks, alluding, as I have said, to the like number of those
     in the tabernacle, as emblems of those seven Churches. Therefore
     seven stars, alluding to the number of the Planets and the Angels
     who presided over them, as emblems of the Bishops of those Churches
     ... Thus it appears plainly, that the Bishops are here represented
     in a mystical way; and how particularly suitable it was, in this
     way, to personate them by the name of Angels. They were, indeed, to
     perform the same office under CHRIST, as a visible human person,
     which the Angels were under Him as the Logos, in reference to the
     restitution of souls to their original dignity

     But because even His human nature, though visible in itself, is yet
     invisible to us, therefore another way was thought of for copying
     out that heavenly telete, even in the ordinary external visible
     government of the Church. And here the Bishop was to personate
     CHRIST Himself, as the High Priest had, formerly, represented the
     Logos. The seven deacons were to represent the Seven Mystical
     Angels, as I am very apt to think, they were designed from the very
     original. I cannot think it casual that the number first pitched on
     was exactly seven. But, that which more confirms me in this opinion
     is the real suitableness of the office of the Deacon to the Bishops,
     as representing the Logos in a visible way, with that of those
     Angels to the same Logos, as He was invisible. The office of the
     Angels in general is thus described, by the Author of the Hebrews,
     that they are ["ministering spirits, sent out for a diaconate."]
     These are exactly the very terms by which the Church would have
     expressed the office of these Deacons, if she had been to have
     described the same office as vested in mortal men They (the Angels)
     were to stand before the presence of GOD, in a posture of readiness
     to be sent on messages by Him; and so were the Deacons to stand
     before the Bishop, to be sent by him on his messages. They were the
     "eyes of the LORD which ran to and fro through the whole earth." So
     also the Deacons are, in the language of the Ancient Church, called
     the Oculi Episcopi, for the same reason ... Now we may not wonder
     why the Bishops are called Angels, in the forementioned mystical
     immediate relation to our SAVIOUR Himself as the chief "Bishop of
     our souls;" because, indeed, in regard of Him, they bear no higher
     office than that of Deacons Accordingly the Primitive Church were
     extremely rigorous in insisting on this very number of their
     Deacons, in all places, as I have elsewhere showed. The council of
     Neocæsarea imposed it as a universal rule, how great soever the
     Church were to which the Deacons were to serve; ... a canon, which,
     though it were at first designed only for their own province of
     Cappadocia, was, notwithstanding, afterwards extended, first, to the
     Eastern Empire ... afterwards to the Western ... Therefore, even
     then it is much more probable that this number was already received
     in more Churches than otherwise.

     And now the comparisons of the Bishops in Ignatius cannot seem so
     strange, these things being considered, as they did to Blondell, who
     had considered none of them. They are generally designed to express
     the sacredness and excellency of the persons which the clergy bore
     in these mystical performances. Nor is there any thing in them that
     is really affected or strained, much less blasphemous, no, nor any
     extravagant flights of fancy lf he were to compare them with the
     first invisible archetypes of unity, (as that is, indeed, his great
     design in those epistles, in opposition to the schisms then rising,)
     then it was very proper for him to take notice only of the two
     orders which were then immediately concerned in the office of
     ministration, and then to compare them with GOD the FATHER, and the
     Logos; because as this unity consists in the unity of the head, and
     the Scripture tells us that the head of every man is CHRIST, so also
     the same Scripture tells us that the Head of CHRIST is GOD ... These
     things, therefore, being thus solidly laid down by the first
     FATHERs, in their disputes against their contemporary Heretics and
     Schismatics, all the inferences thence deduced against them, will
     follow naturally and undeniably ... It will follow, that disunion
     from the Bishop was a disunion from CHRIST and the FATHER, and from
     all the invisible heavenly Priesthood, and sacrifice, and
     intercession. It will follow that disunion from any one ordinary,
     must consequently be a disunion from the whole Catholic Church,
     seeing it is impossible for any, to continue a member of CHRIST'S
     mystical body, who is disunited from the mystical head of it. It
     will follow that visible disunion from the external sacraments of
     the Bishop, is in the consequence a disunion from the Bishop, and
     from the whole Catholic Church in communion with him, who ought to
     ratify each other's censures under pain of schism if they do not.

           COLLIER, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Moral Essays, Part III.

     'Tis the bulk and serviceableness of business, and the use it has in
     the world, which makes an employment honourable. And can any thing
     compare with the Apostles in this particular? Were they not to form
     and instruct the Church, and to govern the most noble society upon
     earth? Were they not to publish the Mysteries of Redemption, the
     offers of the New Covenant, and the glories of the other world Fire
     in the figure of tongues sat upon the heads of each of them. This
     was an emblem of the gift of languages, and the miracle was as
     bright as the flame This was a glorious attestation, this must needs
     make their Commission undisputed, and their character indelible.
     Should a Prince be proclaimed from the sky, anointed out of the
     Ampoul, and crowned by an Angel, his authority could not be more
     visible ... I can't help saying, that, in my opinion, a Prince made
     but a lean figure in comparison with an Apostle. What is the
     magnificence of palaces, the richness of furniture, the quality of
     attendance, what is all this to the pomp of miracles, and the
     grandeur of supernatural power? A Prince can bestow marks of
     distinction, and posts of honour and authority; but he can't give
     the HOLY GHOST, he can't register his favourites among the quality
     of heaven, nor entitle them to the bliss of eternity. No,--these
     powers were Apostolic privileges, and the enclosure of the Church.
     The prerogative royal cannot stretch thus far; these jewels are not
     to be found in the imperial crown ... I need not tell you how much
     they suffered through their progress, and how gloriously they went
     off into the other world. But before their departure they took care
     to perpetuate their authority, and provide governors for the Church.
     Thus the jurisdiction was conveyed to Bishops and Priests; this
     succession has continued without interruption for above sixteen
     hundred years.

    LESLIE, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--Case of the Regale and Pontificate

     When any constitution of civil government dissolves itself, another
     immediately succeeds; or, if a Monarchy be turned into a
     Commonwealth, or a Commonwealth into a Monarchy: and consequently
     that which was dissolved, is no more; but we cannot say that the
     Church is no more. There is still a Church, though in servitude, and
     nothing succeeds to it; if it were dissolved, there would be no
     Church, but nothing would come in its room, unless you will say a
     privation, that is, the want of a Church The Church is a society
     spread over the earth; and, therefore, cannot be dissolved in any
     one kingdom or state; nor can the concessions of any national Church
     oblige the Church Catholic; no, nor oblige that national Church
     herself, otherwise than according to the rules of the Catholic
     Church; more than a Committee of the House of Lords or Commons can
     oblige the whole House, or govern themselves by any other rules than
     those which are prescribed by the House.

     The Church is laid as low and fenceless as the sand under their
     [Atheism, Deism, &c.] storms, which had long since overwhelmed the
     City of GOD, (after the change of her governors) if the Almighty
     promise (Matt. xvi. 18; xxviii. 20.) had not interposed to preserve
     some embers alive in the midst of these torrents. And they will be
     preserved till the time appointed by GOD shall come, when His breath
     shall put new life in them, to lick up that sea that now covers, but
     cannot drown them ... This is the city, the society, over which the
     temporal governments of the earth have assumed the dominion; and
     have said, "Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their
     cords from us."

     And let not so weak a thought arise in your minds, as if all this
     were only the self-seeking of the Clergy, out of pride to advance
     themselves. Alas! it must have the quite contrary effect with any of
     them who consider what a heavy charge they have undertaken, and what
     account will be exacted from them, for their faithful discharge of
     it! That the blood of all those souls who perish through their
     negligence or default, will be required at their hands! That they
     have to wrestle, not only with flesh and blood, but against
     principalities and powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
     this world, against wicked spirits that are set up in high places!
     And whoever opposes these with that truth and freedom that is
     necessary, instead of honour must expect reproach and persecution;
     of which it is not the least that they cannot vindicate the honour
     of CHRIST'S commission without being thought to seek their own
     glory. Yet that must not hinder; the successors of the Holy Apostles
     must be content to pass, as they did, "through evil report and good
     report, as deceivers, and yet true."

           WILSON, BISHOP, CONFESSOR AND DOCTOR.--Private Thoughts

     "He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold," &c. A lawful
     entrance, upon motives which aim at the glory of GOD and the good of
     souls; an external call and mission, from the apostolic authority of
     Bishops.

     "A stranger will they not follow;" that is, they ought not to follow
     such as break Catholic Unity

     Whoever is associated in the Priesthood of CHRIST, ought, in
     imitation of Him, to sacrifice himself for the advantage of His
     Church and for all the designs of GOD

     "Bishops and Priests," saith St. Ambrose, "are honourable on account
     of the sacrifice they offer." The power of the keys and the exercise
     of that power, the due use of confirmation, and previous to that of
     examination ... are matters of infinite and eternal concern (At the
     Lord's Supper. Before the Service begins.) May it please Thee, O
     GOD, who hast called us to this ministry, to make us worthy to offer
     unto Thee this sacrifice for our own sins and for the sins of the
     people. Accept our service and our persons, through our LORD JESUS
     CHRIST, who liveth and reigneth with Thee and the HOLY GHOST, One
     GOD, world without end.--O reject not this people for me and for my
     sins. Amen.

     (Upon placing the Elements upon the Altar.) Vouchsafe to receive
     these Thy creatures from the hands of us sinners, O Thou
     self-sufficient GOD!

     (Immediately after the Consecration.) We offer unto Thee, our King
     and our GOD, this bread and this cup. We give Thee thanks for these
     and for all Thy mercies, beseeching Thee to send down Thy HOLY
     SPIRIT upon this sacrifice, that He may make this bread the Body of
     Thy CHRIST, and this cup the blood of Thy CHRIST; and that all we,
     who are partakers thereof, may thereby obtain remission of our sins
     and all other benefits of His passion. And together with us,
     remember, O GOD, for good, the whole mystical body of Thy Son; that
     such as are yet alive may finish their course with joy, and that we,
     with all such as are dead in the LORD, may rest in hope and rise in
     glory, for Thy Son's sake, whose death we now commemorate. Amen. May
     I adore Thee, O GOD, by offering to Thee the pure and unbloody
     sacrifice, which Thou hast ordained by JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

     Whenever Church discipline meets with discountenance, impieties of
     all kinds are sure to get head and abound. And impieties unpunished
     do always draw down judgments. The same JESUS CHRIST, who appointed
     baptism for the receiving men into His Church and family, has
     appointed excommunication, to shut such out as are judged unworthy
     to continue in it If baptism be a blessing, excommunication is a
     real punishment; there being the same authority for excommunication
     as for baptism. And if men ridicule it, they do it at the peril of
     their souls.

             BINGHAM, PRESBYTER.--Sermons on Absolution. No. 2.

     In the first place, the commission of power to ministers to retain
     and remit other men's sins, in whatever sense we take it, is a great
     engagement on them to lead holy and pure lives themselves. For it
     looks like an absurdity in practice, and is too often really thought
     so, that men should be qualified to forgive other men's sins, who
     are loaded with guilt and impurity themselves. There is nothing so
     natural and obvious to us as, Physician, heal thyself: and,
     therefore, if it be not a real objection against their office, yet
     it is an unanswerable one against their persons. If it do not
     destroy the tenor of their commission in the nature of the thing,
     yet it certainly diminishes their authority and reputation in the
     opinion of men when every profligate sinner can retort upon them and
     say, "Thou that teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? Thou
     that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? Thou that
     sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery?
     Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law,
     dishonourest thou GOD?" It must needs take off very much from the
     veneration of the Sacrament of Baptism, to have a man pretend to
     wash away the sins of others, who is himself polluted and profane;
     and equally diminishes the reverence which is due to the tremendous
     mystery of the Eucharist, to have it ministered with unholy hands.
     It cannot relish well with men, to hear an unsanctified mouth giving
     blessing to others, who in effect is cursing himself; praying that
     the blood of CHRIST may preserve others to eternal life, while he
     himself is eating and drinking his own damnation, not discerning the
     LORD'S body. But above all, such a man cannot with any tolerable
     decency or freedom, discharge the office of punishing and correcting
     others, who is himself more justly liable to rebuke and censure.
     With what face can he debar others from Baptism or the Eucharist,
     who is himself unqualified to receive either? or exclude others from
     the Church, who is himself unworthy to enter into it? Nothing can be
     a greater engagement upon Ministers to lead holy and pure lives,
     than the consideration of the commission which CHRIST has given
     them, to retain or remit other men's sins, whether in a sacramental
     way, or a declaratory way, or a precatory way, or a judicial way:
     because without purity, they can by no means answer the end of this
     office, and the nature of their trust; but their mal-administration
     will rise up in judgment against them and condemn them.

     2. A second thing which this office of retaining and remitting sins
     requires of Ministers, is great diligence in their studies and
     labours, without which they can never be able sufficiently to
     discharge it. The Church, indeed, has made some part of this work
     tolerably easy, by a prudent provision of many proper general forms
     of absolution: to which in her wisdom she may add proper forms of
     excommunication and judicial absolution. But when this is done,
     there still remains a great deal more belonging to the full
     discharge of this office, for which the Church can make no
     particular provision: and, therefore, that must be left to the
     industry and diligence of Ministers, in their particular studies and
     labours. And this requires both a diffused knowledge, and great
     application; to be able to understand the nature of all GOD'S laws,
     and the bounds and distinctions betwixt every virtue and vice; to be
     able to resolve all ordinary cases of conscience, and answer such
     doubts and scruples as are apt to arise in men's minds; to know the
     qualifications of particular men, and the nature and degrees and
     sincerity of their repentance, in order to give them a satisfactory
     answer to their demands, and grant or refuse them the several sorts
     of absolution, as they shall think proper, upon an impartial view of
     their state and condition. He that thinks all this may be done
     without any great labour and study, and a diligent search of the
     Holy Scriptures, the rule and record of GOD'S will, scorns neither
     to understand the nature of his office, nor the needs of men; nor
     what it is to stand in the place of CHRIST, and judge for him
     between GOD and man. The Priest's lips should preserve knowledge:
     and a man that considers the large extent of that knowledge,
     together with the great variety of cases and persons to which he may
     have occasion to apply it, would rather be tempted to cry out with
     the Apostle, "Who is sufficient for these things?" And if this be
     not an argument to engage a man to industry in the office of a
     spiritual physician, it is hard to say what is so.

                     SKELTON, PRESBYTER.--Discourse 71.

     The next thing the Puritans took offence at, was the Hierarchy of
     the Church. They looked on the Bishops as the instruments of papal
     tyranny, and the corrupters of true religion ...They were, it seems,
     so ignorant, as not to know, that the Bishops, of all men, had most
     reason to oppose the usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, who had made
     himself the only Bishop, and reduced all the rest to ciphers. Nor
     did they consider, whether it was in the power of man to abolish, at
     his discretion, an order of the Church, instituted by GOD Himself,
     merely because the men who filled this order had degenerated,
     together with all the rest of the Church, into superstition and
     luxury. Here again the scheme of our opposers was not to reform, but
     to destroy; and what was equally bold, to begin a new ministry, with
     hardly any other mission than such as a number of men, and sometimes
     one man only, wholly unauthorized, for aught that others could
     perceive, should assume. From men thus sending themselves, or sent
     by we know not whom, we are to receive the sacraments We must not
     forget, however, that these new orders lay claim to scriptural
     institution and primitive example. What, all of them? And without
     succession? Do we hear of any man in Scripture who ordained himself,
     or who presumed to take the ministry of GOD'S word and sacraments
     upon him, without being sent either immediately or successively by
     CHRIST? Or, can an instance of this kind be assigned during the
     first fourteen centuries of the Church?

     So sacred a thing is the succession of ordination, that the HOLY
     GHOST, who had already enabled Barnabas and Saul to preach the word,
     ordered them to be "separated for the work whereunto He had called
     them, by fasting, prayer, and imposition of hands,"--that is, to be
     ordained: the SPIRIT of GOD hereby plainly showing, that He himself
     would not break the successive order of mission established in the
     Church.

   SAMUEL JOHNSON.--en filosofou schmati presbeuwn twn qeiwn logon. Sermon
                                     7.

     With regard to the order and government of the Primitive Church, we
     may doubtless follow their [the ancients'] authority with perfect
     security; they could not possibly be ignorant of laws executed, and
     customs practised by themselves; nor would they, even supposing them
     corrupt, serve any interest of their own, by handing down false
     accounts to posterity. We are, therefore, to inquire from them the
     different Orders established in the Ministry from the Apostolic
     ages; the different employments of each, and their several ranks,
     subordinations, and degrees of authority. From their writings, we
     are to vindicate the establishment of our Church, and by the same
     writings are those who differ from us in these particulars to defend
     their conduct.

     Nor is this the only, though perhaps the chief use of these writers;
     for, in matters of faith and points of doctrine, those at least who
     lived in the ages nearest to the times of the Apostles undoubtedly
     deserve to be consulted. The oral doctrines and occasional
     explications of the Apostles would not be immediately forgotten, in
     the Churches to which they had preached, and which had attended to
     them with the diligence and reverence which their mission and
     character demanded. Their solution of difficulties, and
     determinations of doubtful questions, must have been treasured up in
     the memory of their audiences, and transmitted for some time from
     FATHER to son. Every thing, at least, that was declared by the
     inspired teachers to be necessary to salvation, must have been
     carefully recorded; and, therefore, what we find no traces of in
     Scripture, or the early FATHERs, as most of the peculiar tenets of
     the Romish Church, must certainly be concluded to be not necessary.
     Thus, by consulting first the Holy Scriptures, and next the writers
     of the Primitive Church, we shall make ourselves acquainted with the
     will of GOD; thus shall we discover the good way, and find that rest
     for our souls, which will amply recompense our studies and
     inquiries.

   HORNE, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--Charge of Primary Visitation of his Diocese

     The Constitution and use of the Church of CHRIST is another subject,
     on which our principles, for some years past, have been very
     unsettled, and our knowledge precarious and superficial. Ignorance
     is dangerous here, because there are so many whose interest it is to
     flatter us in it, and take advantage of it. The definition of the
     Church, contained in our Articles, was purposely less definitive
     than it might have been, to avoid giving further offence to those
     whom we rather wished to reconcile; but it does not appear, that the
     Church hath gained any thing by its moderation; it hath rather lost;
     because in virtue of that moderation, it hath been pleaded against
     us, that Ecclesiastical Unity may be dispensed with, and that all
     our differences in this matter are only problematical and
     immaterial.

     But salvation is a gift of grace; that is, it is a free gift, to
     which we have no natural claim. It is not to be conceived within
     ourselves, but to be received, in consequence of our Christian
     calling, from GOD Himself, through the means of His Ordinances.
     These can no man administer to effect, but by GOD'S own appointment;
     at first, by His immediate appointment, and afterwards, by
     succession and derivation from thence to the end of the world.
     Without this rule we are open to imposture, and can be sure of
     nothing; we cannot be sure that our ministry is effective, and that
     our Sacraments are realities. We are very sensible the spirit of
     division will never admit this doctrine; yet the spirit of charity
     must never part with it. Writers and teachers who make it a point to
     give no offence, treat these things very tenderly; but he who, in
     certain cases, gives men no offence, will for that reason give them
     no instruction. Light itself is painful to weak eyes; but delightful
     to them when grown stronger, and reconciled to it with use; and he
     who was instrumental in bringing them to a more perfect state of
     vision, though less acceptable at first, may yet, for his real
     kindness, be more cordially thanked afterwards, than if he had made
     the case and safety of his own person the measure of his duty. It is
     by no means evident, that the Church hath ever recommended itself
     the more by receding from any of its just pretensions: generosity
     obliges and secures a friend; but an enemy construes it into
     weakness, and then it never does any good. Yet the adversaries of
     the Church of England have always been persuading her to make the
     experiment, and have promised great things from it; with what views,
     it cannot be difficult to discover. It was an unhappy circumstance,
     and had very ill effects, when some pious men, of more zeal than
     discretion, who set out on the work of reforming this nation, opened
     an asylum for penitents, which took in people of all persuasions,
     without exception of any. It came to be inferred from hence, that
     souls might be saved as well without as with a Church; perhaps
     better; and when men have once begun to neglect roles, they go on to
     despise them, and know not where to stop, till all things are bought
     into confusion

     The ancient Church is the standard by which all modern ones are to
     be examined; and unless a man knows what the Church was in centuries
     before the Reformation, he will see but darkly into the troubled
     waters of later times, in which faction and party have confounded
     things; and it hath become as much the interest of some, that the
     Church of CHRIST should be found every where, as it is the desire of
     others that it should be found no where If we would guard against
     popular mistakes in the subject at large, it will be necessary to
     examine first, what the Church was under the Old Testament; for
     there we find its original establishment, its form, its authority,
     its ministry, its unity and uniformity, its maintenance, its
     independence; which things being so particularly laid down, no new
     establishment is to be found in the Epistles or the Gospels of the
     New Testament, but the ancient constitution is referred to, to show
     us, in certain cases, what ought to be from what had been From the
     Scripture we should proceed next to observe, what the Church was in
     the first ages of the Gospel, before worldly policy, miscalled
     moderation, had any influence upon the opinions of Christians. There
     is an epistle of St. Clement, on Church unity and Church authority,
     with which all students in divinity should be acquainted. It will
     teach them what the Christian society then was, and what it ought to
     be. Ignatius and Cyprian, both of them martyrs, will give further
     instruction. The latter is so particular and copious, that a code of
     discipline might nearly be formed upon his authority. With these
     preparations, we shall be the better able to judge, of what happened
     at the Reformation, when many things were right and many wrong; when
     the Church of England, by the singular blessing of GOD, preserved
     its constitution and its doctrines, while many of the reformed fell
     off by degrees, some into disorder, some into dissolution. What
     remains with us we must defend and preserve; trusting that the same
     GOD who hath raised this Church, when trodden down to the dust, will
     never forsake us till we forsake Him ...

     But I must now hasten, in the last place, to a subject of more
     quietness or less suspicion [than the subject of civil government],
     in which wise men of all persuasions are more nearly of a mind; I
     mean, the conduct of the Christian life. Modern times and new modes
     of education have given too great a latitude in the articles of
     dress, and dissipation, and self-indulgence. Every thing is to be
     avoided which tends to diminish that gravity and seriousness which
     GOD expects to find in all those who are flying from the wrath to
     come. It was observed of old, that when inconsiderate people are
     avoiding one extreme, they commonly fall into another, while reason
     and discretion keep the middle way. When Protestants laid aside the
     austerities of superstition, they began to see less harm in the
     liberties taken by the world. The kind of life to which the first
     Christians conformed, hath been considered as a sort of heroic
     piety, which had more of suffering and mortification than are now
     required of us; as if the way to heaven could be easier, while the
     number of our temptations is probably increasing from the refinement
     of modern times, which, instead of giving us more liberty, call upon
     us for a greater degree of caution and reserve

     To us JESUS CHRIST is the pattern of holiness, the great exemplar of
     perfection, of whom we are first to learn, what no heathen ever
     professed, to be "meek and lowly in heart;" and accordingly, one of
     the best books extant on the Spiritual life, is entitled, "The
     Imitation of JESUS CHRIST." Its language is barbarous, but its
     matter is divine and heavenly, and hath administered instruction and
     consolation to thousands of devout Christians. The way of true
     devotion must still be understood to be the same humble, secret,
     unaffected, unaspiring practice of piety, as it used to be of old.
     The Cross, which JESUS CHRIST carried for our salvation, is still
     the true emblem of our profession, from our baptism to our departure
     out of this life, and is to be borne by us in our minds, as a daily
     admonition to patient suffering and self-denial.

     To assist us in the great duties of prayer and meditation, books of
     devotion have their use; but to us of the clergy, the liturgy of our
     Church is the best companion; and the daily use of it in our
     churches and families is required by the canons. It cannot be
     denied, that from various reasons prevailing amongst us, we are much
     fallen off of late years, from the practice of weekly prayers in our
     churches. Wherever this has been neglected, we should exhort the
     people to the revival of it, if circumstances will possibly permit;
     and alarm them against a mistake, to which they are all exposed,
     from a fanatical prejudice of baneful influence, namely, that they
     come to Church only to hear preaching; and hence they are
     indifferent, even on a Sunday, to the prayers of the Church, unless
     there is a sermon.

           JONES OF NAYLAND, PRESBYTER.--Lectures on Hebrews iii.

     The Church, in its nature, always was what it is now, a society
     comprehending the souls as well as the bodies of men; and,
     therefore, consisting of two parts, the one spiritual, answering to
     the soul, and the other outward, answering to the body. Hence, some
     have written much upon a visible Church and an invisible, as if they
     were two things; but they are more properly one, as the soul and
     body make a single person.

     In the twelfth chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Apostle
     gives such a description of that society, into which Christians are
     admitted, as will show us the nature of it. "Ye are come," says he,
     "unto Mount Zion," &c. The terms here used give us a true prospect
     of the Church This is that Zion of the Holy One of Israel, to which
     the forces of the Gentiles were to flow from all parts of the world
     ... the city of the living GOD, distinguished from the cities of the
     world, as Jerusalem was from the cities of the heathens, who
     dedicated their cities not to the living GOD, but to the names of
     their dead idols This, being the city of the living GOD, must be an
     immortal society, for the living GOD does not preside over dead
     citizens; He is not the GOD of the dead, but the GOD of the living,
     and all the members of this society live unto Him It is, therefore,
     called the Heavenly Jerusalem, because it is of a heavenly nature;
     and it is called the Jerusalem which is above, which is free, and is
     the mother of us all ... Its spiritual nature is further declared,
     in that it is said to comprehend an innumerable company of angels In
     the communion of the Church the spirits of just men made perfect are
     also included. It is a society which admits only the spirits of the
     living, and as such cannot exclude the spirits of the dead; and this
     confirms what we said above, that the Church is a spiritual
     community, comprehending the dead as well as the living

     But it is now to be shown, secondly, that as the Church of GOD hath
     always been the same in its nature, it hath likewise preserved the
     same form in its external economy: the wisdom of GOD having so
     ordained, that the Christian Church under the Gospel should not
     depart from the model of the Church under the Law. For as the
     congregation of Israel was divided into twelve tribes, under the
     twelve Patriarchs, so is the Church of CHRIST founded on the twelve
     Apostles, who raised to themselves a spiritual seed amongst all the
     nations of the world There were then three orders of priests in the
     Jewish Church; there was the high priest, and the sons of Aaron and
     the Levites. In the Church of CHRIST, there was the order of the
     Apostles, besides whom there were the seventy Disciples sent out
     after them; and, last of all, the Deacons were ordained to serve
     under both in the lower offices of the Church. The same form is
     still preserved in every regular Church of the world, which derives
     its succession and authority from the Church of the Apostles: after
     whom the Bishops succeeded by their appointment, such as Timothy and
     Titus, in their respective churches. This authority has been opposed
     to the Christian as it was in the Jewish Church: Corah and his
     company rose up against Moses and Aaron for usurping a lordly
     authority over the people; so, in the later ages of the Christian
     Church, a levelling principle hath prevailed, which has appeared in
     many different shapes

     The Church has also been remarkably conformable to itself in its
     sufferings. There never was a time, so far as we can learn, when the
     true Church of GOD, with its doctrines and institutions, was not
     hated and opposed by the world: either persecuted and oppressed by
     powerful tyrants, or traduced and insulted by lying historians.

                 BISHOP [sic].--Sermon on Matt. xvi. 18, 19.

     The keys of the kingdom of Heaven here promised to St. Peter ...
     must be something quite distinct from that with which it hath
     generally been confounded, the power of remission and retention of
     sins, conferred by our LORD, after His resurrection, upon the
     apostles in general, and transmitted through them to the perpetual
     succession of the priesthood. This is the discretionary power lodged
     in the priesthood, of dispensing the sacraments, and of granting to
     the penitent and refusing to the obdurate the benefit and comfort of
     absolution. The object of this power is the individual upon whom it
     is exercised, according to the particular circumstances of each
     man's case. It was exercised by the Apostles in many striking
     instances. It is exercised now by every priest, when he administers
     or withholds the sacraments of baptism and the LORD'S Supper, or,
     upon just grounds, pronounces or refuses to pronounce upon an
     individual the sentence of absolution.

                HEBER, BISHOP.--Sermons in England, No. xii.

     We must return then, after all, (in ordinary cases, and where an
     immediate and supernatural commission from the HOLY GHOST is neither
     proved nor pretended,) to the appointment and ordination of those
     among our fellow-creatures who exercise a legitimate authority in
     the Church of CHRIST, and who, as being appointed by GOD, are placed
     in GOD'S stead, and commissioned by Him to dispense those graces
     which are necessary for the feeding of His flock, and to designate
     those labourers who are henceforth to work in His harvest.

     And having arrived at this point of the discussion, even if that
     discussion were to proceed no further, and if the Scriptures had
     given us no information as to the persons by whom this authority was
     to be exercised, the validity of our ordinations would still be
     sufficiently plain, and the danger of separation from, or rebellion
     against, our Church would be sufficiently great and alarming,
     inasmuch as, where no distinct religious officer was instituted by
     GOD, the appointment of such officers must necessarily have devolved
     on the collective Christian Church, and on those supreme magistrates
     who, in every Christian country, are the recognized organs of the
     public will and wisdom It happens, however, to be in our power to
     show (if not an explicit direction of CHRIST for the form of our
     Church government, and the manner of appointing our spiritual
     guides), yet a precedent so clear and a pattern so definite, as to
     leave little doubt of the intentions of our Divine Master, or of the
     manner in which those intentions were fulfilled by His immediate and
     inspired Disciples. Nor will the force of such precedent and example
     on the practice of succeeding Christians be regarded as trifling by
     those who consider that it is on such grounds as these that the
     obligation rests of many observances which are allowed by all
     parties to be essential; among which maybe classed the baptism of
     infants, the observance of the LORD'S Day, and our participation in
     the LORD'S Supper.

     But, without entering into the question of the absolute necessity of
     this rule, and without judging those other national Churches which
     have departed from it, it is evident that those Churches are most
     wise and most fortunate, who have continued in the path which CHRIST
     and His Apostles have trodden before; and that religious
     insubordination is then most unreasonable and most dangerous, when
     exerted against a form of polity which the majority of our
     fellow-Christians, the wisdom of our civil governors, and the full
     stream of precedent, from the time of the Apostles themselves,
     combine to recommend to our reverence.

     We find, accordingly, that our LORD, on His own departure from the
     world, committed, in most solemn terms, the government of His Church
     to His Apostles. We find these Apostles, in the exercise of the
     authority thus received, appointing Elders in every city, as
     dispensers of the word and the sacraments of religion; and we find
     them also appointing other Ecclesiastical Officers, who were to have
     the oversight of these Elders themselves; and who, in addition to
     the powers which they enjoyed in common with them, had the
     privilege, which the others had not, of admitting, by the imposition
     of hands, those whom they thought fit to the ministerial office

     And it is not too much to say, that we may challenge those who
     differ from us, to point out any single period at which the Church
     has been destitute of such a body of officers, laying claim to an
     authority derived by the imposition of hands from the Apostles
     themselves; or any single instance of a Church without this form of
     government, till the Church of Geneva, at first from necessity, and
     afterwards from a mistaken exposition of Scripture, supplied the
     place of a single Bishop by the rule of an oligarchical presbytery.

             JEBB, BISHOP.--Pastoral Instructions. Discourse i.

     "And lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world;"--a
     promise not occasional or temporary, like that of miraculous powers;
     but conveying an assurance that CHRIST Himself, will, in spirit and
     in power, be continually present with His Catholic and Apostolick
     Church; with the bishops of that Church, who derive from the
     Apostles by uninterrupted succession, and with those inferior, but
     essential orders of the Church, which are constituted by the same
     authority, and dedicated to the same service.

            VAN MILDERT, BISHOP.--Bampton Lectures. Sermon viii.

     The system, of which the Apostles had laid the foundation, was to be
     carried on through succeeding generations; but with a gradual
     diminution of that extraordinary aid, which the circumstances of the
     case rendered no longer necessary ... Yet since the object to be
     attained was not temporary, but to continue from age to age, the
     mode, the form, and the instrument to be employed, were still to be
     conformable to the primitive institution. Accordingly, the Apostles
     ordained successors to themselves, and took measures for
     perpetuating in the Church a standing ministry of diverse orders and
     gradations. In so doing, they showed in what sense we are to
     interpret our LORD'S assurance, that He would "be with them always,
     even unto the end of the world."

     The evidences, from the best historical records, to the simple fact
     that a visible Church of this description has actually subsisted
     from the time of our LORD and His Apostles to this moment, are too
     well known to require a detail. Nor is there any defect of similar
     evidence, to show that, whatever errors or corruptions may have
     occasionally found admittance into it, the Church itself has proved
     a successful instrument in the hands of Providence, both of
     transmitting the unadulterated Word of GOD from generation to
     generation, and also of promulgating and maintaining all its great
     fundamental truths; nay, perhaps, of preserving even the very name
     as well as substance of Christianity, which, humanly speaking, would
     probably have been long since extinct, had it not been nurtured and
     cherished by this its appointed guardian and protector

     Let us take, for instance, those articles of faith which have
     already been shown to be essential to the Christian Covenant:--the
     doctrines of the Trinity, of our LORD'S Divinity and Incarnation, of
     His Atonement and Intercession, of our sanctification by the HOLY
     SPIRIT, of the terms of acceptance, and the ordinances of the
     Christian Sacraments and Priesthood. At what period of the Church
     have these doctrines, or either of them, been by any public act
     disowned or called in question! We are speaking now, it will be
     recollected, of what in the language of Ecclesiastical history, is
     emphatically called THE CHURCH; that, which has from age to age
     borne rule, upon the ground of its pretensions to Apostolical
     succession. And to this our inquiry is necessarily restricted

     Surely, here is something to arrest attention; something to awaken
     reflection; something which they who sincerely profess Christianity,
     and are tenacious of the inviolability of its doctrines, must
     contemplate with sentiments of awe and veneration. For, though a
     sceptic may contend that this species of evidence does not amount to
     a direct and demonstrative proof of the truth of the doctrines; yet
     if they be not true, how shall we account for their having been so
     uninterruptedly transmitted to these latter times? How they have
     withstood the assaults of continued opponents? opponents, wanting
     neither talents nor inclination to effect their overthrow? If these
     considerations be deemed insufficient, let the adversary point out
     by what surer tokens we shall discover any Christian community, duly
     answering the Apostle's description, that it is "built upon the
     foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, JESUS CHRIST Himself being
     the chief Corner-Stone?"

                  MANT, BISHOP.--Parochial Sermons, xxvii.

     Nor had He in this appointment a view to those times only, in which
     the appointment was made; but He designed that it should be extended
     to all future ages; for so we must understand the words which He
     pronounced immediately after giving His apostles their authority to
     baptize: "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world."
     A promise this which cannot be supposed to have respect to the
     persons of the Apostles alone, who in the common course of nature
     were soon to be taken from the world, to the end of which the
     promise itself was to extend.

     In conformity with this meaning, the Apostles, who were themselves
     holy men and full of the HOLY GHOST, did send other persons; to whom
     again, they gave power and authority to send others, through whom
     the office of ministers of the Gospel has been handed down in
     regular and uninterrupted succession from the Apostles to the
     present time.

     OXFORD,
     The Feast of St. Mark [1839]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Project Canterbury
