

                            Tracts for the Times

                                   ADVENT.

                                 [Number 16]
     __________________________________________________________________

     THE name Advent, which means Coming, is given to the four Sundays
     immediately before Christmas-day, the feast which celebrates our
     LORD'S coming in the flesh to suffer for us. This season, then,
     is set apart by the Church, in accordance with ancient and venerable
     usage, in the first place, to prepare the minds of her children, by
     holy meditation, for welcoming, with more devout and heartfelt joy,
     that great day, the day of CHRIST'S Nativity. But her services
     at this solemn time are also directed to another object, very
     closely connected with the former: viz. to lead our thoughts onward
     to that second coming of our LORD and Master "in His glorious
     Majesty to judge the quick and the dead," which the Church is still
     expecting and anxiously looking for. These two subjects are very
     closely blended in the services of this season, as indeed there is
     much naturally to unit them in our thoughts and feelings; for the
     promise of CHRIST'S second coming to us, what the hope of His
     first coming was to the Jews. And therefore, while we go back in our
     thoughts to the time when CHRIST appeared in the flesh, and to the
     state of the Jewish Church at that time, we must apply all to the
     searching out of our own spirits, whether we are like holy Simeon
     and Anna, and the faithful few who "waited for redemption in
     Jerusalem," or rather like the great mass of the people, who thought
     only of worldly and temporal things, and so rejected their King when
     he appeared among them. Let us here examine, what help the Church
     will give us in comparing our own privileges and condition with
     those of GOD'S ancient people.

     The Collects for the Sundays in Advent, those at least for the first
     three Sundays, are very much formed upon the language of the
     Epistles, with more or less reference to the Gospels. It will be
     right, then, to look first to the Epistles, and from them try to
     learn, how, as members of the Christian Church, we are to prepare
     for the second awful coming of our Lord and Master.

     We are awakened, then, in the Services of the first Sunday, by the
     warning voice of an Apostle, that "now it is high time to awake out
     of sleep;" that "the night is far spent, the day is at hand;" that
     we must therefore without delay, "cast off the works of darkness,
     and put on the armour of light." Just so the Jewish Church was
     awakened by one crying in the wilderness, "Prepare ye the way of the
     LORD;" the message of John the Baptist was the same as the Apostles
     to us---"Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." He was
     to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the
     disobedient to the wisdom of the just;" he was to be the Elias who
     was "to restore all things;" and accordingly the prophecy in which
     his mission was foretold, after vehement rebukes and warnings to the
     Jewish people, concluded with a solemn exhortation to them to
     "remember the law of" GOD'S "servant Moses, which he commanded
     in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and the judgments." (Mal.
     iv.) In like manner St. Paul urges upon us the solemn Law which has
     been given to the Christian Church, the "new commandment," by which
     we shall be tried, when the messenger of the Covenant comes again to
     His Temple. The Apostle has been giving many precepts of Christian
     practice, (ch. xii, xiii.), but it seems as if he heard his
     Master's voice, "Behold, I come quickly," and so the more
     anxiously sounded in our ear the simple commandment which He left
     us, to "love one another." "He that loveth another hath fulfilled
     the Law---Love is the fulfilling of the Law. And that, knowing
     the time; the day is at hand; let us therefore walk honestly as in
     the day, not in strife and envying. But put ye on the LORD JESUS
     CHRIST." And now, having seen and felt what CHRIST will seek for,
     when He comes into his temple, we may profit duly by the awful
     lesson which we learn in the Gospel. The Jews had long been looking
     impatiently for the promised Deliverer; (Mal. ii. 17. iii. 1.) and
     when they saw Him riding into Jerusalem, as the Prophet had
     foretold, they cried, saying, "Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed
     is He that cometh in the name of the LORD; Hosanna in the highest!"
     Meanwhile, what were the thoughts of the "meek and lowly" King? His
     forerunner had been despised, the Law of Moses had not been
     "remembered," the hearts of the fathers were not turned to the
     children, nor the hearts of the children to the fathers;---and He
     was now coming to "smite with a curse." (Matt. iv. 6.) And when he
     came near, He beheld the city and wept over it. He went into the
     temple and cast out the buyers and the sellers and the
     money-changers, as a type and signal of that still more fearful
     clearing of His Temple, when He laid Jerusalem even with the ground,
     and her children within her, and gave the privileges of His chosen
     to the Gentile world. Such fearful vengeance was taken of those who
     "refused Him that spake on earth;" how then "shall we escape if we
     turn away from Him that speaketh from heaven?"---we, who have
     "received the kingdom which cannot be moved;" who are come not to
     Horeb, but unto Mount Sion, "unto the city of the living GOD, the
     heavenly Jerusalem." Surely it becomes us to listen to the
     affectionate warnings of the Church, as she awakens us from our
     slumber, and recounts our high duties and our inestimable
     privileges.

     2. In the services of the Second Sunday we ha e the first great
     privilege of the Church brought before us, viz. that in the Church
     we have preserved to us those Holy Scriptures, in which is set
     before us "the blessed hope of everlasting life." "The promises made
     to the fathers" have now been fulfilled; and as they "through
     patience and comfort of the Scriptures" had "hope" of CHRIST'S
     first coming, and through Him of life and immortality, so we, having
     the same sure word of prophecy, may look onward to the day of the
     Church's final redemption, and, anticipating that coming of
     CHRIST'S kingdom for which we daily pray, and that " life
     everlasting," in which we daily profess our belief, may " abound in
     hope through the power of the HOLY GHOST." Meanwhile the influence
     which Holy Scripture is intended to have upon the Christian Church,
     is strikingly put before us in the context of the Epistle. St. Paul
     has been enforcing the duty of mutual forbearance by the argument of
     CHRIST'S example; "for even CHRIST pleased not Himself....Now
     the GOD of patience and consolation grant you to be like-minded one
     towards another, according to CHRIST JESUS; that ye may with one
     mind and one mouth glorify GOD, even the Father of our LORD JESUS
     CHRIST. Wherefore receive ye one another, as CHRIST also received
     us, to the glory of GOD." The faith of the Holy Catholic Church,
     grounded upon GOD'S "Holy Word," is the bond of unity; a link
     which so binds together the congregation of the faithful every
     where, that there is but "one body and one spirit." And in that
     Christian Temple the worshippers so speak "as one, to make one sound
     to be heard in praising and thanking the LORD"---the "Holy, Holy,
     Holy LORD GOD of Sabaoth"---that "the house is filled with a
     cloud," the special presence of the Great Author of Peace and Lover
     of Concord, "the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, our only Saviour,
     the Prince of Peace." And when we think of the deep and earnest
     tones of CHRIST'S last solemn prayer before He suffered, that
     the Church might be one in itself and in Him through the faith which
     He had given it; and then again remember, that the sentence of His
     judgment-seat, when He shall come the second time in His glory, will
     be grounded on the relation between Himself as the Head of the
     Church, and His brethren as its members,---a relation so close,
     that what has been done unto them, He considers as done unto Him,
     and what has been denied to them, as denied to Him; (St. Matt. xxv.)
     we shall surely return with a feeling of deeper humiliation to the
     Church's Advent Prayer; that we may have "grace to cast off the
     works of darkness, and to put on the armour of light;" that so, when
     "He shall come again in His glorious Majesty to judge the quick and
     the dead," those Holy Scriptures, which were given to His Church for
     our learning, may not rise up in judgment against us for our neglect
     of that new and great commandment, the observance of which was to be
     the distinctive characteristic of His disciples.

     3. But fresh privileges and responsibilities are brought before us
     in the services of the Third Sunday in Advent. For we have in the
     Church not merely "Holy Scriptures written for our learning," but
     "Ministers of CHRIST and Stewards of the mysteries of GOD," sent to
     prepare and make ready the way for His second coming, that we may
     then be found an acceptable people in His sight. We might have been
     left to derive from Scripture by our own unaided efforts its rich
     and glorious contents "for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
     for instruction in righteousness;" but our merciful FATHER has dealt
     otherwise with His Church under each dispensation. For the Baptist,
     who heralded CHRIST at His coming, though "more than a prophet," was
     but the successor of a "goodly company," whom GOD had raised up from
     time to time to vindicate the Law and to foreshow the Gospel. "But
     he that is least in the kingdom of GOD is greater than he." The
     prophet of the ancient Church had for his main office to enforce the
     Law, to show GOD'S people their transgression and their sin; if
     he spoke of the Gospel, it was in prospect only, and seen afar off.
     The Messengers sent to us are a "Ministry of reconciliation,"
     Ministers and Stewards of the mysteries of redemption, with power
     and commandment, as ambassadors of CHRIST, to declare and pronounce
     to GOD'S people, being penitent, the blessed tidings of
     forgiveness, and in the preaching of His word and the distribution
     of His sacraments to convey and apply its benefits to each
     individual member of CHRIST'S Body. And does not this great
     blessing entail upon us a heavy responsibility? Let us learn from
     the Church how such a gift should be received; she instructs us in
     the words of St. Paul's admonition to the proud and
     schismatical Church of Corinth. The Apostle bids them look upon
     himself and his fellow-labourers as Ministers of CHRIST, responsible
     to their own Master, and to be judged by Him alone; as men who
     thought it a very small thing that even their own consciences
     acquitted them, or that in man's judgment they were preferred
     and made the head of a party; who were stewards, and therefore
     required to be faithful to Him who gave them their commission; and
     who sought to have "praise" not of men but "of GOD," in that solemn
     day of His appearing, when He should " bring to light the hidden
     things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the heart."
     And if we had imbibed more deeply St. Paul's spirit, we should
     less resemble than (it is to be feared) we sometimes do, the
     contentious Corinthians, or the multitudes who flocked to the
     wilderness to the Baptist's preaching, as if it had been some
     spectacle for idle curiosity. (Matt. xi.) Wisdom would be justified
     of all her children, even in our judgment; we should see them all to
     be Ministers and Ambassadors of GOD, and our commendations and
     censures would be turned into prayers on their behalf, such as the
     Church has taught us, that like the Baptist they ;may likewise
     so prepare and make ready CHRIST'S way, by turning the hearts
     of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, that at His second
     coming to judge the world, we may be found an acceptable people in
     His sight.' And in this way too, as well as in giving greater
     heed to His holy Word, we should better fulfil CHRIST'S
     commandment of love; for it was for this purpose that He
     commissioned the Ministers and Stewards of His word and sacraments.
     St. Paul tells us, "He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and
     some evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting
     of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
     body of CHRIST; till we all come in the unity of faith and of the
     knowledge of the SON of GOD unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
     the stature of the fulness of CHRIST; that we henceforth be no more
     children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
     doctrine, but speaking the truth in love, may grow up unto Him in
     all things which is the Head, even CHRIST; from whom the whole body,
     fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint
     supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
     every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself

     4. And now, having reviewed the privileges with which we are
     favoured in CHRIST'S Holy Church until His coming again, we are
     solemnly warned in the Epistle of the fourth Sunday, as before first
     of His near approach: "The LORD is at hand." And if we indeed lived
     answerably to our privileges as members of CHRIST'S Church and
     household, we should be able to await the fulfilment of the promise
     in the spirit of calm confidence and joy, which St. Paul describes
     in the verses that follow; "the peace of GOD which passeth all
     understanding," keeping our hearts and minds by CHRIST JESUS. The
     passage which is chosen for the Gospel, places us at the point of
     time when CHRIST was on the eve of appearing as "the Lamb of GOD
     which taketh away the sin of the world." He had been baptized, and
     was now turning from the wilderness; for it was "the next day," we
     read, that the Baptist pointed Him out to the notice of His
     disciples. He was already standing among them, though they knew Him
     not, ready to baptize them with the HOLY GHOST and with fire. And so
     now, in these latter days, the Heralds of CHRIST'S second
     coming are warning the people that He is at hand, and like the
     Baptist, referring to the Scripture for a proof that they are duly
     commissioned to prepare His way before Him. Like him, they tell the
     Church of a "salvation ready to be revealed," of "times of
     refreshing" to come "from the presence of the LORD," of "times of
     the restitution of all things," and of the more glorious
     establishment of CHRIST'S kingdom; and, in earnest looking for
     the promise, they offer up the prayer of the Church that GOD would
     be pleased to raise up His power and come among us, and with great
     might succour us. But, while we hope for the promise, we must not
     forget the threatening. The Baptist spoke of CHRIST'S coming
     with His fan in His hand, and of the separation which He would make
     between the chaff and the wheat; (comp. Mal. iv.) but what were the
     days of vengeance upon the Jewish Church, compared with those which
     we must expect, when the time is at length come that judgment must
     begin at the house of GOD, and the heavenly Reaper thrusts in His
     sharp sickle and reaps the earth? "The LORD, whom ye seek, shall
     suddenly come to His temple; behold He shall come, saith the LORD of
     HOSTS; but who may abide the day of His coming, and who shall stand
     when He appeareth?" We find that when JESUS was coming nigh to
     Jerusalem, on the day of His triumphant entry, because they thought
     that the kingdom of GOD should immediately appear, He added and
     spake a parable; it was the parable of talents. (Luke xix.) And so,
     when we are disposed to indulge in bright anticipations of coming
     glory to the Church, let us rather turn our thoughts inward to our
     own individual privileges and individual responsibility, remembering
     that the kingdom of GOD is within us, and that to whomsoever much is
     given, of him will much be required. And especially let us remember,
     that among the gifts given to us, for which we must give account,
     are, the New Commandment of love, the Inspired Words of GOD written
     for our learning, and His duly appointed Ministers sent before Him
     to prepare us for his coming.
