                THE PRESENT OBLIGATION OF PRIMITIVE PRACTICE.

                                 [Number 6]

     When we look around upon the present state of the Christian Church,
     and then turning to ecclesiastical history acquaint ourselves with
     its primitive form and condition, the difference between them so
     strongly acts upon the imagination, that we are tempted to think,
     that to vase our conduct now on the principle acknowledged then, is
     but theoretical and idle. We seem to perceive, as clear as day, that
     as a Primitive Church had its own particular discipline and
     political character, so have we ours: and that to attempt to revive
     what is past, is as absurd as to seek to raise what is literally
     dead. Perhaps we even go on to maintain, that the constitution of
     the Church, as well as its actual course of acting, is different
     from what it was; that Episcopacy now is in no sense what it used to
     be; that our Bishops are the same as the Primitive Bishops only in
     name; and that the notion of an Apostolical Succession is "a fond
     thing." I do not wish to undervalue the temptation, which leads to
     this view of Church matters; it is the temptation of sight to
     overcome faith, and of course not a slight one.

     But the following reflection on the history of the Jewish Church may
     perhaps be considered to throw light upon our present duties.

     1. Consider how exact are the injunctions of Moses to his people. He
     ends them thus: "These are the words of the covenant which the LORD
     commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of
     Moab, beside the covenant which He made with them in Horeb.....Keep
     therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may
     prosper in all that ye do.....Neither with you only do I make this
     covenant and this oath; but with him that standeth here this day
     before the LORD our GOD, and also with him that is not here with us
     this day." Deut. xxix.

     2. Next, survey the history of the chosen people for the several
     first centuries after taking possession of Canaan. The exactness of
     Moses was unavailing. Can a greater contrast be conceived than the
     commands and promises of the Pentateuch, and the history of the
     Judges? "Every man did that which was right in his own eyes." Judges
     xvii. 6.

     Samuel attempts a reformation on the basis of the Mosaic Law; but
     the effort ultimately fails, as being apparently against the stream
     of opinion and feeling then prevalent. The times do not allow of it.
     Again, contrast the opulent and luxurious age of Solomon, though the
     covenant was then openly acknowledged and outwardly accepted more
     fully than at any other time, with the vision of simple piety and
     plain straightforward obedience, which is the scope of the Mosaic
     Law. Lastly, contemplate the state of the Jews after their return
     from the captivity; when their external political relations were so
     new, the internal principle of their government so secular, GOD'S
     arm apparently so far removed. This state of things went on for
     centuries. Who would suppose that the Jewish Law was binding in all
     its primitive strictness at the age when CHRIST appeared? Who would
     not say that length of time had destroyed the obligation of a
     projected system, which had as yet never been realized?

     Consider too the impossible nature (so to say) of some of its
     injunctions. An infidel historian somewhere asks scoffingly, whether
     "the ruinous law which require all the males of chosen people to go
     up to Jerusalem three times a-year, was every observed in its
     strictness." The same question may be asked concerning the
     observance of the Sabbatical year;-to which but a faint allusion, if
     that, is made in the books of Scripture subsequent to the
     Pentateuch.

     3. And now, with these thoughts before us, reflect upon our
     SAVIOUR'S conduct. He set about to fulfill the Law in its
     strictness, just as if He had lived in the generation next to Moses.
     The practice of others, the course of the world, was nothing to Him;
     He received and He obeyed. It is not necessary to draw out the
     evidence of this in detail. Consider merely His emphatic words in
     the beginning of Matth. xxiii. concerning those, whom as individuals
     He was fearfully condemning. "The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
     Moses' seat; all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
     observe and do."-Again reflect upon the praise bestowed upon
     Zacharias and his wife, that "they were both righteous before GOD,
     walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the LORD
     blameless."-And upon the conduct of the Apostles.

     Surely these remarkable facts impress upon us the necessity of going
     to the Apostles, and not to the teachers and oracles of the present
     world, for the knowledge of our duty, as individuals and as members
     of the Christian Church. It is no argument against a practice being
     right, that it is neglected; rather, we are warned against going the
     broad way of the multitude of men.

     Nor is there any doubt in our minds, as to the feelings of the
     Primitive Church regarding the doctrine of the Apostolical
     Succession? Did not the Apostles observe, even in an age of
     miracles, the ceremony of the Imposition of Hands? And are not we
     bound, not merely to acquiesce in, but zealously to maintain and
     inculcate the discipline which they established?

     The only objection, which can be made to this view of our duty is,
     that the injunction to obey strictly is not precisely given to us,
     as it was in the instance of the Mosaic Law. But is not the real
     state of the case merely this; that the Gospel appeals rather to our
     love and faith, our divinely illumined reason, and the free
     principle of obedience, than to the mere letter of its injunctions?
     And does not the conduct of the Jews just prove to us that, though
     the commands of CHRIST were put before us ever so precisely, yet
     there would not be found in any extended course of history a more
     exact attention to them, than there is now; that the difficulty of
     resisting the influence, which the world's actual proceedings exert
     upon our imagination, would be just as great as we find it at
     present?

                             A SIN OF THE CHURCH.

     Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first
     works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
     candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

     The following extract is from Bingham, Antiq. xv. 9.

     In the primitive ages, it was both the rule and practice of all in
     general, both Clergy and Laity, to receive the Communion every
     Lord's day...... As often as they had met together for Divine
     Service on the Lord's day, they were obliged to receive the
     Eucharist under pain of Excommunication.....And if we run over the
     whole history of the three first ages, we shall find this to have
     been the Church's constant practice....We are assured farther, that
     in some places they received the communion every day.

     Is there any one who will deny, that the Primitive Church is the
     best expounder of our SAVIOUR'S will as conveyed through his
     Apostles?

     Can a learned Church, such as the English, plead ignorance of His
     will this ascertained?

     Do we fulfil it?

     Is not the regret and concern of pious and learned writers among us,
     such as Bingham, at our neglect of it, upon record?

     And is it not written, "THAT SERVANT WHICH KNEW HIS LORD'S WILL, AND
     PREPARED NOT HIMSELF, NEITHER DID ACCORDING TO HIS WILL, SHALL BE
     BEATEN WITH MANY STRIPES?"

     And, putting aside this disobedience, can we wonder, that faith and
     love wax cold, when we so seldom partake of the MEANS, mercifully
     vouchsafed us, of communion with our LORD and SAVIOUR?
