                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                               RICHARD NELSON.

                                     II.

                            THE ATHANASIAN CREED.

                                 [Number 22]
     __________________________________________________________________

     I LOOK back with much pleasure to the visit I had from my friend Mr.
     Woodnott, the Bristol Merchant I before spoke of.

     He stayed with me some days, and we had many agreeable rambles and
     discussions together, which were to me peculiarly interesting, from
     the wide experience he had had of men and things, and of places too,
     as he had been often abroad, in Switzerland, in Turkey, and on
     different parts of the American Continent, where he had spent some
     years.

     Two or three days after our meeting with Richard Nelson, as stated
     before, we took our walk (it being a pleasant evening to wards the
     end of August,) along the side of a little stream, which we traced
     for a mile or two down the valley, returning by a kind of natural
     terrace, which terminated in my favourite beech-walk. The sun was
     low when we got here; and we stood still, (it was not far from
     Nelson's garden hedge,) to admire its rich glow on the opposite
     side of the valley. I was pointing out to my friend a bold and
     almost mountainous outline of hills rising in the distance, far to
     the west in Lancashire, Pendle-hill, as I fancied, and other lofty
     tracts in the neighbourhood of Clitheroe; and we were speculating on
     the distance they might be from us.

     "Sir," said a voice, which startled me, from my not observing that
     any one was near, "Pendle-hill must be full fifty miles off; what
     you see is most likely some of the high ground beyond Halifax."

     "Why, Richard," said I, "what are you doing down there?" for I could
     scarcely see more than his head---"you seem to be making a strong
     entrenchment round your castle."

     "I dare say, Sir," he answered, "you may wonder what I am about; but
     at this time of year, when the springs are low, I generally spend an
     hour, when I have leisure in an evening, in repairing the
     garden-mound, that it may be fit to stand against the assaults of
     what I call my two winter enemies."

     "What can they be?" I asked; "I did not know that you had any
     enemies."

     "Yes, Sir, I have," he replied; "at least my garden had two,
     land-floods, and Scotch ponies. Almost every winter, once, if not
     twice, there is a violent land-flood from the high-ground behind the
     house; and if this ditch were not kept clear, to take the water off
     immediately, the garden would not recover the damage all the next
     year. To be sure, this kind of flood does not commonly last many
     hours; but that is long enough, you know, Sir, to spoil the labour
     of weeks and months."

     "That I can understand," I answered; "but how you can be in any
     alarm about Highland ponies, I cannot imagine."

     "Why," said he, "you know, Sir, that there is a fair at the town
     every year, early in the Spring, where a great many of these ponies
     are bought and sold; and for many years past, Mr. Saveall, the owner
     of this field, has let it for one day and night to the horsedealer,
     (a well known man out of Lincolnshire,) to turn those ponies into,
     as well as other horses he may have purchased at the fair. The first
     year I was here, I was not aware of this custom, and had taken no
     precaution against it; so these little mountaineers got in at a weak
     place in the hedge during the night, and trod the garden, as one may
     say, to a mummy. So, to protect myself for the future against such
     mischievous visitors, I put this fence along, which I was now
     repairing. And if you will please to look at it, I think you, Sir,
     will allow that it was not badly contrived, though I say it, who
     should not say it."

     All along the whole length of the garden, (which might be perhaps
     nearly one hundred yards,) on that side which was next the
     foot-path, he had fixed very neatly, about half way up the slope of
     the ditch on the opposite side, a double indented line of sharp
     strong stakes, pointing upwards, presenting a sort of chevaux de
     frise; an impenetrable barrier, which no pony, highland or lowland,
     could possibly get through or over.

     We said something in commendation of his skill and pre caution: on
     which he observed; "I am glad, Sir, you approve of what I have done;
     for it has cost me a good deal of labour. And my neighbour, Farmer
     Yawn, who has been standing by me for the last three quarters of an
     hour, and went away just as you came up, he says, I am taking a deal
     of trouble, and very likely for nothing; how can I be sure there
     will be a land flood, or that the man well turn in the ponies? and
     besides, (says he,) neither land flood nor ponies would stay twelve
     hours. But I know better, Sir, than to take Mr. Yawn's advice;
     for if my bit of garden should be ruined for a twelvemonth, it would
     be no comfort afterwards to think, that perhaps it might not have
     happened, or that the mischief was quickly done, or that with timely
     caution it might have been prevented."

     After a few more words we wished him a good evening, and walked on
     for some little way in silence, which my companion put an end to by
     saying, "It must be confessed that our friend Nelson is a sensible
     man; and not the less so, (added he, with a smile,) because I am
     sure he will agree with me in opinion."

     For in the course of our walk we had been discussing rather
     earnestly the subject of the Athanasian Creed; the question between
     us not being as to the doctrines contained in it, but as to the
     expediency of retaining it in the Liturgy, supposing any changes
     should take place in that also, as in every thing else. Not that
     there was any real difference of opinion between us on that point
     either; but wishing to know his views on the subject, I had been
     urging the various objections, such of them at least as are more
     plausible, and had been gratified with observing how little weight
     he attached to them; and my satisfaction was the greater, because,
     from his education and profession, as a layman and a merchant, he
     could not be accused of what have been scornfully designated as
     "academical and clerical prejudices."

     In the course of our conversation he had expressed himself most
     earnestly in favour of the Athanasian Creed; alleging, for this his
     opinion, various reasons, and among others the following; "that he
     regarded this Creed in the light of a fence or bulwark, set up to
     protect the Truth against all innovations and encroachments; and
     that to take it away, particularly in times when popular opinion, or
     rather feeling, was against it, would be almost high treason against
     GOD: (that was his word:) would be, so far as in us lies, wilfully
     to expose the Truth to be trodden down by its enemies."

     "Now," said he, "whilst you were talking to our friend Nelson, it
     struck me that his care about his garden very aptly expresses our
     duty in respect of this very subject. For why is this Creed so
     obnoxious? simply because it is so strongly and sharply worded;
     because it leaves no opening for a semi-socinian or a five quarter
     latitudinarian to creep in at; because it presents a insurmountable
     obstacle to every intruder who would trample under foot the
     LORD'S vineyard.

     "And even if the aspect of things were more favourable, even if
     there were no sign of danger at hand, I should much rather advise
     that, like Nelson, we should look forward to probable or possible
     inroads, than venture to neglect, much less to remove, our fences.

     "But," he continued, " in the present condition of what is by
     courtesy, (or one might almost say, facetiously,) called the
     Christian world, it were in my judgment little less than madness to
     yield so strong a position,---one too which, if once lost, call
     never be recovered."

     And then he referred to what he had before been insisting on, the
     great mistake made by the American Church in rejecting the
     Athanasian Creed from her Liturgy; and how, from personal
     observation during his residence, first at New York, and afterwards
     at Charleston, he was sure the time would come when its loss would
     be felt and acknowledged by thc true sons of that Church. "And I
     wish," added he, as we concluded our walk and our discussion
     together, you would endeavour to ascertain what are the sentiments
     of our friend Nelson on this subject, for I have no doubt he has
     turned it over in his mind; and his opinion must certainly be of
     value, because happily for himself he has not been, I suppose, in
     the way of hearing, the profane absurdities that are daily written
     and spoken against this inestimable Creed."

     "Yes," said I, "whatever his opinions are, I doubt not they will be
     found candid, and free from unreasonable prejudice; and I will take
     an early opportunity of ascertaining them.

     Soon after this my friend left me, and I promised to communicate to
     him the result of my inquiries. The Sunday following, it being a
     serene autumnal morning, according to the description of the Divine
     Poet---"most calm, most bright"---I proceeded earlier than
     usual towards the school.

     When I came up to Richard's cottage, he was standing at the
     gate, with his infant child in his arms, looking as if he could envy
     no man; as if Sunday were to him what it should be to us all, "the
     couch of time, care's balm and bay."

     "You are rather earlier, Sir, than usual," he said.

     "Yes," I answered, "the morning is so lovely, so Sunday-like, I
     could not endure to stay any longer within doors."

     After some few observations had passed between us,---in which he
     expressed with an unaffected solemnity of manner peculiar to
     himself, his sense of the value of each returning LORD'S day,
     calling it (and I think he used, though unconsciously, Isaac
     Walton's very words,) a step towards a blessed
     eternity,"---I asked him if he would have any objection to take
     two or three turns with me in the beech-walk, as it still wanted a
     considerable time to school.

     He answered that he would gladly accompany me, especially as it
     might be better for the child to be taken under the shade of the
     trees.

     "Richard," said I, "my friend Mr. Woodnot, and I may call him your
     friend too, was much amused with your plan for keeping off the
     enemies of your garden. He commended it highly, and thinks you
     therein set a good example to all true Churchmen, and especially to
     us of the Clergy."

     "In what respect, Sir?" he asked. "Why," I replied, "in keeping your
     fences strong and sharp, and contrived in the best possible way to
     serve the purpose of fences; namely, to preserve one's property
     from injury. For we understood you to say, that, were it not for a
     little observation and foresight, however well all might be for
     three hundred and sixty-four days in the year, in one twenty-four
     hours all might be laid waste, either by the torrent from the high
     ground above you, or by the cattle from your neighbour's
     field."

     "Indeed, Sir," he answered, "that is no more than the truth. But I
     confess I do not exactly see how, in acting thus, I have set any
     particularly good example. No person of common sense could do
     otherwise."

     "As to that," I replied, "perhaps what some witty man said of common
     honesty, he might too have said of common sense, that it is a very
     uncommon thing. But be that as it may, it certainly would appear to
     me to be no mark of sense nor of honesty either, if we Christians
     who are ;put in trust (as St. Paul speaks) with the
     Gospel,' were to draw back from our strong advanced positions,
     in the vain hope that the Enemy would be content with this success,
     and encroach no further."

     "May I ask, Sir," he said, "What is it you refer to?"

     "Why, Richard," I replied, "of course you have heard that a great
     many people think the Church Prayer Book ought to be altered; and
     that first and foremost the Athanasian Creed ought to be put out of
     it."

     "Sir, said he, "I have heard more than one person make this
     observation, but I never took much account of it till about a year
     or eighteen months ago, when a brother-in-law of mine, who is fond
     of poring over the newspapers, told me he had been reading extracts
     from the works of a famous preacher, one Dr. Hoadley, which I am
     sorry to say he was inclined to admire. For in these extracts there
     were objections made to other parts of the Church Service, and
     particularly to the Athanasian Creed, which (the Dr. said) was a
     great blot in the Prayer Book, and that he wished we were well rid
     of it, with other such disrespectful expressions. Now, Sir, it
     seemed to me such a thing, for a Clergyman who had signed the
     Articles and the Prayer Book, and had his maintenance from the
     Church, and had taken an oath before GOD and man to teach the truth
     to his flock, according to the Prayer Book; that a Church Minister
     should take upon him to omit so remarkable a portion of the Church
     Service; nay more, should speak so slightingly of what he had
     solemnly assented to, and was even sworn to; this seemed to me to be
     astonishing, and, I must confess to you, even shocking. And, Sir, I
     thought of what my mother had said to me in her last illness, about
     the danger of trifling with GOD ALMIGHTY. I thought too, if there
     should be many such clergymen as this Dr. Hoadley, what confusion
     and perplexity they would throw people's minds into, driving
     some perhaps into downright infidelity. And then I went on to
     reflect, what if my poor children should hereafter fall into the way
     of some such false teachers, and learn to deny the LORD that bought
     them, and to despise the SPIRIT of Grace.

     "This thought I could not endure; so I resolved, that with
     GOD'S gracious help, I would search the matter out for myself;
     for surely, Sir, it is a matter in which not the clergy only, but we
     all are deeply interested."

     "You say right," I replied; "the knowledge of GOD'S truth must
     be the greatest earthly treasure to us all. It unquestionably
     concerns the Laity full as much as it does the Clergy, to ascertain
     the truth and to keep it; also to hand it on, pure and uncorrupted,
     to their children after them."

     He proceeded; "My plan was this; first to endeavour to make out what
     was the intention of the Church in appointing this and the other two
     Creeds to be occasionally used; and then to try this Athanasian
     Creed by Scripture rules; and if I could not reconcile it to them,
     why then certainly, however unwillingly, I should have joined in
     opinion with those who wish to have it left out of the Prayer Book."

     "A very good plan," said I, "but you must recollect that the enemies
     of this Creed would ask, what possible reason you could have for
     being unwilling to part with it, especially when you know that great
     numbers of people have so vehement a dislike to it."

     "Sir," said he, "I have long made up my mind, that on questions of
     this kind relating to GOD and Eternity, people's likings and
     dislikings are not much in the scale either way. But I think, Sir, I
     can offer one or two good excuses for my being unwilling to have
     this Creed laid aside. In the first place, it would give me pain to
     have any great alterations made in such a book as the Prayer Book;
     which I have been used to from my infancy; which as a child I was
     always taught to reverence; and which, (I am not ashamed to say,) I
     do reverence from my heart more and more the older I grow. In the
     next place, I am sure all must allow that some parts of the
     Athanasian Creed are very noble and beautiful to hear, especially
     when they are well read or repeated. And again, even a child may see
     that if this Creed be put away, great encouragement will be given,
     not only to professed infidels, but also to many wild thoughtless
     persons, who would fain believe that Religion, like every thing
     else, needs to be radically reformed."

     "But, Richard," I said, "you are not, I suppose, so vain as to
     imagine that our Church Reformers will be willing to keep the Prayer
     Book just as it is, merely because you and I and a few more admire
     some of the clauses in this Creed?"

     " Sir," said he, "you may be sure I never imagined such a thing. I
     was not presuming to give an opinion, whether or not the Prayer Book
     is likely to be improved by any alterations which may be made in it.
     I was only excusing myself for being loath to part with the
     Athanasian Creed."

     "But," said I, "will you now tell me what conclusion you came to in
     your inquiry into the intention of the Church in appointing this and
     the other two Creeds to be used?"

     "I remembered," he said, "that I had heard you, Sir, or some one
     whose opinion I could take on these subjects, make an observation,
     that the three Creeds were not written all at the same time, but at
     three different periods. That the Apostles' Creed was made
     first, either in the time of the Apostles, or very soon after. That
     the Nicene Creed came next, after an interval of two hundred years
     or more. And that then again, after another considerable space, I
     think I understood more than a century, followed the Creed of St.
     Athanasius, as it is called.

     "So it came into my thoughts that the Church seemed to act like a
     tender mother very anxious for her children, from the very first;
     but growing still more and more anxious as they grow older, are more
     exposed to dangers, and yet less and less willing to yield
     themselves to her control.

     "Thus it may seem, that in the most ancient, the Apostles'
     Creed, a plain simple rule of faith is given.

     "In the next, the Nicene Creed, the same rule is laid down, but more
     at length, and in a tone of anxiety and caution as if the enemy were
     at hand.

     "But in the last, the Athanasian Creed, where still the very same
     rule of faith is laid down, the alarm is loudly sounded, there is
     throughout an expression of urgent warning, as needful for persons
     in the very midst of foes, some open, and more secret foes, who
     would rob GOD of His honour, and man of the everlasting inheritance,
     purchased for him by his SAVIOUR'S Blood."

     "Indeed," said I, "it is fearful to think to what lengths the pride
     of human reason will draw those who yield to it. But before you
     proceed with your statement, I should wish to know what opinion you
     have come to respecting what are so falsely, not to say profanely,
     called the ;damnatory clauses' in the Athanasian Creed.
     You are doubtless aware that many good sort of persons, who profess
     not to disapprove of the other parts of the Creed, are, (or at least
     fancy themselves,) much offended and hurt in their feeling by these
     clauses.

     "Observe, I am not now exactly referring to persons who speak
     harshly or disrespectfully of this Creed, but rather to persons of
     piety and learning, who with all reverence for it as an ancient and
     true confession of faith, have yet thought that some of the
     expressions in it are unnecessarily strong, and what they cannot
     endure to repeat or to hear."

     "Sir," he replied, "if it is not presumptuous in me to pass my
     opinion on the conduct of such persons as you represent, I should
     say to them, if you can endure to believe these things, you may also
     endure to acknowledge such your belief, and to hear it con firmed by
     the voice of the Church.

     "The parent who cannot endure to correct his child, will doubt less
     live to repent his mistaken tenderness, as we are taught in
     Scripture.

     "And if the Church or her Ministers through like false pity should
     no longer endure to hold out to our consciences the terrors of the
     LORD, we of the people shall no doubt have cause to lament their
     mistaken tenderness; even though now, like over-indulged children,
     we may many of us be impatient of strict restraint or of warnings
     seemingly severe: yet, if the Church will be but firm to her sacred
     trust, many souls will doubtless in the end bless GOD for these very
     warnings and threatenings; which now they fancy to be almost
     intolerable.

     "But as to persons who scruple not to speak scornfully and
     reproachfully of this Creed, or any part of it, I must think such
     language of theirs shows rashness, and ignorance too, very
     unbecoming a Christian. Or, it may well be asked, is a mother to be
     blamed who, seeing her child in imminent danger, warns him of it in
     language the most powerful her tongue can give utterance to?

     "If the Gospel of CHRIST be indeed our only hope, is not the Church
     a true friend to us, in telling us so; in making us confess it, as
     one may almost say, whether we choose or no?

     "If the Gospel of the LORD JESUS be our only hope; is not this
     kind?"

     "Indeed," said I, "your argument is most just; it is the truest
     kindness to warn people of their danger. But as it is too often a
     thankless office, so it is in the present instance. For, as you
     know, these, which may fitly be called ;The Warning
     Clauses,' or ;The Monitory Clauses,' are especially
     reviled; as, in fact, the tendency of the whole Creed is accounted
     to be unscriptural and uncharitable, even by some who think
     themselves, and desire to be thought by others, very serious
     Christians."

     "Sir," said he, "to any Christian who was disposed to think so ill
     of it, I should like just to mention a conversation I had some time
     last year with a man of our parish, Edmund Plush, the man that has
     set up the new beer-house. You know, Sir, I dare say, that he was
     once a gentleman's servant?"

     "I have heard so," I answered; "but as I see some of the boys
     coming, it is time for me to leave you, and make the best of my way
     to the school."

     "And I," said he, "will take the child back, and be after you in a
     quarter of an hour; but in the evening I shall hope, Sir, to have
     some further conversation with you."

     "I hope so too," I answered. But, as it happened, I was called to go
     after the Evening Service to visit a sick person in a distant part
     of the parish; and a week or two passed away before we again met. He
     then happened to come to my house one evening to settle an account;
     I desired he might come to me into my Study; and when we had
     concluded our business, I told him I wished he would stay half an
     hour, that we might finish the conversation which we had broken off
     so abruptly before.

     He said, if I were disengaged he would be glad to stay; and not
     without some difficulty I prevailed on him to sit down.

     "Richard," said I, "if you recollect, you were going to tell me of a
     conversation you had with Edmund Plush."

     "Yes, Sir," he replied; "I had two or three days' work,
     pointing his garden wall; (for Edmund is very curious about his
     fruit, especially about some favourite Orleans plums;) and one day,
     as he was standing by me, and running on with his talk about
     alterations and reforms, he said, among other observations not very
     moderate, that the Church Prayer Book wanted to be altered and
     reformed as much as any thing.

     "To this I replied, that alteration was one thing! and reform was
     another: and that if the Prayer Book was altered, it did not follow
     that it would be reformed.

     "He then went on to so say, that while he was footman at Squire
     Martingal's, over in Cheshire, one day, when he was waiting at
     table, and there were four or five gentlemen at dinner, they were
     talking about the Prayer Book, and whether it was not now time for
     it to be altered.

     "And the Squire gave it as his opinion, that there was one word in
     particular which he wished very much to see put entirely out of the
     Book; and that was, the word ;damnation.' Such words as
     that, he said, ought not to be in a book which gentlefolks were
     expected to sit and hear.

     "Edmund went on to say, that there was a gentleman at the table, who
     observed, it would be better to alter the word to
     ;condemnation;' of which the company very much approved,
     though, (as Plush himself remarked,) it was not easy to see what was
     gained by the alteration.

     "Now, Sir, it does seem to me, that Squire Martingal and his friends
     forgot, when they made such short work with the Prayer Book, that
     there was the Bible still in their way, quite as much needing to be
     corrected and amended.

     "And I told Edmund so; and I also told him, that if I were in his
     place, I should not like to go about repeating private conversations
     which he might have overheard at his master's table; especially
     when they were so little calculated to be of use.

     "However, Edmund must do as he pleases; but for myself, Sir, I do
     assure you, that after giving the subject the best consideration in
     my power, the objections which people make against the Athanasian
     Creed, are, to my thinking, not at all more substantial than Squire
     Martingal's against the Prayer Book and Bible. Indeed, Sir, it
     is my opinion, that there is nothing in that Creed either
     unscriptural or uncharitable, but quite the very contrary; that it
     is essentially, (as I once heard you call the Commination Service,)
     ;in its matter, Christian Truth; and in its manner, Christian
     Love.' And, Sir, if you will not be weary of me, I will try to
     show you how I came to this conclusion."

     "Richard," said I, "you need not fear that you will tire me."

     "Well, Sir," he proceeded; "it seemed to me plain from the
     Scriptures, (what no one indeed will deny or question,) that the
     Great ALMIGHTY GOD should be the object of all our Love and
     Adoration. From the same Scriptures it also appeared, that the LORD
     JESUS CHRIST, our only Saviour and Hope, is entitled to all our Love
     and Adoration.

     "And again, from the same Scriptures, it appears that the HOLY
     SPIRIT of GOD the only Sanctifier, Guide, and Guardian of His
     Church, is entitled to all our Love and Adoration."

     "Certainly," I replied; "no one, who believes the Scriptures, can
     doubt this."

     "And is not this," he said, "the very doctrine of the first part of
     the Creed; "that the Father is GOD, the Son is GOD, and the Holy
     Ghost is GOD; and yet they are not three GODS, but one GOD In like
     manner, if any man inquire for the very foundation of Christian hope
     and consolation, surely it is the doctrine that GOD our SAVIOUR took
     on him our frail and mortal nature; that He was ;perfect
     man,' as well as ;perfect GOD.' Without this
     doctrine, the peculiar hopes and consolations of the Gospel fade
     away and disappear. Now this is the great truth pressed on our
     thoughts in the second part of the Athanasian Creed, where we are
     taught boldly to maintain that ;the right faith is, that WE
     BELIEVE AND CONFESS---not believe only, but believe and
     confess,---that our LORD Jesus CHRIST, the Son of GOD, is GOD AND
     MAN.'"

     "Yes," I answered, "it is difficult to imagine how any one who
     acknowledges the truth of the Scriptures, can deny and question
     this. But you must, I am sure, be aware, that many people object,
     that this doctrine is not simply stated, and so left to every
     one's own conscience to approve, but that attempts are made to
     draw out distinctions and explanations, which are not in the
     Scripture, and which no one can understand; and then, after all,
     people are made to say, that whoever does not believe all this, has
     no chance of salvation."

     "Sir," he replied, "there is a verse in the Psalms, which seems to
     give an answer to such objectors; ;if I should say like them, I
     should condemn the generation of GOD'S children.' No one
     will dare deny that those who framed this Creed, and those who put
     it into our Prayer Book, were good and holy men, sincerely anxious
     for the honour of ALMIGHTY GOD, and for the salvation of men's
     souls. It was surely, not their fault that these distinctions and
     explanations, (if they are to be so called,) became necessary, but
     the fault of rash or loose-minded people, who attempted to corrupt
     the hearts of the simple with their false distinctions and false
     explanations.

     "Against such, the Church, as a good parent should, warns her sons
     in the strongest terms; and if stronger terms could have been found,
     no doubt she would have used them.

     "And it seems to me, that it is not at all the intention of the
     Church, in this Creed or any where else, to endeavour to explain
     what is above human comprehension; but only to warn us that quibbled
     and pretended distinctions have been made of old, and will be again
     against the essential doctrines of the Gospel; and that, come in
     whatever shape they may, they are to be opposed at once with a sharp
     and strong denial; to be at once, and as the Article says,
     ;thoroughly' rejected.

     "And the absolute need of some such strong impenetrable fence
     appears from what I have heard, that there have been Church people,
     and even Clergymen, who denied these doctrines, and, (as might be
     expected,) scorned this Creed. How they could reconcile their
     conduct to their consciences, it is not for me to say; but it is
     plain, that if the fence were taken away and weakened, the danger to
     the fold would be much increased."

     "I fully agree with you," was my reply; "but you know those who
     dislike this Creed assert, that the ;Fence,' as you call
     it, is much sharper and stronger than it need be; and that it would
     be better to have no ;Monitory Clauses' at all, than any
     expressed in such strong, and, as they call them, violent terms."

     "Sir," he answered, "you know that in different places of the New
     Testament, we are taught that adultery, fornication, drunkenness,
     and other such crimes, are entirely unsuitable to the Christian
     Profession, and that persons who are guilty of them do in practice
     renounce the Gospel.

     "Now supposing it should be thought well by the Governors of the
     Church to set forth a solemn warning to profligates thus
     worded:---

     "Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary
     that he avoid the crimes of adultery, whoredom, drunkenness, and
     blasphemy; which crimes, unless every one do carefully abstain from,
     without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.'

     "And if then were to follow some solemn admonitions, setting forth,
     (according to the sense, though not in the very words of Scripture,)
     the necessity of self-denial, mortification, and constant communion
     with ALMIGHTY GOD in prayer and at His holy table, so that the
     affections may be kept set on high and heavenly things; and all
     concluding thus:---

     "This is the rule of Christian Purity, which except a man
     observe faithfully he cannot be saved;'

     "Do not you, Sir, think such warnings would be quite agreeable to
     Scripture and to Christian charity?"

     "Indeed I think so," I replied.

     "And yet," he proceeded, "supposing such an admonition as this were
     to be made by authority, and ordered to be printed in all the Prayer
     Books, and to be read twelve times a year in every Church in
     England, do you not think there would be a great out cry against it;
     and that many people, when it was going to be read, would shut their
     books, or perhaps go out of the Church?"

     "It is too probable," I replied, "considering how little account is
     now made of crimes of this kind, even by many who are thought
     religious people. Indeed, I have understood from a person I can rely
     upon, otherwise I could not have credited it, that one of the
     objections which Mr. Cartwright himself brought against the Prayer
     Book, was, that in the Litany, fornication is termed ;a deadly
     sin."'

     "It is strange, indeed, Sir," said he, "and sad to think that any
     one who believes the Scriptures could offer such an objection. But
     it confirms an opinion I was going to express to you. For if a good
     kind of man, as Mr. Cartwright is said to be, objects to the Litany
     on such grounds, how much more is it to be expected that such an
     admonition as that which I have spoken of, would be frequently
     scorned and hooted at.

     "And then," continued he, "supposing such an admonition as this had
     been made and used in the Church for hundreds of years, and it were
     now to be left out in the reformed Prayer Book, would not such a
     measure give great satisfaction and encouragement to all the loose
     dissolute people throughout the country?"

     "That cannot be doubted," I answered. "But there is one objection,
     (absurd enough to be sure,) which people offer against the
     Athanasian Creed, which you have not noticed, perhaps be cause you
     had never heard of it.

     "The objection I mean is, that this Creed leaves no allowance for
     unavoidable ignorance, or bad education; nor any chance even for
     persons of weak doubting minds, no, not for idiots, or children, to
     escape from its heavy censures.

     "It is, obviously, an absurd objection, yet it is what people do
     urge, and people too who make pretension to reason and religion."

     "Sir," said he, "I can never suppose that any really conscientious
     person, whose mind was free from Prejudice, could offer such an
     objection.

     "It must be quite plain to all candid minds, that as in the
     Scripture itself, so in the Church Prayer Book, we are always
     instructed to believe that our merciful GOD makes allowance for our
     weakness and blindness in matters of knowledge and faith, as well as
     in other things. As in the Scriptures, so in the Church Prayer Book,
     we are always taught, that occasional doubt and perplexity are no
     proof of want of Faith; that he truly believes who acts (if I may so
     say,) upon trust, who, like Abraham, the father of the faithful,
     ;obeys, and goes on' obeying, ;not knowing whither he
     goes;' knowing only, that if he follow GOD'S guidance, he
     must be right.

     "It is too always taught, as in the Scriptures, so in the Prayer
     Book, that upon true repentance, sincere faith in the blood and
     Mediation of the One Redeemer, and entire submission to the Guidance
     of the One Sanctifier, it is, I say, always taught, that the door of
     mercy is open even to the most inveterate sinners, whatever the
     nature of their sins might have been; unless indeed the sin against
     the HOI.Y GHOST be considered an exception; to guard Christians
     against which, may be supposed one great and surely charitable
     purpose of this Creed.

     "How then," he proceeded, "can the Church with any show of reason be
     called ;uncharitable,' which with this evangelical
     doctrine implied in all her Services, uses occasionally the
     strongest language of warning (or even of threatening,) against
     fatal sins and errors, if by any means she may preserve the souls
     committed to her charge stedfast in the faith, ;the faith which
     was once delivered unto the saints?'"

     "Yes," said I, "once for all, never to be changed or frittered away
     in base compliance with the ever-varying customs and fancies of
     worldly and self-conceited men."

     "And, Sir," he proceeded, " I put it to myself in this way.
     What a fearful thing it would be for a person on his death-bed to
     deny the SON of GOD, the only Redeemer, and the SPIRIT of GOD, the
     only Comforter? Now the Church Prayer Book considers us all as it
     were on our death-beds, or at least but a little way from them. The
     Services for the Visitation of the Sick, and the Burial of the Dead,
     come very close after Baptism and the Catechism. As we should wish
     to die, so the Church would have us live. If it be an awful thought
     to pass into Eternity in wilful ignorance or negligence of the
     essential truths of the Gospel, is it not also an awful thought that
     people should spend this their probationary time in such ignorance
     or negligence? And again, I would ask, can the Church be called,
     ;uncharitable,' which earnestly and incessantly, and in
     the plainest, strongest words that the English language can supply,
     warns her members of their danger in this respect?"

     "Certainly, Richard," I replied, "what you say is most worthy to be
     thought on by all persons who find fault with this Creed. But I wish
     you to recollect, that many of them take what they call ;high
     ground' in their argument. They confidently assert that it is,
     ;bigoted,' ;unscriptural,'
     ;unchristian,' and other such hard names, to pretend that
     ;modes of faith,' (that is their term,) arc of any great
     importance, or indeed of any importance at all; that if a man's
     life is in the right, his faith can't be wrong; that of course
     adultery and those kind of things are forbidden in the Testament,
     but that there are few passages, (or as some of them say) none at
     all, which can be brought forward in support of the opinions put
     forth in the Athanasian Creed; much less (they assert) can any
     passages be found, denouncing so heavy a foe against those who
     reject these opinions."

     "Sir," he replied, with more than even his usual energy, "I will be
     bold to say, that there are as many passages in the New Testament,
     distinctly proving and supporting the great doctrines put forth in
     the Athanasian Creed, as there are passages expressly forbidding
     adultery, and other such crimes. But supposing it were otherwise, it
     really does not appear to me, that the case would be different,
     Gambling is not in words forbidden, (so far as I can recollect,) in
     any part or passage in the Old or New Testament; yet no one doubts,
     I mean, no serious thinking person, that it is one of the most fatal
     habits a person can get into.; not because it is expressly forbidden
     in any part or passage, but be cause it is against the whole Gospel;
     utterly inconsistent with a Christian's practice.

     "Now, Sir, it really does appear to me, that to deny the great
     doctrines contained in this noble Creed, is not merely to go against
     express passages of Scripture; passages, I mean, wherein our LORD
     JESUS, and the Blessed SPIRIT, are spoken of as GOD; but more than
     this, it is against the whole Gospel, utterly inconsistent with a
     Christian's faith."

     "Well, Richard," I said, "the considerations you have suggested are
     certainly such as should lead all Christians to pause before they
     encourage in themselves or others any dislike of this ancient, and
     as you justly call it, this noble Creed."

     "Sir," he replied, "in my poor judgment it is indeed a noble, a
     magnificent confession.

     "But still, noble and magnificent as it is, if it, or any part of
     it, were against Scripture, or against Christian Charity, I, for
     one, should not be easy till it were put out of the Prayer Book.

     "How happy then am I to think that it breathes the very spirit of
     pure Christian Charity; of Love, more than parental; of Lore like
     His, Sir, who so often would have gathered His children together, as
     a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, BUT THEY WOULD NOT!

     "Yes, Richard," I said; "and often as this tender yearning anxiety
     for men's souls is displayed in the conduct and words of our
     adored Master, I have frequently thought it nowhere more strikingly
     appears, than in that pathetic chapter of warnings to which you
     refer, the 23rd of St. Matthew; a chapter truly of ;monitory
     clauses.'"

     "Sir," he answered, "it might almost be expected of those who rashly
     accuse the Church of uncharitableness for retaining the Athanasian
     Creed, that they should also wish to have that chapter left out of
     the Calendar; as indeed I have heard that they do wish many of the
     Psalms to be omitted on some such ground.

     "But it is now time for me to wish you good evening; hoping, Sir,
     that I have not taken too great a liberty in thus speaking out my
     opinions, or wearied you by staying too long."

     "Richard," said I, "once for all, believe me it is one of the chief
     comforts and encouragements I have, to be with you at Church and at
     School, and to talk with you on these great subjects."

     OXFORD,
     The Feast of the Epiphany.
