                            Tracts for the Times
                                 [Number 40]

                               RICHARD NELSON.
                                  No. III.

                                  BAPTISM.

     Ye hear in the Gospel the express words of our Saviour Christ, that
     except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
     into the kingdom of God. Whereby ye may perceive the great necessity
     of this Sacrament, where it may be had."---Office of Baptism for
     those of Riper Years.
     __________________________________________________________________

     DURING the summer, after the conversation last related, in which, as
     the reader may remember, we had been speaking of the Athanasian
     Creed, I was called away to a distance from home by the unexpected
     illness of a near relation, which became serious, and lasted so long
     as to keep me absent for two or three Sundays. The time of year was
     about Midsummer, and it so happened that one of the Sundays was the
     eighth after Trinity. Thinking over the first morning lesson of the
     day, as I sat watching by my kinsman's bedside, I was forcibly
     struck by the awful way, in which it appears to impress upon men the
     duty of separating themselves, in some way or other, from
     unbelievers. "Eat no bread, nor drink water, neither turn again by
     the way that thou camest:" that is, "however tired, hungry, and
     thirsty you may be, and however kind and pressing they may be, have
     nothing at all to say to them: do not even return the same road, but
     make your self as strange among them as ever you can." Long and
     deeply, with my Bible in my hand, did I muse upon this history, and
     the more I thought, the more I was convinced, putting every thing
     together, that such as I have said is its true moral and meaning. I
     must own, however, that the train of thought was not altogether
     agreeable to me. I could not disengage myself from an unpleasant,
     though not a very distinct, conviction that this material part of
     piety, separation from the enemies of God, had not been sufficiently
     pressed on my people, in my course of parochial instruction. The
     thought came across my mind, "What if any of them now should go
     astray for want of due warning on that point, and should come to a
     bad end?" And I secretly determined with myself, in the silence of
     the sick room, that I would endeavour for the future to supply this
     great deficiency, and that until Church discipline can be restored
     again (which the Prayer Book teaches us to wish and pray for), I
     would try to prevail on those who were most likely to be prevailed
     to act upon the principles of it, and establish something like it in
     their own houses: using a kind of holy reserve towards those who
     will not hear the Church. These thoughts occupied me that night
     during most of my waking hours, my patient happily sleeping soundly,
     and my anxiety about him of course growing less: and when towards
     morning I was relieved on my post as nurse, the same thoughts still
     haunted me in my dreams. At last I settled into a sound slumber,
     and, as was not unnatural, overslept myself. I was awakened on the
     Monday morning, an hour after the usual time, by my friend's
     servant bringing a letter into my room, which I saw by the post mark
     came from my own parish, but I could not at all recollect the hand
     writing. I opened it eagerly, not knowing what to expect, and read
     as follows:

     "Honoured and dear Sir,

     "I make bold to trouble you with a few lines, as I find on calling
     at the Parsonage that Mr. Mason is not yet well enough for you to
     leave him: which a little troubled me, for I wanted to ask your kind
     advice on a matter of some consequence, and I could do it much more
     comfortably by word of mouth. As it is, I must try and state my case
     to you by letter, hoping that I shall be able to make it plain, and
     knowing that you will excuse other defects, which will be many. The
     thing, Sir, is this: you have seen something of my nephew, young
     Philip Carey, the bricklayer of Amdale. For I remember, when he had
     some work in our parish, he went to you to buy a Bible, and you had
     some talk with him, and named him to me afterwards, seeming rather
     pleased with him; and indeed he is a steady, good tempered lad,
     though I say it that should not say it. Well, Sir, that Bible was
     intended for a present, he would not tell me then to whom, but I
     afterwards found that he had given it to a young woman named Vane,
     who was in service, where he last worked: and in short, there was a
     talk among the people, which I as a kinsman was one of the last to
     hear, that they were very soon going to be married. I was not very
     much surprised at this: but I own to you, Sir, I was more vexed than
     some of our people can well account ;for. Not that I have any
     thing to say against the young woman's conduct; indeed I
     believe she has always borne a good character, and is, as the world
     goes, very respectable: but I know very well that her father had
     been for many years unsettled in his thoughts on religion---more,
     as I believed, of a Baptist than any thing else: and I thought to
     myself, if Letitia (for that is her name) is not very different from
     her father, how can the Church's blessing go along with such an
     union? and without the Church's blessing, how can they expect
     to be happy? So I made it my business to see my nephew, and asked
     him quietly, if no scruple of this sort had ever come into his mind;
     and a good deal passed between us, which I need not at present tire
     you with. However, the upshot was, we parted good friends, but both
     of the same mind as when we met. And on the Sunday I walked over to
     Amdale, and called on my sister Lucy, Philip's mother (his
     father died last year), and we had a long discourse, in which she
     seemed to think me strange and bigoted: but yet I hoped that what I
     had said would keep them from going on quite inconsiderately. So
     much the more was I disappointed at receiving a note from my sister
     this morning, begging me to order my matters so as to be at Amdale
     church at 10 o'clock next Saturday, they having fixed on that
     day for the wedding, and wishing me to give the young woman away. I
     can see, they quite reckon' upon it, and I fear they will be
     very much affronted should I refuse. I conclude they hardly thought
     me quite in earnest in what I said to them. But though it will be a
     great grief to me to have them look unpleasant at me (for next to my
     own family, I have always delighted in my sister's), I seem to
     have made up my mind, unless you, Sir, should think differently, not
     to have anything to do with this marriage; and I cannot help
     thinking they will one day thank me for it. I shall not now intrude
     on you with my reasons; but one line just to say yes or no would
     greatly oblige,

     "Honoured and dear Sir,

     "Your humble and obliged servant,

     "RICHARD NELSON."

     When I had read this letter, though I was grieved to think that my
     friend Richard, who had always lived such a quiet life, and with
     whom I had sometimes talked of the great happiness we both
     enjoyed---a rare happiness in these times---of belonging, each
     of us, to a family undivided in religious opinions: though, I say, I
     was grieved to think of Richard's being thus disturbed, yet I
     was on the whole more pleased for the thing to have be fallen him
     than if it had happened to any other man in the parish, for reasons
     which the reader will easily guess. I wrote to him as he desired,
     not a long letter, but such as to show him that I heartily approved
     of his principles, and trusted to his discretion for applying them
     in the most effectual way. While I stayed with my relation, I heard
     no more of the matter, but I thought of it day and night, and
     wondered how it would turn out. The middle of the next week, my
     relation having nearly recovered, I returned home; and the first
     thing I did was to contrive a little job of walling, that I might
     have an excuse for sending to Richard Nelson. I saw at once, when he
     came into the room, that he had been going through a good deal; he
     looked anxious, though very calm and cheerful. The following
     conversation, or some thing very like it, passed between us, after I
     had given my orders about the work:---

     "And how goes on this wedding, Richard?"

     "Pretty much as I expected, Sir: we have had a good deal to say to
     each other about it, I, and my sister, and Mr. Vane; but though I
     spoke very plainly to them, they would not believe I was in earnest,
     till the very day before that intended for the marriage. And when
     they saw that I meant what I said, they were forced to put off the
     marriage, till a friend of theirs can be written to, and come, with
     whom it seems they had made an old engagement, that he should be the
     father at their wedding, if any one was, out of their two families.
     In the mean time I am sorry to say they look rather black on me; and
     not only they, but a many of the neighbours too. But luckily I had
     made up my mind to that beforehand."

     "They must look black upon me, too, then. For I should have done
     just the same, according to what I understand of the case. But I
     suppose you told them on what ground you went?"

     "I did, Sir, as well as I could, in y plain way. I saw them all at
     different times, Mr. Vane, and my sister, and the two young people,
     and told them all the same thing; viz., that I look on marriage as a
     sacred thing; that the Church never meant her sacred things to be
     made common; that such would be the case, were a person in
     Letitia's state (for do you know, Sir, she is not yet even
     baptized,) to be admitted to Christian marriage; that the neglect of
     this rule is every day doing great mischief; and that, being as I
     am, Philip's Godfather, as well as his nearest relation, I was
     bound especially to do what I could to hinder him from the sin and
     the peril.

     "And it was curious to me, Sir, in the midst of my vexation, to
     observe in what a different way the different persons I had to deal
     with received what I had to say. Each had his own objection, one to
     one part of my notions, and another to another. Mr. Vane thought it
     very strange that marriage should be made so purely a matter of
     Religion; my sister, I am sorry to say, was inclined to think very
     slightly of the difference between us and the Baptists; Philip was
     quite sure, that let him be once married, he should soon bring his
     wife to the same way of thinking as himself, (for to do him justice,
     he has no thought of leaving the Church;) and, as for the young
     woman, she said but little, but what she said, affected me more than
     all the rest; for she really seemed to think me unkind and cruel, in
     exposing and discrediting her, and making her out (so she said) to
     be no Christian."

     "I do not much wonder," said I, "at the young people; but I own I am
     a little surprised that Mr. Vane should utter a thought which
     appears to me so very shocking, as that marriage need not be
     sanctified by Religion at all."

     "Why, Sir," replied Richard Nelson, "he has been of late much out
     and about, talking with all sorts of people; and then he meddles
     with politics and elections, all rather in a wild way, and it brings
     him into strange company, and sets him on reading strange books. So
     he has picked up this notion among others, which I understand the
     French are very full of, as well as our Frenchified newspapers But I
     should not have thought of arguing with him about it, it seems so
     absurd and shocking of itself, if I had not been afraid of his doing
     my nephew some harm by it; for Philip was in the room with us, of
     course listening eagerly to what passed. But I do not know"
     (interrupting himself) "why I am troubling you, Sir, with this
     conversation."

     "By all means go on, I beg of you. I am a little inquisitive to know
     what he could have to say for such a notion."

     "His fancy was, as far as I could make it out, that the peace and
     order of the country is every thing. And if, said he, people can go
     on well, and be faithful and happy in marriage without any public
     religious service, why should it be urged on them by the law?"

     "To which I suppose you answered, that there is another world as
     well as this; and it does not follow that things will turn out well
     in that, because to our short and dim sight they seem to go on in
     peace and order here."

     "To be sure, Sir, that is very plain; but I do not think I went so
     deep. I took him straight to Scripture; for in that way I thought
     Philip would attend to me most. I put it to him in this way: if
     marriage is a different thing to a Christian from what it would be
     to any one else; if it is not only one of the greatest earthly
     blessings, but also a special and holy token, appointed by God to
     signify unto us the mystical union that is betwixt Christ and his
     Church; then, to enter on it without prayer, or in any other but a
     religious way, must be almost as affronting to the Almighty, as if
     one profaned the Sacrament of His Son's body and blood. And
     again, since we are plainly told, that Christian men ought never to
     expect any blessings from God, except as members of His Son's
     body, (that is, I take it, as parts of His Church,) how can one help
     fearing to forfeit the whole of the blessing intended in matrimony,
     if one scornfully refuse it as offered by the Church? And I take it,
     that every man does reject it in God's sight, who, disliking it
     in his heart, submits to it merely because it is the law of the
     land. Thus I went on, not expecting to make any impression on Mr.
     Vane; indeed, I saw too clearly that he was sneering in his heart
     all the time, but he did not like to say much, for fear of turning
     Philip against him; who, as I rejoiced to perceive, entered very
     much into this part of my talk. And as we walked away to my
     sister's, he expressed to me some wonder that so pious a man as
     Mr. Vane should ever have approved of the notion of marrying by
     Justices of the Peace. ;But I assure you, uncle,' said he,
     ;that we none of us agree with him. My mother and Letitia would
     both of them be miserable if they thought the Church's blessing
     would be wanting on our union. And although I must acknowledge that
     I could wish some parts of the service omitted, yet it must be
     owned, on the whole, to be extremely beautiful; and I, for my
     part,' he went on to say, ;never expect to see the day,
     when I shall take any dislike to the Church, for that or any other
     reason."'

     Here I interrupted Richard in his recital. "I do wish," I said,
     "that people who are so much wiser and more delicate than the Prayer
     Book, would look a little into their Bibles too. And when they have
     well reformed both, we shall see how purely the world will go on,
     the warnings of God being silenced, and the mistake corrected, which
     the Church has made, in speaking out plainly about fashionable and
     shameful sins."

     My friend Richard smiled at my vehemence, and said, "To be sure,
     Sir, it is tolerably plain, (what I have often thought of the
     warnings of the Athanasian Creed also,) that the very repugnance
     which many men feel towards repeating them, is rather a proof of
     their usefulness and necessity, supposing the substance of them to
     be true. For it is plain, that people who shudder so much at
     repeating them after the Church, would never have courage to deliver
     the like warnings for themselves. And the same kind of remark may be
     made on the passages you now allude to in the Office of Matrimony.
     And thus people might be left to perish unwarned, through false
     delicacy, or false good nature. I must say, that if I was a
     Clergyman, and felt, as I suppose I should feel, that such warnings
     ought to be given, I should feel most deeply obliged to the Prayer
     Book for putting words into my mouth, and commanding me to speak
     them. I would much rather have it so, than be left to form words of
     my own. I should feel it less painful to myself, and probably less
     annoying to others. And now that we are upon this subject; permit
     me, Sir, just to ask you, do you not think: it would do much good,
     and correct what may perhaps be justly called the vulgar objections
     to the Marriage Service, if men would. try to enter a little more
     into the spirit of the household: stories, and family scenes of the
     Old Testament? The book of Ruth especially---can anyone read it
     reverently, and not learn a great deal of the difference between
     True and False Delicacy? You will feel my meaning, Sir, at once."

     "Indeed," said I, "I do; and although I am not aware that I ever
     before heard it said in so many words, yet, I should imagine it must
     have been silently experienced by every right-minded reader. And if
     it should turn out, that the spirit of that Book is exactly the same
     with the spirit of our Marriage Service, who would desire a more
     complete vindication of it? But pray let us go back to your story,
     which I beg pardon for having interrupted. You were on the way to
     your sister, Mrs. Carey's; and I think you told me, that you
     found it very hard to make her so much as understand your objection
     to the marriage, or how any one could possibly imagine Baptists, as
     such, to be aliens to the Church."

     "Yes! she was quite positive at first, that I must have some view of
     my own, some worldly purpose, in ;setting my head' against
     the match. As long as she had this fancy, she would not even listen
     to my arguments; and as it was, I believe she did but half hear
     them. I did not indeed trouble her with many for I thought that two
     or three plain texts, with the interpretation confirmed by a little
     unquestionable history, might and ought to be sufficient."

     "Let me just guess, what line you probably took with her. I suppose
     you first pointed out to her, that our Saviour's promises are
     made to individuals, not simply as believing and repenting, but as
     joining themselves, by faith and repentance, to the Church which He
     was founding through his Apostles. For instance, you might perhaps
     put her in mind, that our Saviour in His prayer before His
     sufferings, in ch. xvii. of St. John, plainly had an eye to the
     command he purposed to give them, when he was going to be taken out
     of their sight: which command we read in the last three verses of
     St. Matthew. The prayer was ;not for the Apostles alone, but
     for all who should believe on Him THROUGH THEIR WORD: that they all
     might be one. For whom was this prayer offered? Not for all who any
     how should believe in CHRIST, but ;for them who should believe
     on Him through the word of the Apostles:' i. e. for the very
     same per sons described in the other text: ;GO ye and teach
     (or, as it is in the margin, make Disciples, or Christians, of all
     nations, baptizing them in the name of the FATHER, the SON, and the
     HOLY GHOST.' Those whom he had before prayed for, he here in
     effect orders to be taught or made Disciples, by persons having
     Apostolical authority. But these very same Disciples are to be one
     and all baptized. For our Lord's words are quite express:
     ; Make Christians of them by baptizing them;' so that if
     we are to go by these words, it is quite plain that persons
     unbaptized cannot properly be called Christians: and if we compare
     the same words with the other text, it seems very doubtful whether
     such persons are included in the meaning of our SAVIOUR'S
     gracious intercession: which is surely a point to be deeply
     considered. Do you quite understand me, Richard?"

     "Yes, Sir, I believe I do. Those are some of the places in
     Scripture, which I turned to and begged my sister Lucy to consider.
     But of course, Sir, I could not reason on them so exactly as you
     have now done. There was another place too, which I begged her to
     think a good deal of, which must needs, I think, sound very awful to
     those who are inclined to make light of Baptism: I mean what was
     said to Nicodemus, ;Except a man be born OF WATER and of the
     Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD.' It seems to
     me, Sir, that in speaking those words, our Saviour, who knew what he
     would do, must have borne in mind his purpose of causing water to be
     what it is made in the Sacrament of Baptism, the outward and visible
     sign of our new birth, and admission into His Church. I put the
     substance of the two places side by side in this way.

     St. John iii. 5.

     If you would enter into the kingdom of GOD, you must be born of
     water and of the Spirit.

     St. Matt. xxviii. 19.

     If you would be a Disciple or Christian, you must be baptized by
     Apostolical authority. in the name of the Holy Trinity.

     What made me stronger in this opinion, was observing the like
     argument in our Divine Master's language, when speaking of the
     other Holy Sacrament. As thus: for I wrote the four places down to
     make my meaning plain to the very eye.

     St. John vi. 53.

     If you would have life in you, you must eat the flesh of the Son of
     man, and drink his blood.

     St. Matt. xxvi. 28.

     If you would eat Christ's body and drink his blood, you must
     take and eat the bread, and drink of the cup, blessed by those who
     have authority to bless it in remembrance of Him.

     "I hope, Sir, you will not think that I am using the Bible too
     freely: but I must own, to me it is very convincing, when I see one
     part of our SAVIOUR'S discourses thus pointing as it were to
     another, and both so thoroughly agreeing with the known customs of
     the early Church, as I have always understood these do.

     "For it is now some few years, Sir, since I began to think on this
     subject, and what few doubts I had, were very much settled by a book
     which you kindly spared me from your Lending Library. I think it was
     called ;A conference of two men on the subject of Infant
     Baptism.' And it showed to my thinking most closely, the
     opinion of the Church on that subject, in times when they must have
     known what the very Apostles used to do.

     "These things, in my plain way, I tried to point out to my sister;
     and I was in hopes to have convinced her that wilfully to remain
     unbaptized is a more grievous sin than the generality of Dissenters
     (aye, and a great many Churchmen) imagine. I thought, when our LORD
     so distinctly affirmed, that one MUST be born of water and the
     Spirit, before one could even ;enter into GOD'S
     kingdom,' it was not too much to ask of a Christian man, that
     he should not marry such a person, considering what the Holy Spirit
     has said by St. Paul to all Christians, that if they marry, they
     must marry ;in the Lord;' that is to say, must select such
     persons as make part of the body of Christ, considering too what
     strict charges were given to the Israelites of old time, not to make
     marriages with the heathen and unbelievers. I thought to myself, and
     I put it strongly to my sister, how can I, with these convictions,
     with the Scriptures lying open before me, and as I think distinctly
     forbidding such things, how can I be helper to such a union? how can
     I come to GOD'S altar, and present my relation there to Him,
     and beg His blessing on an act which in my conscience I believe to
     be sinful, and most provoking to Him? In short, I told them it was
     out of the question; and if they would put themselves in my place
     for a moment, they would see that it must be so."

     "I should like to know what the young man thought, as he stood by
     and heard all this."

     "Oh, Sir, I could see that he was very uneasy; he made two or three
     endeavours to break in upon us with some remarks of his own: but I
     was steady in not permitting him till I had stated my own view, so
     as to give it a fair chance. When I had finished, and was going
     away, leaving my sister, as it seemed to me, more puzzled than
     convinced by what had been said, Philip came close up to me, and
     said, in the tone of a man more or less vexed, ;You mistake me
     quite, uncle, if you think I have any notion of leaving the Church,
     because I am proposing to marry one who is not yet a Churchwoman. I
     like the Church as well as ever. I was born and bred in it, and hope
     to die in it; nay, and by this very engagement of mine, I expect to
     do good service to the Church. For I shall be very much disappointed
     indeed, if Letitia be not very soon prevailed on to be baptized, and
     conform, after she becomes my wife.'

     "I told him, if such was indeed her mind, the matter might in no
     long time be settled to the satisfaction of us all. He had only to
     wait till that happy change, which he so confidently looked for, had
     taken place, and I would most gladly attend him as he desired. At
     this he looked a little disconcerted, and it was plain enough that
     he had been mistaking what he only wished, for what was likely to
     happen. So I just asked him one question, whether he thought himself
     wiser and steadier than Solomon? He very likely (said I), when he
     permitted himself first to form an attachment to a heathen, expected
     to bring her over to the faith and worship of the one true GOD; but
     it ended in his becoming himself an idolater. Indeed, GOD'S
     warnings to his ancient people, not to be unequally yoked with
     unbelievers, every where go upon the notion, that the'
     corrupting side in such unions will be commonly too strong for that
     which was originally right. How can it be otherwise, while human
     nature is corrupt, and when the aid of Divine Grace is forfeited by
     men's presumptuously running themselves into a state of
     continual temptation? And, I added, what I have more than once heard
     from those who have read modern history, that the same kind of
     result is there also visible enough, attending on the like profane
     marriages among those who call themselves Christians. I ventured to
     mention one example, which had occurred to myself, in such little
     reading as I have had time for in that line---the example of one
     whom I deeply honour and reverence---you will guess that I mean
     King Charles the Martyr. I do not know whether I am right, but it
     has always seemed to me, that the one great error of his
     Majesty's life was his being ;unequally yoked' with a
     person of another creed,---a person with whom I suppose he could
     not well pray, although, as we happen to know for certain, he prayed
     constantly for her conversion. His own faith to be sure was
     unstained; but we know what evil ensued to his family and kingdom;
     and perhaps many of his own calamities might be traced to the cause.
     Now if that just and good king cannot be excused for such a
     marriage, what can be said for an ordinary Christian, should he run
     into the like danger? What is ;tempting GOD, if this be
     not?' Thus I ran on; but Philip evidently said little attention
     to me. He seemed to be making up his mind that I was prejudiced, and
     that it was no use his listening at all. So I went away for the
     present, hoping before long to have an opportunity of speaking to
     him when he was more willing to hear."

     "I thought," said I, "that you told me just now of your having
     conversed with the young woman herself: did I mistake you? or was
     that at another time?"

     "That was just as I was going away: I passed by accident through the
     room where she was, and we had a very few words together. It was
     plain at once, by her manner, that she considered me personally
     unkind in what I had been saying of her to my sister. I begged her
     to bear with me, considering that I was so much older, and that I
     could have nothing at heart but my nephew's good; and I put her
     in mind of two or three things which had passed, such as I thought
     would be most apt to pacify and soothe her when she remembered them;
     and then I begged her seriously to consider, not at present whether
     I was right or no in my opinion of the necessity of Baptism, but
     supposing I thought myself right, how could I act otherwise than I
     was doing? Which, I asked, is the truer charity? to let people go on
     unbaptized and unsanctified, for fear of paining them;---to treat
     them as if they were quite safe, when if you will believe our
     SAVIOUR, you must believe they have not yet even entered into the
     Church and Kingdom of GOD,---or to show them that you feel in
     earnest for their danger; to remind them what sentence the Church
     would pass on them, should they die in their present condition? She
     would not, in that case, allow them Christian burial. Why?
     Evidently, because she thinks them not members of CHRIST'S
     body; not entitled by covenant to those promises, the rehearsing of
     which over the grave are in her mind is part of Christian burial. I
     believe, and obey the Church; and if it was the nearest and dearest
     relation I have, I should count it kindness; not cruelty, to treat
     him as she would have him treated to ;have compassion on him,
     making a difference,' and so try to bring him, with an humble
     and penitent heart, to our SAVIOUR'S Baptism in good time.

     "This was the tone of what I said to her; but I had hardly time for
     so much as this: however, as she is naturally good tempered and
     candid, she seemed to take it pretty well."

     "I should like to know," said I, "whether she has ever expressed any
     wish for Baptism. A person who thinks of it, but is as yet
     irresolute, may be regarded, I should think, in a different light
     from one who distinctly slights and disparages it; more like one of
     the beginners in Christianity, who were called in old time
     Catechumens. Whereas, those who indulge in scorn, and make
     themselves easy in such a condition, show the very temper of the
     worst heretics. Have you any notion to which of these two classes
     the young woman you are speaking of rather belongs?"

     "I should not suppose she had ever thought much of the matter, until
     of late, that the question has been started by this proposed
     wedding. What thoughts she has, I should fear, are rather of the
     scornful kind. She has been used to hear people say, under breath,
     perhaps, but not the less emphatically for that, something like what
     Naaman the Syrian said, ;May I not wash elsewhere, and be
     clean?' with plenty of hints about superstition and Popery, and
     other words of the like sound."

     "It is too likely: one has heard of late of too much of that kind
     among the Baptists, and among others who agree with them in
     slighting the ancient Church. And worse consequences even than the
     contempt of Baptism follow, I fear, too often. Persons become
     generally irreverent towards religion altogether. A proud common
     sense, as it calls itself, usurps the place of that humility which
     befits a creature and a sinner in judging of his duties towards GOD.
     Nothing is cordially believed which is not theoretically understood:
     nothing carefully and reverently practised, of which the use is not
     perceived. And thus the religion of our time is in danger of
     dwindling down to a wretched kind of political decency: and where,
     of all parties, is the change going on most rapidly? Among those who
     left the Apostolical Church because ;it was not spiritual
     enough' for them!"

     "And yet, Sir, is there any thing so strange in that? Our blessed
     LORD joined the two together, the high, mysterious, and spiritual,
     doctrine of the Trinity, with the no less mysterious communication
     of grace by water Baptism. They who begin by being so bold as to
     despise the water, which He commanded to be used, it is very
     natural, as far as I see, that they should end by despising the word
     which He commanded to be spoken,---the sacred name of the FATHER,
     the SON, and the HOLY GHOST.

     "It is indeed but too natural, like all the other steps which men
     make down the broad way which leads to perdition. But it is some
     kind of satisfaction to me to find, that quiet thoughtful laymen see
     the danger, as well as we who are of the clergy. And I suppose we
     shall be pretty well agreed upon the remedy, namely, to do what
     little we can towards reviving among men the knowledge and love of
     the ancient Church."

     "Ah, Sir, if that might be! But a Christian must not despond about
     the Church, nor the meanest Christian of being made useful, in his
     place, towards the highest ends. I will not therefore indulge in
     forebodings: but will rather try again what I can do with the
     opportunity which Providence has put in my way. I certainly will do
     nothing to countenance this marriage; and if I cannot prevent it, at
     least some part of what I say may rise up in some of their minds
     some day, and may help them to truer and better thoughts. But you
     must help me, Sir, with your advice, and (may I be so bold?) with
     your prayers."

     "It is my bounden duty, Richard," said I, as I shook him by the hand
     at parting. "And take this Scripture home for your comfort; that if
     a man humbly ;cast his bread upon the waters,' ---if he
     trust his Maker with it in earnest, he shall ; find it after
     many days."'

     OXFORD,
     The Feast of St. James.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
