                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

      WHETHER A CLERGYMAN OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND BE NOW BOUND TO HAVE
           MORNING AND EVENING PRAYERS DAILY IN HIS PARISH CHURCH?

                                 [Number 84]
     __________________________________________________________________

           COLLECTIONS IN ORDER TO THE RESOLUTION OF THIS QUESTION.

     1. BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER---"They (the Fathers) so ordered the
     matter, that all the whole Bible (or the greatest part thereof)
     should be read over once every year; intending thereby, that the
     clergy, and especially such as were ministers in the congregation,
     should (by often reading and meditation in GOD'S word) be stirred up
     to godliness themselves, and be more able to exhort others by
     wholesome doctrine, and to confute them that were adversaries to the
     truth; and further, that the people (by daily hearing of the Holy
     Scripture read in the Church) might continually profit more and more
     in the knowledge of GOD, and be the more inflamed with the love of
     His true religion."---Concerning the Service of the Church.

     2. "All priests and deacons are to say daily the Morning and Evening
     Prayer, either privately or openly, not being let by sickness, or
     some other urgent cause. And the curate that ministereth in every
     parish-church or chapel, being at home, and not being otherwise
     reasonably hindered, shall say the same in the parish-church or
     chapel where he ministereth, and shall cause a bell to be tolled
     thereunto a convenient time before he begin, that the people may
     come to hear GOD'S word, and to pray with him."---Ibid.

     [Note, that these last directions used to be inclosed in inverted
     commas, probably for the purpose of calling peculiar attention. It
     might be asked, on what authority the commas have been omitted in
     recent editions of the Prayer Book?]

     3. "The Psalter shall be read through once every month, as it is
     there appointed, both for Morning and Evening Prayer."--- Order
     how the Psalter is appointed to be read.

     4. "The Old Testament is appointed for the first Lessons at Morning
     and Evening Prayer, so as the most part thereof all be read over
     every year once. The New Testament is appointed for the second
     Lessons at Morning and Evening Prayer, and shall be read over
     orderly every year thrice."---Order how the rest of Holy
     Scripture is appointed to be read.

     5. TITLE.--- "The Order for Morning and Evening Prayer daily to
     be said and used throughout the year."

     6. TE DEUM.---"Day by day we magnify thee....

     "Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin."

     7. RUBRIC.---"The Collects [for Peace and for Grace] shall never
     alter, but daily be said at Morning Prayer throughout all the year."
     See also the Collect for Grace.

     See likewise the Rubric before the Second Collect at Evening Prayer,
     and the Collect for Aid against all Perils.

     The Collect for the First Sunday in Advent is to be repeated every
     day, until Christmas Eve.

     That for Ash-Wednesday is to be read every day in Lent, after the
     Collect appointed for the day.

     The Morning and Evening Service to be used daily at Sea, shall be
     the same which is appointed in the Book of Common Prayer.

     8. In the Prayer-book of 1552, instead of "not being let by
     sickness," &c. (see No. 2.) we have, "except they be letted by
     preaching, studying of divinity, or some other," &c.

     9. Q. ELIZABETH'S INJUNCTIONS, 1559.--- "Item, That weekly
     upon Wednesdays and Fridays, not being holy-days, the curate at the
     accustomed hours of service shall resort to church, and cause
     warning to be given to the people by knolling of a bell, and say the
     Litany and Prayers."---Injunction 48th. Bishop Sparrow's
     Coll. p. 79.

     10. CANON XIV. JAMES I.--- "The Common Prayer shall be said or
     sung distinctly and reverently upon such days as are appointed to be
     kept holy by the Book of Common Prayer, and their eves, and at
     convenient and usual times of those days, and in such place of every
     church as the bishop of the diocese, or ecclesiastical ordinary of
     the place shall think meet for the largeness or straitness of the
     same, so as the people may be most edified. All ministers likewise
     shall observe the orders, rites, and ceremonies, prescribed in the
     Book of Common Prayer, as well in reading the Holy Scriptures, and
     saying of prayers, as in administration of the Sacraments, without
     either diminishing in regard of preaching, or in any other respect,
     or adding any thing in the matter or form thereof."

     11. CANON XV.---"The Litany shall be said or sung when, and as it
     is set down in the Book of Common Prayer, by the parsons, vicars,
     ministers, or curates, in all cathedral, collegiate or parish
     churches and chapels, in some convenient place, according to the
     discretion of the bishop of the diocese, or ecclesiastical ordinary
     of the place. And that we may speak more particularly, upon
     Wednesdays and Fridays weekly, though they be not holydays, the
     minister at the accustomed hours of service shall resort to the
     church and chapel, and warning being given to the people by tolling
     of a bell, shall say the Litany prescribed in the Book of Common
     Prayer: whereunto we wish every householder dwelling within half a
     mile of the church to come, or send one at the least of his
     household fit to join with the minister in prayers."

     12. After the words "some urgent cause," (see No. 2.) the Scotch
     Prayer-book had, "Of which cause, if it be frequently pretended,
     they are to make the bishop of the diocese, or the archbishop of the
     province, the judge and allower."

     13. TITLE OF THE LITANY.--- "Here followeth the Litany to be used
     after the third collect at Morning Prayer, called the Collect for
     Grace, upon Sundayes, Wednesdayes and Fridayes, and at other times
     when it shall be commanded by the ordinarie, and without omission of
     any part of the other daily service of the Church on those
     days."---Prayer-book of the Church of Scotland, 1637.

     14. PRAYER IN EMBER WEEKS.---"A Prayer to be said in the Ember
     weeks, for those which are then to be admitted into holy orders; and
     is to be read every day of the week, beginning on the Sunday before
     the day of ordination."---Prayer-book of the Church of Scotland.

     15. ACT OF UNIFORMITY, 14 C. O. cap. iv. ÃY 2.---"Be it enacted
     by the King's most excellent Majesty, &c., That all and
     singular ministers in any cathedral, collegiate or parish church or
     chapel, or other place of public worship within this realm of
     England, dominion of Wales, and town of Berwick-upon-Tweed, shall be
     bound to say and use the Morning Prayer, Evening Prayer, celebration
     and administration of both the Sacraments, and all other the publick
     and common prayer, in such other and form as is mentioned in the
     said book, annexed and joined to this present act, and intituled,
     ;The Book of Common Prayer,' &c.: and that the Morning and
     Evening Prayers therein contained, shall upon every Lord's Day,
     and upon all other days and occasions, and at the times therein
     appointed, be openly and solemnly read by all and every minister or
     curate in every church, chapel or other place of public worship
     within this realm of England, and places aforesaid."

     16. DR. NICHOLLS.--- "Morning, and Evening Prayer shall be used,
     and all other the Common Prayer, administration, &c. in the order
     and form, and on the days, and times appointed, nor will any
     dispensation excuse the performance of what is here
     required."---Dr. Nicholls on the Act of Uniformity.

     17. "The Rubric here (see No. 2.) speaks of the whole Morning and
     Evening Prayer, which our Reformers would not have in any case,
     neglected by ministers of the Church; but that they should be as
     diligent, in using the English Liturgy, as the Papists were the
     Latin; and if they could not get a congregation at church, they
     should use the public forms with their own families at home.

     "Now, it is certain, by the rules of the Roman Church, even before
     the Reformation, and the Council of Trent, that the clergy were
     obliged to recite the canonical hours, or the offices of the several
     hours of day and night, which are in the Breviary; either publicly
     in a church, or chapel, or privately by themselves. The canon law is
     positive as to this, with relation to priests. Decret. dis. 91. And
     it is the common opinion of the divines and canonists, that deacons
     and sub-deacons were obliged to the same. Wherefore, since our
     Reformers thought it convenient that the mumbling over the prayers
     in private should be laid aside by the clergy, they would not
     perfectly exonerate them from the constant repetition of the public
     devotions; and therefore they changed the private recital of the
     Morning and Evening service, which was before performed by each
     clergyman alone by himself, into family prayer, when a congregation
     could not be gotten at Church."---Dr. Nicholls in locum.

     18. "The two times of worshipping God in public among the Jews, were
     Morning and Evening, and that by GOD'S own appointment; the
     Morning and Evening Sacrifice drawing the people together for that
     purpose. ;Thou shalt offer upon the altar two lambs of the
     first year: the one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning, and the
     other in the evening.' (Exod. xxix. 32.) Which precept was
     constantly observed, as long as the city and polity of the Jews
     stood. For Josephus says, [Dis tes hemeras, proi te kai peri ennaten
     oran, ierourgounton epi tou bomou.];Twice a day, in the morning
     and at the ninth hour, they offer sacrifice.' Joseph. Ant. lib.
     xiv. c. 4. And that this was the hour of prayer, for devout people
     to go to the temple, to perform their devotions there, is plain from
     Acts iii. 1. ;Peter and John went up together into the temple,
     being the ninth hour,' which is confirmed by the Talmud. R.
     Jose Ben Chaninah saith, ;The patriarchs appointed the
     prayers.' R. Josua Ben Levi saith, ;They appointed them
     according to the daily sacrifices. Morning Prayer is still the
     fourth hour; the prayer of the Mincha, or the Evening, is till
     evening.'"---Beracoth, cited by Dr. Lightfoot, Talm. Ex. p.
     649.

     "Upon this account, the primitive Christians, who would not be
     behind-hand with the Jews in their devotion, did constantly observe
     these two solemn times of prayer, and did very early add a third.
     For, as some devout Jews had a third hour, which they devoted to
     prayer, viz. (our twelve o'clock) when they retired to some
     closet, or other private place, to say their prayers, as we see in
     the example of Peter, who went up on the house-top to pray about the
     sixth hour (Acts x. 9.): so the primitive Christians turned this
     hour, which was formerly voluntary, into a settled hour of public
     devotion. For so it was settled before St. Cyprian's time; for
     this Father gives a rationale of the institution of the three solemn
     hours of prayer. The Morning Prayer (he says) was instituted in
     remembrance of CHRIST'S resurrection; the Noon Prayer in
     remembrance of His crucifixion, and the Evening prayer in token of
     His death, (Vide CyE,. de Or. Dom.) which is confirmed likeuise by a
     passage in St. Clemens of Alexandria, [Ei tines kai horas taktas
     aponemousin euche, hos triten, fere, kai ekten, kai ennaten,] &c.
     "Though some are for stated hours of prayer, viz. 9, 12, and 3
     o'clock; yet the [ho gnostikos], the most perfect Christian,
     will be always praying." (Clem. Alex. Strom. vii.) Soon after, the
     monks, who would be more devout than common Christians, were for
     more hours of stated prayer: and in St. Basil's time, they had
     mounted them up to seven. (Op. tom. ii. p. 49.) At last these were
     established by decree of Pope Pelagius II., and the Psalms appointed
     for each hour, which was the rise of what they call canonical hours
     in the Church of Rome. (Pol. Virg. de Rer. Inv. lib. ii. c. 2.) But
     our Church, in her reformation, has brought back the solemn times of
     prayer to the most ancient institution, and enjoineth only morning
     and evening prayer to be used."---Dr. Nicholls' note on
     "Proper Lessons for Sundays."

     19. Day by day, &c. (see No. 6.) "Therefore in the words of the
     Psalmist let us say, ;Every day do we bless thee, and praise
     thy name for ever and ever,' be pleased therefore to answer the
     petitions of this day's devotion, and to preserve us from sin,
     till the course of our public exercise returns to-morrow."---Dr.
     Nicholls, Paraphrase on the Te Deum.

     20. CREED.---"St. Ambrose (Ad Virg. lil. iii.) advises the use of
     the Creed every morning. And St. Austin (De Symb. ad Cat. lib. i.)
     morning and night. King Canutus ordered it to be used in our daily
     devotions." Id. Notes on the Apostles' Creed. [But see No. 26
     of this Collection.]

     21. "The latter part of the Collect for Grace (see No. 7.) does
     exactly agree with that in the Greek Liturgies: [Doresai hemin to
     loipon tes parousias hemeras, eirenikon kai anamarteton, kai panta
     ton chronon tes zoes hemon.] Euchol. Gr. Lucern. Orat. 2."---Id.
     Note on the Collect for Grace.

     22. "And we beseech thee, out of thy tender mercy to all thy
     creatures, and especially to thy faithful servants, that thou
     wouldest be pleased to defend us from all the dangers which the
     night brings along with it; from fire and thieves; from diseases and
     sudden death; from all unchaste thoughts and frightful dreams; and
     that thou wouldest preserve us in health and safety to the next
     morning."---Id. Paraph. on the third Collect at Evening Prayer.

     23. BISHOP OVERALL.---Of ministers daily saying the service.
     ---This was so ordered in the Council of Venice, under Pope Leo
     I., and after that in the Council of Mentz, Can. 57. "Clericus, quem
     intra muros civitatis suÃS manere constiterit, et matutinis hymnis,
     sine probabili excusatione ÃSgritudinis, inventus fuerit defuisse,
     septem diebus a communione habeatur extraneus," &c.---Bishop
     Overall ap. Nicholls.

     24. "All the priests and deacons shall be bound to say daily."
     --- "So that we are all bound, and all priests are in the Church
     of Rome, daily to repeat and say the public service of the Church.
     And it is a precept the most useful and necessary of any other that
     belongs to the ministers of GOD, and such as have cure of other
     men's souls, would men regard it, and practise it a little more
     than they do among us. We are all for preaching now; and for
     attending the service and prayers appointed by the Church for
     GOD'S worship, and the good of all men, we think that too mean
     an office for us, and therefore, as if it were not worth our labour,
     we commonly hire others under us to do it, more to satisfy the law,
     than to be answerable to our duties. Here is a command that binds us
     every day to say the Morning and Evening Prayer; how many are the
     men that are noted to do it? It is well they have a back-door for an
     excuse to come out at here: for good men! they are so belaboured
     with studying of divinity, and preaching the word, that they have no
     leisure to read these same common prayers; as if this were not a
     chief part of their office and charge committed unto them.
     Certainly, the people whose souls they have care of, reap as great
     benefit, and more too, by these prayers, which their pastors are
     daily to make unto GOD for them, either privately or publicly, as
     they can do by their preaching: for GOD is more respective to the
     prayers which they make for the people, than ever the people are to
     the sermons which they make to them."--- Id. ibid. p. 6.

     25. BISHOP COSINS.---"Every curate is enjoined to say the Morning
     and Evening Prayer daily in the Church, unless he be otherwise
     reasonably letted. Which requires an explanation (against them that
     account themselves ;reasonably letted' by any common and
     ordinary affairs of their own) whether any thing but sickness, or
     necessary absence abroad, shall be sufficient to excuse them from
     this duty."---Bishop Cosins ap. Nicholls, 67.

     26. It does not appear, (see No. 20.) from the Latin version at
     least, that Canute ordered the Creed to be used in the daily
     devotions.---See Sir H. Spelman's Councils, &c. vol. i. p.
     549.

     27. SAXON CHURCH.---Excerptio 2da Egberti Archiep. Ebor. circ.
     An. Christi 750.

     "Item, Ut omnes sacerdotes, horis competentibus diei et noctis,
     suarum sonent ecclesiarum signa: et sacra tunc Deo celebrent
     officia; et populos erudiant, quomodo aut quibus Deus adorandus est
     horis."---Spelm. Conc. 1. p. 259.

     Ex ejusdem Egberti Poe;nitentialis Lib. 2do.

     5. "Si quis clericus aut monachus corporis sanitate consistens, si
     vigiliis et cotidianis officiis defuerit, perdat communionem."

     6. "Si quis clericus, absque corpusculi sui inÃSqualitate, vigiliis
     deest, stipendio privatus, excommunicetur."

     7. "Si quis clericus, dato signo, non statim ad ecclesiam
     properaverit, correptionibus subjacebit."---Spelman, Conc. vol.
     i. p. 276.

     28. "Docemus etiam, ut quis statis temporibus campanas pulset, et ut
     omnis tunc sacerdos cantum suum horarium in ecclesia psallat, Deum
     in timore invocet solicite, et pro omni populo preces
     fundat."---Canon. dat. sub Edg. Reg. Spelm. i. p. 453.

     29. "De mane et vespere orando.

     "Dicendum illis ut singulis diebus, qui amplius non potest, salten
     duabus vicibus oret; mane scilicet et vespere, dicens symbolum sive
     Orationem Dominicam; Qui plasmasti me miserere mei; vel etiam, Deus
     propitius esto mihi peccatori. Et Domino gratias agens pro
     quotidianÃS vitÃS commeatibus, et quia se ad imaginem suam creare
     dignatus sit, et a peccatoribus segregare; llis actis, et solo Deo
     Creatore suo adorato sanctos invocet, ut pro se intercedere ad
     majestatem divinam dignentur; hÃSc facient quibus basilicÃS locus
     prope est in basilica. Qui vero in itinere, aut pro qualibet
     occasione in sylvis aut in agris est, ubicunque enim hora matutina
     vel vespertina invenerit, sic faciat, sciens Deum ubique praesentem
     esse, dicente Psalmista, "In omni loco dominationis ejus, et si
     ascendero in caclum, tu ibi es," &c.---Speln. Conc. 23ta Capit.
     inert. Edit. vol. i. p. 599.

     30. DR. BISSE.--- "Though the publick worship be appointed to be
     daily offered up in our parish churches, and in some few is offered
     up according to appointment; yet in these great temples (Cathedrals)
     the morning and evening sacrifice is never intermitted: it is
     offered day by day continually, even as the Lamb under the law.
     These are the great mother churches in every diocese, from which the
     parochial churches being originally derived, and upon which being
     dependent, are to be looked upon as parts of them, and belonging to
     them, as living members of the same body; and therefore the acts and
     offerings which are offered up in these greater, are accepted for
     all the lesser parish churches within their dependence, where the
     daily offering is not upon just cause observed, as indeed it
     generally cannot; even as the daily sacrifice of the temple was
     imputed to the several synagogues, where only the law and the
     prophets were expounded, and that every Sabbath-day. These cathedral
     temples, these mother-churches, the sure resting-places for the ark
     of the covenant, before which the daily offering never ceaseth to be
     offered morning and evening,---these are our strength and
     salvation, and are of far greater use and security to our people and
     to our land, than all the watchfulness of our senators, or policy of
     our ambassadors, or valour of our mighty men."---Dr. Bisse,
     Rationale on Cathedral Worship, pp. 53, 54.

     31. T. S.--- "......the corruptions and cruelties of the Church
     of Rome, made those that justly opposed her in many things, to
     forsake others, without any other reason but the hatred of being
     like to her who had been so cruel towards them. And among these, I
     reckon this to be the chief, that they not only left off the daily
     offices of GOD'S publick worship, but also that ancient order for
     the performance thereof on the LORD'S day, which was most
     accommodate," &c.---Preface to a book intituled "Advice to the
     Readers of the Common Prayer, &c., by T. S. [possibly, Dr. Thomas
     Smith, the friend of Bishop Ken.] 1683."

     32. "Hereby (by the use of our Liturgy) we shall be greatly assisted
     in holy meditations (while our minds will be stored with abundance
     of excellent matter for the same), and in educating our children
     religiously, in keeping our families in unity and order, and
     performing the worship belonging to the same, and many other great
     benefits that we shall experience in a devout attendance on the
     daily service of GOD in publick appointed by this Church; by which
     means they will also be more confirmed in their love hereunto, and
     become examples to others, who will be more effectually drawn to
     their duty, by observing the practice of this way of piety, than by
     disputations about it."---Ibid. sub fin.

     33. "I was lately told of an order in some Lutheran churches, whose
     service consists chiefly in singing the Psalms of David to the
     praise and glory of GOD, and songs of love and honour to our blessed
     SAVIOUR, composed by excellent persons among themselves: they have
     twice a day assemblies for this service; and that all may know what
     is to be sung, there is a table hung up at the entrance of the
     church, where it is written down what Psalms and Songs are appointed
     for the day; and the people (coming early to church) go first to
     this place, and take notice what they are to sing, and look it out
     ready before the service begins."---Advice to Readers, &c. p. 30.

     31. "Whereas we have an order most profitable and comfortable to
     pious minds, (viz. to have publick prayers daily, that those who are
     not hindered by necessary provisions for themselves and family, or
     other works of justice and mercy, may constantly enjoy the heavenly
     delights of GOD'S house, in Christian communion and fellowship
     of the Spirit (which certainly are above any can be found elsewhere)
     and for a freedom whereunto a plentiful estate is more desirable
     than upon any other account whatsoever); yet notwithstanding this,
     many of the richest and most leisurely persons never take care that
     this order be observed in their own parish churches; and when it is,
     will scarce ever come there, but make that which should give then
     the greatest advantage and obligation to come, to be a hindrance
     thereunto: I mean that men make use of their riches to run
     themselves into such vast trades and troublesome projects, whereby
     they are so incumbered with cares and labours, that they are less at
     leisure for GOD'S service than the poor and indigent; or else (if
     they incline more to pleasure than profit) they take no care to
     order their carnal divertisements, that they may be no hindrance to
     the service of GOD; but make them more joyful and zealous therein
     (though this they ought to do), but suffer these to ingross all
     their time and exhaust all the vigor and strength of their minds,
     that either they never come to church at all (at least on weekdays),
     or if they do, they are more ready to sleep than pray, and are far
     from taking such delight in these spiritual exercises as they find
     in carnal recreations: nay, many I have observed that will stand
     altogether idle and unemployed (a thing that seems tedious to nature
     itself), and yet will not divert themselves with going to church;
     and in this I have observed the female sex most guilty, who being
     not so subject to be incumbered with business as men, and often
     wanting opportunity of company, sports, and pastimes, have nothing
     else to do; and yet living near the churches where prayers are daily
     read, seldom or never come there."---Advice to the Readers, &c.
     pp. 130, 133.

     35. "That the Church hath well appointed these daily offices of
     divine worship, it being agreeable to reason and the divine
     prescription to the Jews, and the customs of the wisest and most
     civilized of the Gentiles;---this, and much more that might be
     said of like nature, being so evident, I must believe those kind of
     men, that think; our daily attendance at prayers is being righteous
     over-much, are not moved hereunto by any thing of reason or sober
     consideration; but are wholly influenced by pride or covetousness,
     or other carnal affections which hinder the exercise of their
     rational faculties, &c. The second sort to whom I shall apply
     myself, and for whose sake I chiefly undertook this work, is such as
     have a love for these holy offices, and daily frequent them; to whom
     my earnest request is, that they will persist in the good way they
     have begun, attend to the best manner of performance, and male all
     the rest of their lives answer to the devotion herein. For the first
     of these, I doubt not but such who do understand the grounds and
     reasons upon which this way of our publick service was first
     ordered, and have taken up this practice, not upon some carnal and
     secular accounts (as may sometimes happen), but in a sense of their
     duty to GOD and man: I say, these will, I hope, easily and
     effectually comply with my desire, and save me the labour of
     arguments. The inward peace and satisfaction they will find in
     governing themselves in this matter by reason and not by fancy, and
     in following the universal custom and usage of Christians for many
     ages, and of most even in this, and not that of heretiques and
     schismatiques; in obeying the orders of our own Church, made with
     the greatest advice and by the most unbiassed persons of any in the
     world; and not herding with Quakers, Fifth-monarchy-men,
     Anabaptists, and other turbulent sects that oppose the same and seek
     its ruin; in finding all that was good and profitable, all that was
     decent and solemn, all that was truly primitive or any way
     praiseworthy in the service of the Church of Rome, still retained in
     ours, &c. I say, the satisfaction they will find in considering the
     excellency of our Form of divine service will prevent all
     inclination to turn into other ways."---Advice to the Readers,
     &c. p. 138. 141.

     36. "I do heartily congratulate the happy success of such ministers,
     who in conscience of their assent and consent to the orders of this
     Church, have taken upon them the constant daily reading of the
     Common Prayer in their parish churches.....that do not make the
     backwardness of their people to come to prayers a pretence for their
     own neglect (when they never tried how forward they would be if they
     had opportunity and good instruction)......they have found access
     beyond their expectation, the numbers of those that have attended
     the prayers being much greater than what others do ordinarily
     suggest to be likely," &c.

     "At St. ------ Aldermanbury, at 11 Morn. and 5 Even. Being
     given by a pious person for one year, with promise of settling it
     for ever, if it be attended by any considerable number in that time.
     'Tis a thousand pities future generations should be hindered of such
     a benefit by the indevotion of this."---Advice to the Readers,
     &c. pp. 115. 168.

     37. BP. JEREMY TAYLOR.---"Between this (morning) and noon usually
     are said the publick prayers appointed by authority, to which all
     the clergy are obliged, and other devout persons that have leisure
     to accompany them."---Bp. Jeremy Taylor, Holy Living, p. 39.

     38. BP. FELL.---".....If I require a constant diligence in
     offering the daily sacrifice of prayer for the people at least at
     those returns which the Church enjoins, the usual answer is, they
     are ready to do their duty, but the people will not be prevailed
     with to join with them......And so when the minister has thoroughly
     accused his flock, he thinks he has absolved himself, his church
     becomes a sinecure; and because others forbear to do their duty,
     there remains none for him to do. But, my brethren ......if our
     people be negligent, we are the more obliged to industry; if they
     are indevout, we ought to be more zealous; if they are licentious,
     we ought to be more exemplary. Nor let any man say, the people will
     not be prevailed upon: how know we what will be hereafter? They who
     resisted one attempt may yield unto another; or if they yield not to
     a single instance, they may to many and more pressing,"
     &c.---From Bishop Fell's Charge to his Clergy, 1685.

     39. ROBERT NELSON.---"Q. Is the obligation [of attending publick
     worship] sufficiently discharged by going to church on Sundays and
     holy days?

     A. "It is to be wisht, that all Christians were constant in
     attending the publick worship on Sundays and holy days; because
     ;tis likely ;twould dispose them to repeat such exercises
     of devotion with greater frequency. But considering that among the
     Jews there was a morning and evening sacrifice daily offered to GOD
     at the Temple; and that the precepts of the Gospel oblige us to
     'pray always,' and to 'pray without ceasing;' and that the
     ancient prophets expressly declare that there should be as frequent
     devotion in the days of CHRIST, as there had been in former times;
     that 'prayer shall be made unto Him continually, and daily shall He
     be praised.' Considering these things, I say, as prayer, the
     Christian sacrifice should be offered morning and evening in public
     assemblies; so they that have such opportunities, and are not
     lawfully hindered should endeavour so to regulate their tine, as to
     be able constantly to attend such a great advantage to the Christian
     life. And as those who have leisure cannot better employ it, so they
     must have but little concern for the honour and glory of GOD, that
     neglect such opportunities of declaring and publishing His
     praise."---Nelson's Fasts, p. 440, 3d edit. 1705.

     40. BISHOP BURNET.---"Though there is still much ignorance among
     their [the Roman] mass priests; yet their parish priests are
     generally another sort of men: they are well instructed in their
     religion; lead regular lives, and perform their parochial duties
     with a most wonderful diligence. They do not only say mass, and the
     other publick functions daily, but they are almost perpetually
     employing themselves in the several parts of their cures:
     instructing the youth, hearing confessions, and visiting the sick:
     and besides all this, they are under the constant obligation of the
     breviary."---Bishop Burnet, Pref. to his Disc. on Past. Care.

     41. HOMILY.---"To the house or temple of GOD, at all times by
     common order appointed, are all people that be godly indeed, bound
     with all diligence to resort, unless by sickness or other most
     urgent causes they be letted therefro......If we would compare our
     negligence in resorting to the house of the LORD there to serve Him,
     with the diligence of the Jews in coming daily very early, sometime
     by great journeys to their temple, and when the multitude could not
     be received within the Temple, the fervent zeal that they had,
     declared in standing long without and praying: we may justly in this
     comparison condemn our slothfulness and negligence, yea plain
     contempt, in coming to the LORD'S house standing so near unto
     us, so seldom and scarcely at any time."---First Part of the
     Homily "Of the right Use of the Church."

     42. DR. CAVE.---"The Christian Churches began to rise apace,
     according as they met with more quiet and favourable times;
     especially under Valerian, Gallienus, Claudius, Aurelian, and some
     other emperors: of which times Eusebius (Hist. Eccl. 1. 8. c. I. p.
     29.) tells us, that the bishops met with the highest respect and
     kindness both from people and governors. And adds: But who shall be
     able to reckon up the innumerable multitudes that daily flocked to
     the faith of CHRIST, the number of congregations in every city?"
     &c.---Dr. Cave's Primit. Christianity, part i. 6.

     43. "As that day [the Jewish Sabbath] was kept as a commemoration of
     GOD'S Sabbath, or resting from the work of creation, so was
     this set apart for religious uses, as the solemn memorial of
     CHRIST'S resting from the work of our redemption in this world,
     completed upon the day of His resurrection. Which brings into my
     mind that custom of theirs, so universally common in those days,
     that whereas at other times they kneeled at prayers, on the
     LORD'S day they always prayed standing, as is expressly
     affirmed both by Justin Martyr (Ap. 2. p. 95.) and Tertullian (De
     Coron. c. 3. p. 102.): the reason of which we find in the author of
     the Questions and Answers in Justin Martyr (Resp. ad Quest. 115. p.
     468). It is (says he), that by this means we may be put in mind both
     of our fall by sin, and our resurrection or restitution by the grace
     of CHRIST: that for six days we pray upon our knees, is in token of
     our fall by sin; but that on the LORD'S day we do not bow the knee,
     does symbolically represent our resurrection."---Cave's
     Primitive Christianity; part i. c. 7. p. 163.

     44. "Their family duties were usually performed in this order: at
     their first rising in the morning they were wont to meet together,
     and to betake themselves to prayer (as is plainly implied in
     Chrysostom s Exhortation) to praise GOD for the protection and
     refreshment of the night, and to beg His grace and blessing for the
     following day: this was done by the master of the house, unless some
     minister of religion were present. 'Tis probable that at this
     time they recited the Creed or some confession of their faith, by
     which they professed themselves Christians, and as it were armed
     themselves against the assaults of dangers and temptations; however
     I question not but that now they read some parts of Scripture, which
     they were most ready to do at all times, and therefore certainly
     would not omit it now. That they had their set hours for prayer, the
     third, sixth, and ninth hour, is plain both from Cyprian, Clem.
     Alex. and others: this they borrowed from the Jews....When night
     approached, before their going to rest, the family was again called
     to prayer, after which they went to bed: about midnight they were
     generally wont to rise to pray and to sing hymns to
     GOD."---Cave's Primitive Christianity, part i. c. 9. pp.
     262. 266.

     45. "Eusebius (Eccl. Hist. lib. ii. c. 23. p. 63, ex Hegesippo)
     reports of St. James the Just, that he was wont every day to go
     alone into the church, and there kneeling upon the pavement so long
     to pour out his prayers to GOD, till his knees became as hard as
     camel's."---Cave's Primitive Christianity, ubi sup.

     46. "At first (while the spirit of Christianity was yet warm and
     vigorous, and the hearts of men passionately inflamed with the love
     of CHRIST) it is more than probable they communicated every day, or
     as oft as they came together for publick worship, insomuch that the
     canons apostolical (Can. 9 ) and the synod of Antioch (Can. 2.)
     threaten every one of the faithful with excommunication, who come to
     church to hear the Holy Scriptures, but stay not to participate of
     the LORD'S Supper.....This custom of receiving the Sacrament
     every day continued some considerable time in the Church, though in
     some places longer than in others, especially in the Western
     Churches. From Cyprian, we are fully assured it was so in his time:
     ;We receive the Eucharist every day (says he), as the food that
     nourishes us to salvation.'---The like St. Ambrose seems to
     intimate of Milan, whereof he was bishop; nay, and after him St.
     Hierome tells us it was the custom of the Church of Rome; and St.
     Augustine seems pretty clearly to intimate that it was not unusual
     in his time'. In the Churches of the East this custom wore off
     sooner, though more or less according as the primitive zeal did
     abate and decay; St. Basils telling us, that in his time they
     communicated four times a week, on the LORD'S day, Wednesday,
     Friday, and Saturday, yea and upon other days too, if the memory or
     festival of any martyr fell upon them."---Cave's Primitive
     Christianity, part i. c. 2. p. 339.

     47. GEORGE HERBERT.---"His obedience and conformity to the Church
     and the discipline thereof, was singularly remarkable. Though he
     abounded in private devotions, yet went he every morning and evening
     with his family to the church, and by his example, exhortations, and
     encouragements, drew the greater part of his parishioners to
     accompany him daily in the publick celebration of divine
     service."---Preface to "The Temple."

     "Mr. Herbert's own practice was to appear constantly with his
     wife and three nieces (the daughters of a deceased sister) and his
     whole family twice every day at the church prayers, in the chappel
     which does almost joyn to his parsonage-house. And for the time of
     his appearing, it was strictly at the canonical hours of 10 and 4,
     and then and there he lifted up pure and charitable hands to GOD in
     the midst of the congregation. And he would joy to have spent that
     time in that place, where the honour of his Master JESUS dwelleth;
     and there, by that inward devotion which he testified constantly by
     an humble behaviour and visible adoration, he, like Josua, brought
     not only ;his own houshold thus to serve the LORD,' but
     brought most of his parishioners, and many gentlemen in the
     neighbourhood, constantly to make a part of his congregation twice a
     day; and some of the meaner sort of his parish did so love and
     reverence Mr. Herbert, that they would let their plow rest when Mr.
     Herbert's saint's-bell rung to prayers, that they might
     also offer their devotions to GOD with him, and would then return
     back to their plow. And his most holy life was such, that it beat
     such reverence to GOD, and to him, that they thought themselves the
     happier, when they carried Mr. Herbert's blessing back with
     them to their labour. Thus powerful was his reason, and his example,
     to perswade others to a practical piety and devotion. And his
     constant publick prayers did never make him to neglect his own
     private devotions, nor those prayers that he thought himself bound
     to perform with his family Thus he continued, till a consumption so
     weakened him, as to confine him to his house, or to the chappel,
     which does almost joyn to it; in which he continued to read prayers
     constantly twice every day, though he were very weak: in one of
     which times of his reading, his wife observed him to read in pain,
     and told him so, and that it wasted his spirits and weakened him;
     and he confessed it did, but said, 'his life could not be better
     spent than in the service of his Master JESUS, who had done and
     suffered so much for him. But (said he) I will not be wilful; for
     though my spirit be willing yet I find my flesh is weak; and
     therefore Mr. Bostock shall be appointed to read prayers for me
     to-morrow, and I will now be only a hearer of them, till this mortal
     shall put on immortality.' And Mr. Bostock did the next day
     undertake and continue this happy employment, till Mr.
     Herbert's death."---Isaac Walton's Life of Herbert, pp.
     807. 313.

     48. NICOLAS FARRER.---"Mr. Farrer having seen the manners and
     vanities of the world, and found them to be, as Mr. Herbert says,
     ;a nothing between two dishes,' did so contemn it, that he
     resolved to spend the remainder of his life in mortifications, and
     in devotion, and in charity, and to be alwaies prepared for
     death.....He being accompanied with most of his family, did himself
     use to read the common prayers (for he was a deacon) every day, at
     the appointed hours of ten and four, in the parish church which was
     very near his house, and which he had both repaired and adorned: and
     he did also constantly read the Mattins every morning at the hour of
     six, either in the church, or in an oratory, which was within his
     own house: and many of the family did there continue with him after
     the prayers were ended, and there they spent some hours in singing
     hymns or anthems, sometimes in the church, and often to an organ in
     the oratory: and there they sometimes betook themselves to meditate,
     or to pray privately, or to read a part of the New Testament to
     themselves, or to continue their praying or reading the Psalms: and
     in case the Psalms were not alwaies read in the day, then Mr.
     Farrer, and others of the congregation, did at night, at the ring of
     a watch-bell, repair to the church or oratory, and there betake
     themselves to prayers, and lauding GOD, and reading the Psalms that
     had not been read in the day; and when these, or any part of the
     congregation grew weary or faint, the watch-bell was rung, sometimes
     before, and sometimes after midnight, and then another part of the
     family rose, and maintained the watch, sometimes by praying, or
     singing lauds to GOD, or reading the Psalms; and when after some
     hours they also grew weary or faint, then they rung the watch-bell,
     and were also relieved by some of the former, or by a new part of
     the society, which continued their devotions until morning. And it
     is to be noted that in this continued serving of GOD, the Psalter,
     or whole book of Psalms, was in every four-and-twenty hours sung or
     read over, from the first to the last verse; and this was done as
     constantly as the sun runs his circle every day about the world, and
     then begins again the same instant that it ended. Thus did Mr.
     Farrer and his happy family serve GOD day and night: thus did they
     alwaies behave themselves, as in His presence. And they did alwaies
     eat and drink by the strictest rules of temperance,--- eat and
     drink so, as to be ready to rise at midnight, or at the call of a
     watch-bell, and perform their devotions to GOD...... and this course
     of piety and liberality to his poor neighbours, Mr. Farrer
     maintained till his death, which was in the year
     1639."---Walton's Life of G. Herbert, p. 316. ed. 1675.

     49. DR. BEST.---"The highest orders of men and women in our
     Church, instead of being exempted from the exercise of daily public
     prayer by their exalted station, are more loudly called upon than
     others to be constant in their observance of this duty......It would
     not be difficult to point out to you the example of a personage
     [King George III.] who has a greater weight of duties, a greater
     burthen of cares, a greater variety of earthly concerns upon his
     mind, than any other individual amongst us, who nevertheless suffers
     neither business nor any other avocation to prevent his first
     addresses to the MAJESTY of Heaven, for pardon and peace, grace and
     direction, for the welfare of his people, and for his own and
     others' present and future happiness. After this, let no
     excuses be made for the neglect of our daily
     service."---Dedication of "Best's Essay," to the Society for
     promoting Christian Knowledge.

     50. "As the want of a congregation is the only justifiable, so is it
     the only true reason why we do not meet with a daily celebration of
     it in our parochial churches; in some of which it would be extremely
     difficult, if not impracticable, especially in country villages, to
     comply with her order for it; and therefore to them we conclude it
     was not intended to be given."---Dr. Best's Essay on the
     Daily Service of the Church, 12.

     51. "In St. Matt. xviii. 20, CHRIST hath especially declared, that
     ;where two or three are gathered together in His Name, there is
     He in the midst of them.' Comfortable words, indeed, to the
     daily frequenters of the daily service,---words that carry with
     them a strong motive to their perseverance in this pious
     practice,---words that supply the ministers of the Gospel (whose
     duty it is to attend continually on this very thing) with a powerful
     reason against being quite disheartened from all further celebration
     of the daily service, by the non-attendance of so many of their
     people upon it,---words that are, both to pastor and flock, a
     great argument for the continuance of the daily service, though so
     small is the number of frequenters in it."---Dr. Best's Essay,
     32.

     [But the whole of this Essay deserves to be carefully read. It was
     re-published by the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, in
     the year 1794.]

     52. BP. JEREMY TAYLOR.---"Every minister is obliged publicly or
     privately to read the Common Prayers every day in the week, at
     morning and evening; and in great towns and populous places
     conveniently inhabited, it must be read in churches, that the daily
     sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving may never cease."---Advice
     to the Clergy of Down and Connor, ÃY. lxxvii.

     53. WILLIAM III.---"That the bishops do use their utmost
     endeavour to oblige the clergy to have public prayers in the Church,
     not only on holy-days and litany-days, but as often as may be, and
     to celebrate the holy sacrament frequently."---Injunctions to the
     Archbishops, ÃY. 11.

     54. DR. HAMMOND.---"In the discharge of his ministerial function,
     he satisfied not himself in diligent and constant preaching only, (a
     performance wherein some of late have fancied all religion to
     consist), but much more conceived himself obliged to the off.ering
     up the solemn daily sacrifice of prayer for his people,
     administering the Sacraments, &c. The offices of prayer he had in
     his church [Penshurst] not only upon the Sundays and festivals, and
     their eves, as also Wednesdays and Fridays, according to the
     appointment of the Rubric; (which strict duty and ministration, when
     it is examined on the bottom, will prove the greatest objection
     against the Liturgy; as that which, besides its own trouble and
     austerity, leaves no leisure for factious and licentious meetings at
     fairs and markets), but every day in the week, and twice on
     Saturdays and holiday-eves; for his assistance wherein he kept a
     curate, and allowed him a comfortable salary. And at those devotions
     he took order that his family should give diligent exemplary
     attendance."---Bp. Fell's Life of Dr. Hammond, p. 162, et
     seq.

     55. "When we reckon up and audit the expences of the Doctor's
     (Hammond) time, we cannot pass his constant tribute of it paid by
     him to Heaven in the offices of prayer, which took up so liberal
     proportions of each day unto itself, for the ten last years of his
     life, and probably the preceding. Besides occasional and
     supernumerary addresses, his certain perpetual returns exceeded
     David's seven times a day. As soon as he was ready, (which was
     usually early) he prayed in his chamber with his servant, in a
     peculiar form composed for that purpose; after this he retired to
     his own more secret devotions in his closet. Betwixt ten and eleven
     in the morning he had a solemn intercession in reference to the
     national calamities; to this, after a little distance, succeeded the
     morning office of the Church, which he particularly desired to
     perform in his own person, and would by no means accept the ease of
     having it read by any other. In the afternoon he had another hour of
     private prayer, which on Sundays he enlarged.... About five
     o'clock, the solemn private prayer for the nation, and the
     evening service of the Church returned. At bed-time his private
     prayers closed the day; and after all even the night was not without
     its office, the 31st Psalm being his desined midnight
     entertainment."---Fell's Life of Hammond, p. 230. See also,
     p. 263.

     56. MR. WHEATLY.---"People of all ages and nations have been
     guided by the very dictates of nature not only to appoint some
     certain seasons to celebrate their more solemn parts of religion,
     but also to set apart daily some portion of time for the performance
     of divine worship. To his peculiar people, the Jews, GOD Himself
     appointed their set times of public devotion; commanding them "to
     offer up two lambs daily, one in the morning and the other at even,"
     which we find from other places of Scripture (Acts ii. 15. iii. 1.)
     were at their third and ninth hours, which answer to our nine and
     three; that so those burnt-offerings, being types of the great
     Sacrifice which CHRIST the Lamb of GOD was to offer up for the sins
     of the world, might be sacrificed at the same hours wherein His
     death as begun and finished.... And though the Levitical Law expired
     together with our Saviour, yet the public worship of GOD must still
     have some certain times set apart for the performance of it; and
     accordingly all Christian Churches have been used to have their
     public devotions performed daily every morning or evening. The
     Apostles and primitive Christians continued to observe the same
     hours of prayer with the Jews, as might easily be shown from the
     records of the ancient Church. But the Church of England cannot be
     so happy as to appoint any set hours when either morning or evening
     prayer shall be said; because, now people are grown so cold and
     indifferent in their devotions, they would be too apt to excuse
     their absenting from the public worship, from the inconveniency of
     the time; and therefore she hath only taken care to enjoin that
     public prayers be read every ;morning and evening daily
     throughout the year;' that so all her members may have
     opportunity of joining in public worship twice at least every day.
     But to make the duty as practicable and easy both to the minister
     and people as possible, she hath left the determination of the
     particular hours to the ministers that officiate, who, considering
     every one his own and his people's circumstances, may appoint
     such hours for morning and evening prayer, as they shall judge to be
     most proper and convenient. ÃY 2. But if it be in places where
     congregations can be had, and "the curate of the parish be at home,
     and not otherwise reasonably hindered," she expects or enjoins that
     "he say the same in the parish church," &c. But if for want of a
     congregation, or some other account, he cannot conveniently read
     them in the Church, he is then bound to say them in the family where
     he lives; for by the same Rubric, "all priests and deacons are to
     say daily the morning and evening prayer, either privately or
     openly," &c.... The occasion of our Rubric was probably a rule in
     the Roman Church, by which, even before the Reformation and the
     Council of Trent, the clergy were obliged to recite the canonical
     hours, (i. e. the offices in the breviary for the several hours of
     day and night), either publicly in a church or chapel, or privately
     by themselves. But our Reformers, not approving the priests
     performing by themselves what ought to be the united devotions of
     many; and yet not being wholly to discharge the clergy from a
     constant repetition of their prayers, thought fit to discontinue
     these solitary devotions; but at the same time ordered, that if a
     congregation at church could not be had, the public service, both
     for morning and evening, should be recited in the family where the
     minister resided. Though according to the first book of King Edward,
     "this is not meant that any man shall be bound to the saying of it,
     but such as from time to time, in cathedral and collegiate churches,
     parish churches and chapels to the same annexed, shall serve the
     congregation."--- Wheatly on the Common Prayer, pp. 83, 84. Sixth
     Ed.

     57. "That the primitive Christians, besides their solemn service on
     Sundays, had public prayers every morning and evening, daily, has
     already been hinted, but a learned gentleman (Bingham, Ant. B. 13.
     c. 9. s. 1. vol. 5. p. 281.) is of the opinion that this must be
     restrained to times of peace; and that during the time of public
     persecution, they were forced to confine their religious meetings to
     the LORD'S day only. And it is certain that Pliny and Justin
     Martyr, who both describe the manner of the Christian worship, do
     neither of them make mention of any assembly for public worship on
     any other day; so that their silence is a negative argument that in
     their time was no such assembly, unless perhaps some distinction may
     be made between the general assembly of both city and country on the
     LORD'S day, and the particular assemblies of the city
     Christians (who had better opportunities to meet) on other days;
     which distinction we often meet with in the following ages, when
     Christianity was come to its maturity and perfection. However, it
     was not long after Justin Martyr's time, before we are sure
     that the Church observed the custom of meeting solemnly on
     Wednesdays and Fridays, to celebrate the Communion, and to perform
     the same service as on the LORD'S day itself, unless perhaps
     the sermon was wanting. The same also might be showed from as early
     authorities in relation to the festivals of their martyrs, and the
     whole fifty days between Easter and Whitsuntide. [Tert. de Id. et de
     Cor.] Nor need we look down many years lower, before we meet with
     express testimony of their meeting every day for the public worship
     of God. For S. Cyprian tells us, that in his time it was customary
     to receive the holy Eucharist every day; a plain demonstration that
     they had every day public assemblies, since we know the Eucharist
     was never consecrated but in such open and public assemblies of the
     Church. ÃY 2. That these daily devotions consisted of an evening as
     well as a morning service, even from S. Cyprian's time, the learned
     author I just now referred to (Bingham, ubi sup.) endeavours to
     prove. However, in a century or two afterwards, the case is plain,
     for the author of the ;Constitutions' not only speaks of
     it, but gives us the order of both the services.---l. 8. c. 37."
     Id. pp. 113, 114.

     58. DEAN COMBER.---We may call this (public prayer) the life and
     soul of religion, the anima mundi, that universal soul which
     quickens, unites, and moves the whole Christian world. Nor is the
     case of a private man more desperate, when he breathes no more in
     secret prayer, than the condition of a church is, where public
     devotions cease. St. Hierome, out of Hippolytus, puts the cessation
     of Liturgy as a principal sign of the coming of Antichrist. (Hieron.
     Com. in Dan.) And nothing more clearly shows a profane generation,
     the very title of wicked men in Scripture being that "they call not
     upon God." It is well if any of us can excuse ourselves; but the
     general neglect of daily prayers by ministers, (who are both
     desirous and bound to perform them,) doth too sadly testify they are
     tired out with the people's constant absence, and altogether
     witnesseth an universal decay of true piety. Perhaps the dishonour
     that is cast upon GOD and religion, will not move these disregarders
     and neglecters, since they live so that a stranger could not imagine
     they had any God at all. But I hope they have yet so much charity
     for their own persons, that it may startle them to consider what
     mischiefs are hereby brought upon their own selves as well as
     others. Wherefore, let them ask the cause of all that atheism and
     profaneness, luxury and oppression, lying and deceiving, malice and
     bitterness, that is broke in upon us, to the torment and disquiet of
     the whole world. Let them ask why they plague others with their
     sins, and others requite them again? and it will appear that all
     this is come upon us because we forget GOD and heaven, death and
     judgment, which daily prayers would mind us of.... But if these
     evils be too thin and spiritual, let it be inquired whence our
     national and personal calamities proceed, epidemical diseases, wars,
     and pestilences? Whence comes the multiplication of heresies, the
     prevalency and pride of the enemies of the true religion? The Jews
     will tell you, "Jacob's voice in the synagogue keeps off
     Esau's hands from the people." We have disrespected and
     slighted GOD and his worship, and He may justly put us out of his
     protection: "If he meet us not in his house, he may go away
     displeased," and then we lie open to all evil when our defence is
     departed from us; and they that provoke him so to doe, are enemies
     to themselves, and to the Church and state where they live, indeed
     the worst of neighbours 2. But notwithstanding all this, while sober
     and devout men lament this epidemical iniquity, and groan under the
     sad effects thereof, passionately wishing a speedy remedy, the
     offenders grow bold by their numbers, and hardened by this evil
     custome, till they now despise a reproof, and deny this negligence
     to be a sin, because they have no mind to amend it. But these are of
     two kinds: 1. Those that make their business their apology, and
     suppose it is unreasonable to expect them every day at common
     prayer, and judge it sufficient to say they cannot come. 2. Those
     who despise the Prayers of the Church, &c.... 1. We shall
     demonstrate the reasonableness of the daily attendance on public
     prayers, and that principally from the universal reason of all the
     world, and the concurrent practice and consent of all mankind, which
     agrees in this, that wheresoever they own a God true or false, they
     daily perform some worship to him. The very heathens, beside their
     private requests and vows, made particular addresses to their
     temples in all their great concerns, and yet abstained not from the
     daily sacrifices, nor from the frequent festivals of their numerous
     deities; in Egypt (as Porphyry relates) they praised their gods with
     hymns three or four times every day. The Turks are called to their
     houses of prayer five times every day, and six times upon the
     Fridays; and le that notoriously absents himself' is punished with
     disgrace, and hath a fine set upon him. And if our Saviour think it
     reasonable we should doe something more [perismon], how dare we call
     it unreasonable, when we are not enjoined to doe so much as they?
     But to go on, who knows not that the Jews had set hours of prayers,
     when all devout people (even Christ's Apostles) went to the temple
     or synagogues to offer up public supplications? And these hours are
     observed among them exactly to this very day. One instance of their
     strictness in this particular we learn from the Talmud; here it
     appears that because of the distance of the temple, and the
     impossibility of attendance on the daily sacrifice, those who could
     not come hired certain devout men who were called "viri stationis,"
     the men of appearance, to present themselves daily there and put up
     petitions for them. And the Pharisees not only observed the usual
     hours of prayer, but doubled them, and zealously kept them all. Now
     JESUS tells us, our righteousness must exceed theirs, if ever w e
     hope to enter into His kingdom. Which precept of His, some of us
     could almost afford to call an intolerable burthen, for we call a
     smaller matter by a worse name. To pass, then, to the Christian
     Church. We have an express command, to pray "without ceasing," that
     is, without omitting the set times which every day return, and ought
     to be observed. In obedience hereunto, the Church in the
     Apostles' time, met at daily prayers; and so did the primitive
     Christians for many ages after, who had their Liturgy, Eucharist,
     and Hymns, even in the night, when persecution prevented them in the
     day. And surely their zeal and fervour is a huge reproach to our
     sloth, who yet call ourselves of the same religion, and are so far
     from venturing lives and estates to enjoy opportunities of
     devotions, that we will not leave our shop nor our company, nay, our
     very idleness half an hour, for a freer and more easie worship than
     they could enjoy. Surely we are as unlike them in practice as we are
     like in name and profession. Twice a day as not enough for them,
     wherefore they appointed (in the days of martyrdom) three set times
     in every day for prayer, nine, twelve, and three in the afternoon,
     and punctually observed them. Afterwards, in more quiet times, it
     was wonderfull to behold the orderly performance of morning and
     evening prayer in huge assemblies of men and women, who failed not
     to their constant attendance. These are the men and times whose
     principles we are reformed by; but I wish that corrupted Church, who
     forced us to a separation, do not prove more conformable to the
     outward part of their practice in a due observance of public prayer,
     than we who have more knowledge, better prayers, fewer excuses, and
     yet less devotion. Wherefore let us no more complain of our own
     Church for expecting us at daily prayers. Let us rather challenge
     all nations and people for fools, and declare it unreasonable that
     we should have any GOD at all, or let Him have any of our time,
     though He give us all we have. Let us tell the world, we are
     self-sufficient for the conduct and defence of ourselves and our
     affairs, and then we shall discover ourselves what we are. We must
     not feign ourselves too busy; for we do lay aside our business
     daily, for causes less weighty, and advantages more inconsiderable.
     If vanity or lust, Sathan or his emissaries call, we can find
     leisure; and why not when GOD calls? unless we think all that time
     lost which is spent upon His service, or as if we needed not His
     blessing. In short, if unavoidable business did hinder us and
     nothing else, many men might come always, and all sometimes, and
     every day an hundred for one that now comes. Wherefore it is sloth
     and covetousness, or atheism and irreligion, keeps us away. And if
     so, what signifie those pretences of praying at home (which ought to
     be done too)? Verily, no more than those of the idle school-boy who
     seeks a corner, not to learn, but play in without disturbance. And
     truly it is to be doubted that constant neglecters of publick
     prayers use seldom and slight devotions in private, for they make
     the same objections against them. Finally, therefore, do but
     remember the reasonableness of this is to be tried at a higher
     tribunal, and come as often as GOD can in reason expect to meet you
     there, and I shall ask no more. .... But it is urged that these
     prayers, though good in themselves, will grow flat and nauseous by
     daily use, and consequently become an impediment to devotion. Ans.
     We come not to the house of GOD for recreation, but for a supply of
     our wants; and therefore this might be a better reason of an empty
     theatre than a thin congregation. We come to GOD in publick, to
     petition for the relief of our own general necessities, and those of
     the whole Church, viz., for pardon of sin, peace of conscience, and
     succours of divine grace, and a deliverance from sin and Sathan,
     death and hell; as also for food and raiment, health and strength,
     protection and success in all our concerns; and more generally for
     the peace of the kingdom, the prosperity of the Church, the
     propagation of the Gospel, and the success of its ministers. Now
     these things are always needful, and always the same, to be prayed
     for every day alike. Wherefore, (unless we be so vain as to fansie
     God is delighted with variety and change as well as we), what need
     is there to alter the phrase every day, or what efficacy can a new
     model give to our old requests. Particular wants and single cases
     must be supplied by the closet devotions, for the publick, whether
     by form or extempore, can never reach all those, which are so
     numerous and variable. Wherefore one form may fit all that ought to
     be asked in the Church; and why then should we desire a needless and
     infinite variety and alteration? If we do, it is out of curiosity,
     not necessity. The poor man is most healthfull whose labour procures
     him both appetite and digestion, who seldom changeth his dish, yet
     finds a relish in it, and a new strength from it every day; and so
     it is with the sober and industrious Christian, who busying himself
     in serving GOD, gets daily a new sense of his wants, and
     consequently a fresh stomach to these holy forms, which are never
     flat or dull to him that brings new affections to them every day. It
     is the epicure and luxurious, the crammed lazy wanton, or the
     diseased man, that need quelques choses, or sauces, to make his
     daily bread desirable. And if his be our temper, it is a sign of a
     diseased soul, and an effect of our surfeiting on holy things. In
     this we resemble those murmurers who despised the bread of heaven,
     because they had it daily, and loathed manna itself, calling it in
     scorn dry meat. This was sufficient to sustain their bodies, and
     satisfie their hunger, but they required "meat for their soul," that
     is, to feed their fancies and their lusts; even as we do, for whom
     the Church hath provided prayers sufficient to express our needs,
     but not to satiate our wanton fancies, nor gratifie the lust of our
     curiosity; and we complain they are insipid; so perhaps they are to
     such, for the manna had no taste to the wicked; but it suited itself
     to the appetite and taste of every good man, as the Jews tell us in
     their traditions. Sure I am it is true here; for if we be curious
     and proud, or carnal and profane, there is no gust in the Common
     Prayers; but a truly pious man can every day here exercise
     repentance and faith, love and desire, and so use them as to obtain
     fresh hopes of mercy, peace of conscience, increase of grace, and
     expectations of glory; and whoever finds not this, the fault is not
     in the prayers, but in the indisposition of his own heart."---Dr.
     Comber's "Discourse on the daily frequenting of the Common Prayer."

     59. "I conclude this preface with a twofold request: First, to my
     brethren of the clergy, that they will read these prayers so
     frequently, that such as have leisure may never want opportunity
     thus to serve GOD; and so fervently, that those who do attend them,
     may he brought into an high esteem of them. It was a great end to
     GOD'S instituting the priest's office, and a principal motive to our
     pious ancestors in their liberal provisions for it: That there might
     be an order of men on purpose, to pray daily for all mankind,
     especially for such as could not daily attend Divine Service: So
     that if we neglect this daily sacrifice, we neither answer the
     designs of GOD nor of our benefactors. And as we are not excused by,
     so we ought not to be discouraged at the people's slowness in coming
     to daily prayers, for their presence is indeed a comfort to us, and
     an advantage to themselves; but their absence doth not hinder the
     success, nor should it obstruct the performance of our prayers. The
     promise of JESUS is made to two or three; and since our petitions
     are directed to GOD, we need not regard who is absent, so long as he
     is present, to whom we speak; for he accepts our requests, not by
     the number, but the sincerity of those that make them. Let our
     congregation, therefore, be great or small, it is our duty to reade
     these prayers daily; and every day to doe it with such fervency and
     reverence, as may declare that our affections keep pace with our
     words, while we are presenting so excellent requests to so infinite
     a Majesty upon so weighty occasions...... And if the people daily
     come, and constantly use the Common Prayer in this manner, they will
     neither be tired with the length, nor wearied with the frequent
     repetition thereof; for it will appear to be the most noble and
     comfortable exercise that religion doth afford; it will increase
     their graces, multiply their blessings, and fit them for the
     never-ceasing service of the heavenly choir."---Ibid. sub fin.

     60. BP. BULL.---"When the Bishop came to live at Brecknock, they
     had publick prayers in that place only upon Wednesdays and Fridays,
     but by his care, during his stay there, they have prayers now every
     morning and evening in the week. The method he took to establish
     this daily exercise of devotion was briefly this: Upon his visiting
     the college in that town, he made the following proposal to the
     prebendaries, that whereas they had each of them a certain yearly
     stipend under the name of a pension out of their respective
     prebends, towards reading of daily prayers in the college chapel,
     which by reason of its distance from the body of the town, were very
     little frequented, and indeed hardly by any but the scholars of the
     free-school, which is adjoining to it; whether it would not be a
     very useful and acceptable piece of service to the town, if those
     pensions should be applied to encourage the vicar of Brecknock to
     perform daily the morning and evening service in the town Church or
     Chapel, as it is usually called. This proposal appeared to them so
     reasonable, that they all readily agreed to it. By this means the
     vicarage is considerably augmented, and the college prayers are
     still kept up for the benefit of the scholars, to whom chiefly they
     could be of use since the ruin of the college, the master of the
     school having ever since discharged that duty; and the Bishop, for
     his encouragement, gave him a prebend just by the town, with a
     design that it might for ever be annexed to the school. And whereas
     at Caermarthen they had only morning prayers upon week days, when
     his Lordship first came to that town, he set up also constant
     evening prayers; and towards this additional labour, he allowed the
     curate the yearly synodals of the archdeaconry to which Mr.
     Archdeacon Tenison, who is very ready to contribute to all works of
     charity and piety, being then upon the place, added twenty shillings
     a year out of his revenue there; and the prayers are still kept up
     and well frequented."---From the Life of Bishop Bull, by Mr.
     Nelson, p. 439.

     61. BISHOP STILLINGFLEET.---"I could heartily wish that in
     greater places, especially in such towns where there are people more
     at liberty, the constant morning and evening prayers were duly and
     devoutly read, as it is already done with good success in London,
     and some other cities. By this means religion will gain ground, when
     the publick offices are daily performed; and the people will be more
     acquainted with Scripture, in hearing the lessons; and have a better
     esteem of the prayers, when they become their daily service, which
     they offer up to GOD as their morning and evening sacrifice; and the
     design of our Church will be best answered, which appoints the order
     for morning and evening prayer to be said daily throughout the
     year."---Charge to the Diocese of Worcester, 1690. Works, vol.
     iii. p. 630.

     62. BISHOP BEVERIDGE.---"Daily prayers are slighted and neglected
     among us, far more, to our shame be it spoken, than among any other
     sort of people in the world. The Papists will rise up in judgment
     with this generation, for they every day observe their canonical
     hours for praying, at least, for that which they believe to be so.
     The Jews will rise up in judgment with this generation, for they
     never omitted to offer their daily sacrifices, so long as they had
     an house of GOD wherein to offer them. The Turks shall rise up in
     judgment with this generation, for when their priests call the
     people to prayer, as they do several times every day, they
     immediately run to their mosques or temples, and if any offer to
     stay at home, he is shunned by all, as a wicked atheistical wretch.
     The heathen will rise up in judgment with this generation, for if
     they had such opportunities as we have of praying and praising their
     ALMIGHTY CREATOR every day, I doubt not but they would do it far
     more constantly than it is done by most of us. What then can we
     expect but that some severe judgment or other will ere long be
     inflicted on us, when people generally live as without GOD in the
     world, notwithstanding the clear discoveries that He hath made of
     Himself unto them, and notwithstanding the means of grace which are
     so constantly administered to them, but they will not use them
     ?"---Works, Vol. v. p. 234.

     63. BISHOP GIBSON.---"As for those, to whom GOD has given greater
     degrees of leisure from the business of life, to attend to reading,
     prayer, and other exercises and offices of religion; they must
     remember that He will expect from them greater improvements in
     purity and goodness, suitable to the special advantages and
     opportunities which He has bestowed upon them. And among those may
     well be reckoned, the provisions made in these two great cities for
     daily prayers in the Church, which are attended by many serious
     Christians, to their great spiritual benefit, and might be attended
     by many more, without prejudice to health, or hinderance to
     business."---IVth Pastoral Letter. Ench. Theol. ii. 302.

     64. ARCHBISHOP SECKER.---"But besides your and their duty on the
     LORD'S day, it is appointed, that all ministers of parishes read
     prayers on holy-days, on Wednesdays, and Fridays; and undoubtedly
     your endeavours to procure a congregation at such times ought not to
     be wanting. Were I to repeat to you the strong expressions which my
     great predecessor Bishop Fell used, in requiring this part of
     ecclesiastical duty, they would surprise you. But I content myself
     with saying that public worship was from the very first ages
     constantly performed on the two stationary days of each week; that
     all holy-days appointed by the Church were carefully observed by the
     clergy, and the number of them now is not burthensome; that where
     you can get competent number to attend at these times, you will act
     a very pious and useful, as well as regular part; that your own
     houses will sometimes furnish a small congregation, and what success
     you may have with others, nothing but trials, repeated from time to
     time, can inform you."---2d Charge to the Clergy of the Diocese
     of Oxford, pp. 71, 2.

     65. BISHOP BUTLER.---"That which men have accounted religion in
     the several countries of the world, generally speaking, has had a
     great and conspicuous part in all public appearances, and the face
     of it been kept up with great reverence throughout all ranks, from
     the highest to the lowest; not only upon occasional solemnities, but
     also in the daily course of behaviour. In the heathen world their
     superstition was the chief subject of statuary, sculpture, painting,
     and poetry. It mixed itself with business, civil forms, diversions,
     domestic entertainments, and every part of common life. The
     Mahometans are obliged to short devotions five times between morning
     and evening. In Roman Catholic countries, people cannot pass a day
     without having religion recalled to their thoughts, by some or other
     memorial of it; by some ceremony or public religious form occurring
     in their way; besides their frequent holidays, the short prayers
     they are daily called to, and the occasional devotions enjoined by
     confessors. By these means their superstition sinks deep into the
     minds of the people, and their religion also into the minds of such
     among them as are serious and well disposed. Our Reformers,
     considering that some of these observances were in themselves wrong
     and superstitious, and others of them made subservient to the
     purposes of superstition, abolished them, reduced the form of
     religion to great simplicity, and enjoined no more particular rules,
     nor left any thing more of what was external in religion, than was
     in a manner necessary to preserve a sense of religion itself upon
     the minds of the people. But a great part of this is neglected by
     the generality amongst us; for instance, the service of the church,
     not only upon common days, but also upon saints' days, and
     several other things might be mentioned. Thus they have no customary
     admonition, no public call to recollect the thoughts of God and
     religion from one Sunday to another. It was far otherwise under the
     Law. ;These words,' says Moses to the children of Israel,
     ;which I command thee,' &c. And as they were commanded
     this, so it is obvious how much the constitution of that law was
     adapted to effect it, and keep religion ever in view. And without
     somewhat of this nature, piety will grow languid, even among the
     better sort of men; and the worst will go on quietly in an abandoned
     course, with fewer interruptions from within than they would have
     were religious reflections forced oftener upon their minds, and
     consequently with less probability of their amendment. Indeed, in
     most ages of the Church, the care of reasonable men has been, as
     there has been for the most part occasion, to draw the people off
     from having too great weight upon external things, upon formal acts
     of piety. But that state of matters is quite changed now with us.
     These things are neglected to a degree which is, and cannot but be
     attended with a decay of all that is good. It is highly seasonable
     now to instruct the people in the importance of external
     religion.... The frequent returns, whether of public devotion, or of
     any thing else, to introduce religion into men's serious
     thoughts, will have an influence upon them, in proportion as they
     are susceptible of religion, and not given over to a reprobate mind.
     For this reason, besides others, the service of the Church ought to
     be celebrated as often as you can have a congregation to attend it.
     But since the body of the people, especially in country places,
     cannot be brought to attend it oftener than one day in a week, and
     since this is in no sort enough to keep up in them a due sense of
     religion, it were greatly to be wished they could be persuaded to
     any thing which might in some measure supply the want of more
     frequent public devotions, or serve the like purposes."---Charge
     to the Clergy of Durham, 1751.

     The above extracts were collected by a friend of the writer, when a
     student for holy orders, about 24 or 25 years since, and have not
     long since come to hand accidentally. It appeared desirable that
     they should be published, with as little alteration as possible,
     even in form or order, so as to establish the fact, that we have
     always had in our prayer-books, and in the writings of our
     ritualists, and other eminent divines, a witness against our neglect
     of this duty; and a witness so clear and decided, as to arrest the
     attention of a young person studying these books at the very time
     when the daily service was most completely disused, and in a manner
     forgotten.

     It will be seen, therefore, that this collection does not pretend to
     be a catena, nor to contain all the testimonies in favour of this
     practice, which are to be found in the divines of our branch of the
     Church.

     It is believed, however, that any one who will seriously consider
     the extracts that are here set forth, will find in them enough to
     convince him,

     First, That the objections against the practice, and the
     difficulties in the way of restoring it, are not so great as they
     are supposed to be.

     Secondly, That the duty itself is of such importance, one might
     perhaps say of so great necessity, for the maintenance of true
     religion, that it would he no more than right to make some venture,
     and, if need be, patiently to suffer discouragement and
     mortification for the sake of performing it.

     And, at any rate, it is quite certain that this view of the daily
     service is very far from being in any way modern or "new-fangled."

     It has been made a point of conscience to quote the passages exactly
     as they stand in the books whence they are taken, and in such a
     manner as to give a fair impression of the views entertained by the
     respective writers.

     In consequence, there are one or two statements contained in them,
     which seems to the person who sends this collection to call for some
     kind of protest on his part.

     It is submitted, that the excuse for the neglect of the service in
     country villages, which Dr. Best suggests in extract 50, would be a
     plea for omitting it in town churches, and even in cathedrals, where
     there may be no congregation. And it should be considered whether
     what he says in that passage be in any way reconcileable to his
     opinions as more solemnly and distinctly expressed in the extract
     that follows. And the first part of this observation appears
     applicable also to a statement of Dr. Bisse, in No. 30, that "the
     daily offering cannot be observed in lesser parish churches."

     Further, from the extracts here made from Wheatly and Nicholls, it
     would seem that they thought the Church meant to "discontinue" or
     discourage all "solitary" repeating of her services. And indeed the
     language used by Dr. Nicholls does not appear suitable to the
     seriousness and sanctity of such a subject.

     But the writer of this notice begs leave humbly to submit, that,
     although the services ought, if possible, to be read in the church,
     or in some family congregation, yet should any clergyman be
     prevented from saying them thus "openly," he is bound by the rubric
     to say them to himself "privately," unless prevented by some urgent
     cause. Such, it is apprehended, was the view of the rubric generally
     entertained in the seventeenth century.

     And the writer would venture to express his conviction, that if a
     churchman were, under such discouraging circumstances, to persevere
     in the private practice of this duty, he would gain thereby the
     greatest comfort and advantage; and when restored to a more full
     enjoyment of the means of grace, would find his delight and
     edification in the services increased beyond anything he could have
     possibly anticipated.

     He thought, moreover, it might be useful to add four fresh
     authorities,---one from the most simple and practical, as well as
     the most learned (perhaps) of our ritualists, and the others as
     illustrating the practice and opinions of three very distinguished
     bishops.

     BISHOP SPARROW.---"Whatsoever the world think, thus to be the
     Lord's remembrancers, putting Him in mind of the people's
     wants (Isaiah lxii.), being, as it were, the angels of the Lord,
     interceding for the people, and carrying up the daily prayers of the
     Church in their behalf, is one of the most useful and principal
     parts of the priest's office. So St. Paul tells us, who, in the
     First Epistle to Timothy, chap. ii., exhorts Bishop Timothy, that he
     should take care, first of all, that this holy service be offered up
     to God. ;I exhort, first of all, that prayers and
     supplications, intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all
     men; for kings,' &c. What is the meaning of this ;first of
     all?' I will that this holy service be offered up daily. And
     the faithful know how we observe this rule of St. Paul, offering up
     daily this holy sacrifice morning and evening. See Chrysostom on the
     place."

     St. Paul, in the first chapter of this Epistle, at the eighteenth
     verse, had charged his "son Timothy to war a good warfare," to "hold
     faith and a good conscience," and presently adds, "I exhort
     therefore, that first of all prayers, &c. be made." As if he had
     said, You cannot possibly hold faith and a good conscience in your
     pastoral office, unless, first of all, you be careful to make and
     offer up prayers, &c. For this is the first thing to be done, and
     most highly to be regarded by you. Preaching is a very useful part
     of the priest's office, and St. Paul exhorts Timothy to "preach
     the word, be instant in season, out of season," and the more because
     he was a bishop, and had to plant and water many churches, in the
     infancy of Christianity, among many seducers and temptations: but
     yet, first of all he exhorts, that this daily office of presenting
     prayers to the throne of grace, in behalf of the Church, be
     carefully looked to.

     This charge of St. Paul to Timothy, holy Church here lays upon all
     those that are admitted into that holy office of the Ministry, that
     they should offer up to God this holy sacrifice of prayers, praises,
     and thanksgivings, this savour of rest, daily---morning and
     evening. And would all those whom it concerns look well to this part
     of their office, I should not doubt but that GOD would be as
     gracious and bountiful to us in the performance of this service, as
     He promiseth to be to the Jews in the offering of the lamb, morning
     and evening, Exod. xxix. 42, 43. "He would meet us and speak with
     us," that is, graciously answer our petitions; "He would dwell with
     us and be our God," and we should know by comfortable experiments of
     His great and many blessings, that He is the LORD our
     GOD.---Rationale of the Common Prayer---on the Rubric which
     orders the daily service, p. 9.

     ARCHBISHOP LAUD.---"I stayed at Lambeth till the evening, to
     avoid the gazing of the people. I went to evening prayer in my
     chapel. The Psalms of the day, Ps. 93 and 94, and Chap. 50 of Esai,
     gave me great comfort. God make me worthy of it, and fit to receive
     it."---Diary, p. 60.

     BISHOP KEN.---"But your greatest zeal must be spent for the
     public prayers, in the constant and devout use of which the public
     safety, both of Church and State, is highly concerned: be sure then
     to offer up to GOD every day the morning and evening prayers; offer
     it up in your family at least, or rather, as far as your
     circumstances may possibly permit, offer it up in the church,
     especially if you live in a great town, and say over the Litany
     every morning during the whole of Lent. This I might enjoin you to
     do on your canonical obedience, ;but, for love's sake, I
     rather beseech you,' and I cannot recommend to you a more
     devout and comprehensive form of penitent and public intercession
     than that, or more proper for the season. Be not discouraged if but
     few come to the solemn assemblies, but go to the ;house of
     prayer,' where GOD is well known for a sure refuge; go, though
     you go alone, or but with one besides yourself; and there, as you
     are GOD'S ;remembrancer,' keep not silence, and give Him
     no rest, till He establish, till He make Jerusalem a praise in the
     earth.'---Bp. Ken's Pastoral Letter to his Clergy,
     concerning their behaviour during Lent. 1688.

     BISHOP WILSON.---From Archdeacon Hewetson's advice to him
     the day he was ordained Deacon, the Festival of St. Peter, 1686.

     "VI. To say the morning and evening prayers, either publicly or
     privately, every day, is, T. W. knows, the Church's express
     command, in one of the rubricks before the calendar.

     "VIII. Never to miss the Church's public devotions twice a day,
     when unavoidable business, or want of health, or of a church, as in
     travelling, doth not hinder."---Crutwell's Life, at the
     beginning of Bp. Wilson's Work, pp. 3 & 4, folio ed.

     How well this advice was followed appears from the following
     statement further on:---

     "Every summer morning at six, and every winter morning at seven, the
     family attended him to their devotions in the chapel, where he
     himself, or one of his students, performed the service of the day,
     and in the evening they did the same.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
