                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                          SERMONS ON SAINTS' DAYS.

                          (No. 3. ST. MARK'S DAY.)

                                 [Number 57]
     __________________________________________________________________

     "That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
     carried about with every wind of doctrine."---Ephes. iv. 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

     THE Church, in her Collect for this day, directs us how to pray for
     stability in sound doctrine, as a sign, and indispensable requisite,
     of something better than mere childhood in religion. She would not
     have Christians to content themselves with a consciousness of faith,
     however devout, or with a feeling of love, however fervent, but she
     wishes every man to prove his faith and love; i. e. to see to it,
     that he believe the genuine Gospel, and love and adore the true and
     only Saviour. Daily experience shows that it is very possible for
     men, and serious men too, forgetting this caution, to think all is
     right, if only certain pious impressions are produced, sufficient,
     apparently, to lead the mind upwards, and, at the same time, to
     enforce the relative duties of life. If that be done, say they, all
     is done. Why go on to perplex good people with questions of mere
     doctrinal accuracy? This is a very common way of speaking and
     thinking just at present: and it finds ready acceptance, especially
     among, the many who dislike trouble. For in Christian doctrine, as
     in other things, it is some trouble to be accurate. Common, however,
     and acceptable as the notion is, that the temper of faith in the
     heart is every thing, and the substance of faith in the creed
     comparatively nothing; it is a notion at once proved unscriptural
     and wrong, were it only by this simple consideration; that so much
     care has been taken in Scripture, and by GOD'S Providence guiding
     His Church in all ages, to guard the doctrines once for all
     delivered to the Saints, and keep men steady and uniform in them. If
     this were not a principal object in the eye of Divine Wisdom, is it
     conceivable that the great Apostle should have introduced it as he
     has done when speaking to the Ephesians as one main result of the
     coming of the HOLY GHOST, the very bond between heaven and earth? It
     is one of the passages, in which he writes like one soaring
     majestically upward, flight after flight beyond what he had at first
     intended:---"Unto every one of us is given grace according to the
     measure of the gift of CHRIST ;" i. e., according to that portion of
     special infused grace which GOD sees needful for our several
     callings in His Church. "Wherefore he saith, When He ascended up on
     high, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men." What gifts?
     Surely, to those who think slightly of Apostolical order in the
     Church, the answer must appear very surprising. "He gave some,
     Apostles, and some, Prophets, and some, Evangelists, and some,
     Pastors and Teachers." I do not of course press this text as proving
     by itself the Apostolical authority of our three orders. But thus
     much, undoubtedly, it proves, that some kind of order was instituted
     in the beginning, of so important and beneficial tendency, as to
     deserve a very high place in the enumeration of those royal gifts,
     by which the Holy Comforter solemnized the inauguration of the SON
     of GOD. We may, or we may not, enjoy that order still. We may have
     irrecoverably lost it by God's Providence justly visiting human
     abuse of it: in which case it might not strike us as a practical
     topic of inquiry: but to suppose that it still exists, or may be
     recovered, and yet to speak of it as an idle dream, a worn out
     theory, or (still worse) a profane superstition---this is not
     what one should expect from those who reverence the Divine Inspirer
     of this and similar passages in St. Paul. But to proceed; the
     Apostle goes on to mention unity of doctrine, as one main final
     cause of the institution of this Apostolical system. The Apostles,
     Prophets, and the rest, were given to the Church by the Holy Ghost,
     "that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
     carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, by
     cunning craftiness, according to the wily system of deceit: but
     speaking the truth in love, may grow up unto Him in all things,
     which is the Head, even Christ:" i. e. may daily go on unto
     perfection in serving and copying our adorable Saviour, and in
     nearer and nearer communion with Him.

     It is clear that if the Apostolical ministry does guard effectually
     the foundations of our faith, it so far gives room and opportunity
     for all to go on to perfection. It puts men on a vantage ground,
     disencumbers them of cares and anxieties about that which is behind,
     and enables them with undivided energy to press forward to that
     which is before. As a mere witness, the Apostolical system,
     supposing it really such, must have this effect: and we must not
     forget, that, on the same supposition, especial helps from Divine
     Grace may be looked for as likely to be vouchsafed to those who
     humbly endeavour to go on by its aid. Now, that the great Head of
     the Church has hitherto made use of the succession of Bishops as a
     singular mean for guarding the doctrine of His Incarnation in
     particular, was shown on a former occasion, by reference to the
     ancient Church: where it was proved, that both as indisputable
     witnesses, and as commissioned and responsible guardians, the
     Bishops of the three first centuries effectually maintained the
     truth for us. The same conclusion is now to be deduced from a more
     painful set of experiments, in which modern times, unfortunately,
     have too much abounded. We are to consider what has been the
     doctrinal result in those Churches which have been so bold as to
     dispense with primitive discipline and government. If we find them
     marked, in the great majority of cases, by great unsteadiness and
     vacillation of doctrinal views, even on those points which contain
     the very essence of our faith: will not this be an additional lesson
     to us, that by forsaking the Apostolical ministry we are but giving
     ourselves up to be "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
     wind of doctrine?"

     Now, first, although, as I said before, the heretics of the first
     ages dared not openly dispense with Apostolical succession, the
     times, as they well knew, not enduring it: yet they showed in some
     remarkable instances, how little they really cared for it. The
     following is the complaint of Tertullian in the second
     century:---"It may be right here to add some account of the
     practical system of the heretics, how futile it is, how altogether
     earthly and human; destitute of weight, of authority, of discipline:
     as well agreeing with their system of doctrine. First, who among
     them is a Catechumen, who a complete Christian, is a thing
     uncertain: they come to Church: hear the sermon, join in the
     prayers, indiscriminately: even should heathens chance to come in,
     they will throw their holy things to the dogs, and their pearls
     (\which, indeed, are but counterfeits) before swine. They hold the
     overthrow of discipline to be [Christian] simplicity; and our
     reverence for the same, meretricious art. Every where, and with all
     kinds of persons, they affect to be on good terms. For it makes no
     difference to them how they disagree in their own expositions,
     provided they can but unite for the overthrow of one thing, viz.
     TRUTH. All are puffed up: all profess knowledge. Their Catechumens
     become complete Christians before they have quite learned their
     lessons. The very women among the heretics, how forward are they!
     daring to teach, to dispute, to exercise, to make show of gifts of
     healing: perhaps, even to baptize. Their ordinations are off-handed,
     light, variable; sometimes mere novices are raised by them to Church
     office, sometimes men engaged in worldly business, sometimes
     deserters from our ranks; whom they hope to make sure of by the
     compliment, having no reality" [of spiritual power] "to offer. In
     fact, promotion is nowhere so easy as in the camp of rebels; since
     the very act of being there is rewardable service. Accordingly, one
     man shall be their Bishop to-day, another to-morrow: to-day a
     Deacon, to-morrow a reader: to-day a Presbyter, to-morrow a mere
     layman. For in laymen also they will vest the powers and functions
     of the Priesthood."

     As an instance of what is thus generally stated by Tertullian, take
     the behaviour of Novatian, Presbyter in the Church of Rome, who,
     about the year 252, was the founder of a sect which professed
     especial strictness of moral discipline. The testimony concerning
     him, of his own Bishop, Cornelius, a prelate of the highest
     character in the Church, is as follows:---" Never in so short a
     time was so great a change seen, as we witnessed in Novatian. He was
     continually pledging himself by certain fearful oaths, that the
     Bishoprick was no object to him: and now, on a sudden, as it were by
     some stage trick, he comes forward in public a Bishop! Reformer as
     he is of doctrine, and champion of pure Church principles, having
     entered on a scheme for making himself a Bishop, without Divine
     sanction, by underhand means, he selects two, as desperate as
     himself, and sends them into certain small and insignificant
     dioceses of Italy: where, lighting on three Bishops, (the requisite
     number for consecration,) " men rustic, and very simple, he
     persuades them to come with all speed to Rome, as though by their
     mediation some present dispute in that Church might be composed.
     Being there come he surrounds them with men like himself, provided
     for the purpose; and at a late hour, after a full meal, when they
     were off their guard, compels them to make him Bishop, by I know not
     what imaginary and vain ordination."

     Is it not plain that this person would have rejected the episcopal
     succession at once, if he could have compassed his ends without it?
     So far, therefore, he is an instance of the fact, that disrespect to
     that succession is a part of the heretical character. And although
     it is not exactly to the present purpose, I cannot refrain from
     adding also a circumstance which betrays his mind regarding the
     sacraments of CHRIST. Having set himself up as a schismatical rival
     to Cornelius, the true Bishop of Rome, this was his method of
     securing to himself partisans: in the act of solemnizing the holy
     Eucharist, "when he had made the offerings, and was distributing to
     each communicant his portion, and conveying it to him, he compels
     the unfortunate men, instead of giving thanks, to utter the
     following oath: he holding both their hands, and not letting them go
     until they repeated the words of asseveration after him: and these
     are his very words:---'Swear to me by the body and blood of our
     LORD JESUS CHRIST, that thou wilt never forsake me and return to
     Cornelius.' Nor is the poor man allowed to taste, before he shall
     have thus pronounced an imprecation on himself. And when he receives
     that bread, instead of saying, Amen, he is made to say, I will never
     return to Cornelius."

     It is frightful, but surely it is very instructive, to see how one
     kind of profaneness thus draws on another. Contempt of Apostolical
     authority was joined, we see, in this case, with contempt of the
     Sacraments of CHRIST. In the worse case which followed, that of
     Arius, the same evil temper led, as every one knows, to a direct
     assault on the holiest truths of Christianity. The immediate
     occasion of Arius' promulgating his blasphemy is said to have been
     his vexation at failing to succeed to the episcopal throne of
     Alexandria. This exasperated him so, that he laid in wait for an
     opportunity of disturbing the person preferred to him, Alexander, a
     man of true primitive energy. And he took occasion from certain
     expositions of Scripture, in which, as he, Arius, pretended to
     think, the Bishop had too much magnified the SON of GOD. The first
     spring, therefore, of his heresy was a rebellious and envious
     feeling towards his Bishop. And although for the same reason,
     probably, as Novatian, his followers never renounced the Apostolical
     succession; their proceedings were marked all along by a thorough
     disdain of Apostolical privileges. Witness their unscrupulous use of
     the civil power, or even of the fury of the populace, wherever it
     suited their purposes to carry an episcopal election, or control a
     synod, by such means: witness again the licence they encouraged of
     profane and libellous scoffing, both in prose and verse: by which,
     added to their improper appointments, they gradually depreciated the
     character of the most sacred office; so that it is quite melancholy
     to read the accounts given of what Bishops were at Constantinople in
     381, as compared with what they had been at Nicea, about sixty years
     before. All was no more than might be expected from a party, whose
     first overt proceedings are thus related by an eye-witness. "They
     could not endure any longer to remain in submission to the Church;
     but having builded for themselves dens of thieves, there they hold
     their meetings continually, by day and by night exercising
     themselves in calumnies against CHRIST and us.... They try to
     pervert those Scriptures which affirm our LORD'S eternal Godhead and
     unspeakable glory with His FATHER. Thus encouraging the impious
     opinions of Jews and Heathens concerning CHRIST, they lay themselves
     out to the uttermost to be praised by them: making the most of those
     points, which the unbelievers are most apt to ridicule; and daily
     exciting tumults and factions against us. One of their methods is,
     to get up actions at law against us, on the complaint of simple
     women, disorderly persons, whom they have perverted. Another, to
     expose the Christian profession to scorn, by permitting the younger
     persons among them to run irreverently about all the streets," i.
     e., as it would seem, from one conventicle to another .... "And
     while they thus set themselves against the Divinity of the SON of
     GOD, of course they shrink not from uttering unseemly rudeness
     against us. Nay, they disdain to compare themselves even with any of
     the ancients, or to be put on a level with those, whom we from
     children have reverenced as our guides. As to their fellow-servants
     of this time, in whatever country or Church, they do not consider a
     single one to have attained any measure of true wisdom: calling
     themselves the only wise, the only disdainers of worldly wealth, the
     only discoverers of doctrinal truths to themselves, they say, alone
     are revealed things which in their nature never could have come into
     the mind of any other under the sun."

     Such were the original Arians, the first powerful impugners of the
     Divinity of JESUS CHRIST; such their conduct towards their Bishops,
     and their reverence for Apostolical authority. The list of examples
     might be greatly enlarged; but it is time to go on to more modern
     times, and see what the result has been, where that was done, (I do
     not say from motives like theirs,) which Novatian and Arius clearly
     would have done if they had dared.

     The largest experiments yet made in the world on the doctrinal
     result of dispensing with episcopal succession, are the Lutheran
     Churches of North Germany, the Presbyterian or Reformed Churches of
     Switzerland, Holland and Scotland, with their offshoots in France,
     Germany, England and Ireland, and the Congregational or Independent
     Churches, in this island, and in America. I am not now going to
     dispute the necessity of what was done at the Reformation, (although
     it would be wrong to allow such necessity, without proof quite
     overwhelming,) but simply to state, as matter of fact, what has
     ensued in each instance in regard of the great doctrine of our
     LORD'S Incarnation.

     First, in North Germany, whatever may be supposed the cause, it is
     notorious that a lamentable falling off from the simplicity of
     evangelical truth prevailed during a considerable part of the
     eighteenth century. Views prevailed, which are commonly called
     Rationalist: i. e. which pretend to give an account, or principles
     of mere human reason, of Christianity and every thing connected with
     it. Of course the union of GOD and man in the Person of JESUS CHRIST
     was an object of scorn to a nation so led away by "philosophy and
     vain deceit." But it is a point well worth remarking, that,
     according to some who know much of German literature, the mischief
     was occasioned in good measure by the importation of Deistical books
     and opinions from England: books and opinions which England herself
     had rejected. Why so great a difference in the reception of the same
     error by two kindred races of people, lying very much under the same
     temptations? Is it unreasonable to suppose that the Apostolical
     succession and safeguards arising out of it, which England enjoys,
     had something to do with her comparative exemption from that most
     alarming error?

     The next which occurs is the case of the Church of Geneva and it is,
     indeed, a most startling case. It appearing at the time morally
     impossible to get a sufficient number of episcopally ordained
     Pastors, Calvin was induced to neglect the Apostolic; Commission in
     his plan for the reformation of Geneva; or rather to search holy
     Scripture for a new view of that commission, which might make him
     quite independent of Bishops. In so doing, he made out for himself
     the platform of Presbyterian Discipline. Having once established
     that as of exclusive divine right, he precluded himself from taking
     advantage of the avenue for returning to the true succession, which
     was soon after opened to him by his intercourse with the English
     reformers. It should seem that he could not help feeling how
     irreconcileable this his new form, Church government was with the
     general witness of the Fathers and hence, among other reasons, he
     contracted a kind of dislike of the ancient Church, and an
     impatience of being at all controlled by her decisions, which
     ultimately has proved of the worst consequence to the Genevan Church
     in particular. For example, he feared not, in his prime work, the
     Institutes, to speak contemptuously of the Fathers of the Council of
     Nicaea, and to designate the capital article of their majestic creed
     as little better than "an affected and childish sing-song." Another
     time he uttered a wish that the word "TRINITY" might be discontinued
     in the formularies of the Church. These and other symptoms of a
     desire to take liberties with antiquity were not unnoticed by a new
     sect, just then creeping out of the ground in Italy. Socinus and his
     partisans, one after another, betook themselves to Geneva, as the
     soil most congenial to them: and the later years of Calvin, and
     almost all those of his successor, Beza, were disturbed by that
     heresy and others akin to it, both at home and among their spiritual
     colonies abroad: especially those in Poland and Transylvania. It is
     well known how violently some of these false teachers were attacked
     by Calvin, even to the death: and his letters altogether betray a
     soreness and anxiety on the subject, as if he were aware that the
     system of his Church was incomplete, and did not feel quite sure
     that it was not his own fault. If such were Calvin's misgivings, the
     experience of later times has furnished a sad verification of them.
     After a gradual declension of many years, the Church of Geneva has
     now, it appears, sunk down to the very lowest standard of doctrine
     consistent with nominal Christianity. The Trinity, the Atonement,
     the Incarnation of the SON of GOD, are, or were lately, absolutely
     proscribed by authority as topics of preaching in the congregations
     there considered orthodox. Could such a downfall so easily have
     taken place, had not the authority of the Primitive Church, as a
     witness and interpreter of holy writ, been intentionally disparaged
     from the beginning, and private, that is to say, popular and
     fashionable judgment, set up instead, for strictly Presbyterian
     purposes? Episcopal sway, appealing as it must to antiquity, was
     surely just the thing needed to watch and check that evil leaven
     before it had spread so far.

     A like effect, proceeding as it may be thought very much from the
     same cause, may be seen in Holland, in the rise and growth of that
     school of divinity, commonly called Liberal or Latitudinarian: which
     began with Episcopius and others in the seventeenth century, and
     which has greatly tended to encourage a habit of explaining away the
     mysteries of the faith in almost all Protestant countries. The fact
     seems to be, that the extremes of the Predestinarian doctrine,
     violently pressed as they were at the Synod of Dort, produced their
     natural result, a violent reaction: and the minds of men not being
     prepossessed with the salutary antidote of reverence for primitive
     tradition, (which antidote had been systematically withholden, lest
     Presbyterianism should lose influence through it,) were ready to
     give up any thing else, when they had once given up the creeds and
     definitions of their own Churches. When these divines were pressed
     with the testimonies of the Fathers, the spirit of their answers
     were such as the following: "Never shall any advice drive me into
     the fruitless toil of studying the Fathers; which is more like
     grinding in a prison-house than any thing else I envy no man the
     credit he may acquire in such a frivolous insignificant pursuit.
     Others, for me, may have all the glory of much reading and great
     memory, whoever they are, who can find pleasure in wandering and
     rocking about in that vast ocean of Fathers and Councils." And (let
     it be well observed) this founder of the liberal school goes on
     distinctly to avow, that "he takes no great pains," nor ever did,
     "to acquaint himself with the writings of the Fathers:" whom,
     indeed, he grudges to call "the Fathers," accounting it a name of
     too much reverence. On this, our learned Bishop Bull remarks, what
     is much to our present purpose, as showing how cheap thoughts of the
     Primitive Church might naturally lead some steps towards heresy.
     "Much, indeed, were it to be wished that Episcopius had excepted the
     Fathers and writers of the three first centuries, at least. Had he
     spent more time on them, it would never have been regretted either
     by himself or the Church. For it would have saved him from
     representing the Arian and Socinian doctrines, regarding the Person
     of our SAVIOUR, as having been in the Judgment of the early
     Churches, erroneous indeed, but not so bad as heretical."

     Passing over to our own island, we are met, at once, by a fact,
     which appears at first, as far as it goes, to tell against the
     preceding conclusions. The Church of Scotland, ever since the
     Revolution, has been altogether Presbyterian; and yet, by God's
     blessing, her Ministers never have been accused of such a defection
     as took place at Geneva. Allowing the many good parts of her system
     (which, be it observed, are all in a primitive spirit) full credit
     for this, yet one may be permitted to observe, that something
     naturally must be ascribed to the vicinity of our own Church
     diffusing a kind of wholesome contagion, the benefit of which has
     been acknowledged by some of the great lights of the Scottish
     establishment. And it may be doubted whether many of the laity of
     that country? and especially whether the leading schools of
     education, have not been all along gradually verging towards
     something like Genevan profaneness. A little time will probably
     show---certainly there are symptoms in Scotland at this moment,
     which would make an orthodox Englishman more than ever unwilling to
     part with that outwork of Apostolic Faith, which England, under
     circumstances in many respects peculiarly untoward, has hitherto
     found in the Apostolical Commission of her Clergy.

     In England itself, it is hardly necessary to do more than notice the
     acknowledged state of the Presbyterian Churches. Not being subjected
     to the control of so strict a discipline as those of their communion
     in Scotland, and being moreover thrown into more hostile contact
     with the principles of ancient episcopal order, they have subsided,
     one after one another, into a cold and proud Socinianism. Three
     years ago, it was stated on dissenting authority, that the whole
     number of Presbyterian chapels in England was 258, out of whom 235
     were in reality Unitarian.

     Among the Independent or Congregational Churches (in which
     denomination, when speaking of Church government, the Baptists are
     of course included) no such avowed defection prevails. But their
     systematical disparagement of the holy Sacraments, their horror (for
     it is more than disregard) of authority and antiquity, and the
     tendency of their instructions and devotions to make Faith a matter
     of feeling rather than a strict relative duty towards the persons of
     the HOLY TRINITY: these and other causes are, I suspect, not very
     gradually preparing the way for lamentable results among them also.
     And it is most evident that all such causes act more strongly for
     the want of that check which a controlling Episcopacy supplies; such
     an Episcopacy I mean as may confidently make a continual appeal to
     the very Apostolical age.

     But we are not left quite to conjecture on the doctrinal tendency of
     Congregational views of Church government. The experiment has been
     tried on a large scale in America; and in one part of it (New
     England) with something of that advantage which endowments may be
     supposed to yield towards stability of Orthodox doctrine. The result
     may be given in the words of a Socinian writer. "In the United
     States, where there are no obstructions to the progress of knowledge
     and truth, the spread of liberal doctrines has exceeded our most
     sanguine expectations." An account which is confirmed by the
     testimony of all parties. Now, it is allowed, that in the same
     United States the Independents and Baptists put together greatly
     exceed all other denominations of Christians. The only country,
     therefore, of Christendom where congregational principles of
     government entirely prevail, is likewise the only country which
     witnesses the rapid and unmitigated growth of Unitarian principles
     of doctrine. In other countries, generally speaking, the
     "God-denying, apostasy" finds more or less acceptance, in proportion
     as less or more remains of primitive order and respect for the
     Apostolical commission.

     "But," it will be said, "what then becomes of the opposite case of
     the Church of Rome? She, too, has her grave doctrinal errors, deeply
     trenching on scriptural truth, awfully dangerous to the souls of
     men; and yet she is generally considered as the great champion of
     the Apostolical commission." The answer to this lies in the fact,
     well-known, however little considered, that in the same degree as
     the Romish Church swerved as a church from Christian verity, she
     laboured also to induce her subject Bishops to part with their claim
     to a succession properly Apostolical. Many and earnest were the
     debates on this point, at Trent, in the year 1562: the Papal Legates
     labouring, on the one hand, to enforce a declaration that Episcopal
     authority was not of divine right immediately, but mediately through
     the See of Rome, the Bishops of Spain more especially, insisting on
     the contrary tenet. The matter was quieted by a kind of compromise
     through the intervention of the French Bishops, and is accordingly
     left undecided in the decrees of that Council. The debates, however,
     remain on record, a remarkable proof that the spirit of Popery, as
     of all Anti-Christian corruptions, shrinks back, as it were
     instinctively, from the presence of Apostolical principles of order.

     If any one ask, " Why should all this be so? What has the Episcopal
     succession to do with doctrines, with the doctrine of our LORD'S
     Incarnation more especially?"---the answer has been partly given
     in the course of this brief sketch, especially in what related to
     Geneva. But, in general, the following considerations would appear
     to suffice.

     First, As matter of direct argument, when once men have learned to
     think slightly of the testimony borne by the ancients to the
     primitive discipline, they will naturally lose some part of their
     respect for the testimony borne by the same ancients to the
     primitive interpretation of Scripture. Now the questions between us
     and Unitarians are, in a great measure, questions of Scripture
     interpretation. Is it not clear, then, in how great additional
     jeopardy we place the irreverent and the wavering, when, from
     whatever cause, we shake their confidence in the express testimony
     of the early Fathers?

     Secondly, Looking at the whole subject as matter not of argument,
     but of feeling and temper; boldness and self-sufficiency in dealing
     with those who came next to the Apostles will prepare the mind to
     lay aside some portion of that deference with which we should
     approach the holy Apostles themselves. They and their writings will
     be treated more and more with a sort of hasty familiarity:
     inspiration will be less and less thought of; and naturally restless
     in discussion, and tormented with thoughts of his own ingenuity, the
     result is all but morally certain.

     Thirdly: (the point must not be omitted, however the majority may
     agree to scoff at it, and however gravely some may blame it as
     uncharitable:) if there be such a thing as a true Apostolical
     commission, truly connected with the efficacy of CHRIST'S holy
     Sacraments; then we must suppose, that where that commission is
     wanting, especially if the want be through men's presumption or
     neglect, then the gracious assistance of the HOLY GHOST cannot be so
     certainly depended on, as for other sanctifying purposes, so for the
     guiding of the mind to doctrinal truth. Of course, then, the evil
     spirit and the tempting sophistry of the world will have the more
     power over men: so that if for no other reason, yet through the want
     or imperfection of the ordinary channels of grace, schism might be
     expected to lead to false doctrine and heresy.

     Can it be necessary to add the obvious remark, that if the Church
     system were needful heretofore, it is but rendered the more
     evidently necessary for every advance in intellectual light and
     liberty, which the present age, from day to day, prides itself on
     making? Alas! if the appetite for knowledge of good and evil be
     indeed the great snare of all, then all the supernatural means and
     aids which our LORD has provided in His Church, instead of having
     gone out of date, are more than ever necessary to us; and those more
     heavily than ever responsible, who scorn any of those aids, or teach
     and encourage others to do so.

     It is of GOD'S great mercy, that to such a perversion of mind is
     generally annexed what makes it its own punishment here, and so far
     gives it a fairer chance of better and more humble thoughts in time
     for hereafter. We are plainly taught by St. Paul, that those who
     permit themselves to disparage the heavenly gifts, conveyed to us by
     the SPIRIT of CHRIST through his Apostles, may expect to be, if no
     worse, yet all their lives "children, tossed to and fro, and carried
     away by every wind of doctrine:" or, as he elsewhere expresses it,
     "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of truth."
     Let us remember these things, when we hear, as we too often have
     heard, and must more and more expect to hear, of ingenious men
     letting go their hold, first, of Christian order, and then of
     Christian faith: and let us fear and prayer both for them and for
     ourselves.

     OXFORD,

     The Feast of the Annunciation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
