                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                               RICHARD NELSON.

                                     I.

                       BISHOPS, PRIESTS, AND DEACONS.

                                 [Number 12]
     __________________________________________________________________

     "It is evident unto all men diligently reading the Holy Scripture
     and ancient authors, that from the Apostles' time there have
     been these orders of Ministers in CHRIST'S Church; Bishops,
     Priests, and Deacons."

     Pref. to the Ordination Service.

     IN the course of this last summer of 1833, I had the pleasure of a
     visit from an old and valued friend, one of the most respectable
     merchants in the city of Bristol (and this, in my opinion, is no
     small praise).

     We were discussing one day the subject of National Schools, their
     merits and demerits. He was pleading strenuously for them; and to
     confirm his arguments, "I will mention," said he, "a circumstance
     which happened to me when I was in this part of the world about
     eleven or twelve years ago I was travelling on a coach somewhere
     between Sheffield and Leeds, when we took up a lad of fourteen or
     fifteen years of age; a rough country-looking boy, but well
     mannered, and of an intelligent countenance.

     "I found, upon conversation with him, that he belonged to a National
     School in the neighbourhood which he was, he said, on the point of
     leaving. This gave me occasion to ask him various questions, which
     he answered with so much readiness and vivacity, yet without any
     self-conceit in his manner, that when the coach stopped (I think it
     was at Barnsley) for a short time, I took him with me into a
     bookseller's shop, and desired him to select some book which I
     might give him as a testimony of my approbation. After looking at a
     few which the bookseller recommended, he fixed on a ;Selection
     from Bishop Wilson's Works,' whose name, he said, he had
     often heard. He begged me to write his name in it, which I did, and
     we parted with mutual expressions of good-will; and I will be bold
     to prophesy that that boy (or young man as he must now be, if he is
     still alive) is giving, by his conduct, stronger testimony in favour
     of the National School System, than a thousand of your speculating
     philosophers can bring against it."

     "Well," said I, "you are apt to be sanguine in your views, but, as I
     must confess they are very often right, so I will hope you may not
     have been deceived in this instance."

     It so happened, that two or three days after this conversation, we
     were taking a walk together, and discussing various topics, such as
     the present state of things might well suggest, when we met a young
     man, a neighbour of mine, a mason, who detained us two or three
     minutes, while he asked my directions about some work he was doing
     for me.

     After he was out of hearing, "that," said I, "is one of the most
     respectable young men I know. Soon after I came here, more than four
     years ago, he married a young woman of a disposition similar to his
     own, and they live in that cottage that you see there, to the right
     of that row of beeches."

     "I see it, I believe," said he, hardly looking the way I pointed,
     and not altogether seeming pleased at having our conversation thus
     interrupted.

     "He has two or three little children, and I believe sometimes it
     goes hard with them, as in the winter work is short hereabouts, and
     he does not like beating about far from home I sometimes tell him he
     ought to look farther, but he is so fond of his home, his wife, and
     children, that I verily think he would rather live on potatoes seven
     days in the week with them, than have meat and beer by himself. And
     besides, I know he does not relish the companions he must work with
     at the town. However, on the whole, they do tolerably well, as they
     have a garden of a fair size, and he never spends an unnecessary
     penny."

     "I am glad to hear it," said he; "but we were talking; about the
     value of an apostolical succession in the ministry, were we not? and
     of the great ignorance and neglect now prevailing on the subject."

     "We were," said I; "but to tell you the truth, though I have
     bestowed considerable attention on the subject, and examined the
     various opinions which have been put forth on it, yet I have
     scarcely learned so much hereon from the works of learned
     theologians, as I have from repeated conversations with that very
     young man we just now met."

     "You surprise me," said he.

     "You may be surprised, but it is, however, true, and, if you have no
     objection, I will tell you how it was."

     "By all means," he answered.

     "When I first came to the parish, I looked about for some person to
     take charge of the Sunday School, as the master was old, and so deaf
     as to be unequal to the work. I was recommended to apply to Richard
     Nelson; (that is the man's name)"---Here my friend
     interrupted me, saying, "Richard Nelson ? why, now I remember, that
     was the very name of the boy I travelled with." "Indeed !" said I, "
     then doubtless it is the same person: for his age will agree with
     your account very well, and I know he was bred
     at---------National School."------"Well," said he, "I
     am quite delighted to find myself a true prophet in this instance."
     "Perhaps," said I, "you will be still more pleased when you have
     heard all I have to tell you: you will find that your little present
     was by no means thrown away."------"Go on," said he, "I am all
     attention."

     "I was telling you, I believe, that I requested Nelson to be come
     master of the Sunday School. After some little hesitation, he
     declined my offer, under the plea that he could not give constant
     and regular attendance; though he was willing to attend
     occasionally, and render what assistance he could. So it was
     arranged that the old master should still remain; and I afterwards
     discovered that an unwillingness to deprive him of the little
     emolument was Nelson's real reason for declining my offer. As
     the Sunday School is nearly three-quarters of a mile from my house,
     in a direction beyond Nelson's, along the Beech Walk, as we
     call it, it frequently happened that we joined in company as we went
     to and fro. We generally talked over such subjects as had reference
     to the School, or to the state of religion in general; and, amongst
     other topics, that on which you and I are conversing, the authority
     of Christian ministers. I remember it was on the following occasion
     that the subject was started between us: I thought that I had
     observed one Sunday that he was making the boys of his class, (our
     school professes to be on the Bell System,) that he was, I say,
     making his boys read the nineteenth and some other of the
     Thirty-nine Articles relating to the ministerial office, and that
     afterwards he was explaining and illustrating them, after his usual
     manner, by referring them to suitable parts of Scripture. On our
     walk homewards, I enquired if I was right in my conjecture. He said,
     Yes; and that in the present state of things he could not help
     thinking it quite a duty to direct the minds of young persons to
     such subjects. And on this, and many subsequent occasions, he set
     forth his opinions on the matter, which I will state to you, as far
     as I can remember, in his own words.

     "My good mother," he said, "not long before her death, which
     happened about half a year before I came to live here, said to me
     very earnestly one day, as I was sitting by her bed side, ;My
     dear Richard, observe my words, never dare to trifle with GOD
     ALMIGHTY.' By this I understood her to mean, that in all
     religious actions we ought to be very awful, and to seek nothing but
     what is right and true. And I knew that she had always disapproved
     of people's saying, as they commonly do, ;that it little
     matters what a man's religion is, if he is but sincere;'
     and ;that one opinion or one place of worship is as good as
     another.' To say, or think, or act so, she used to call
     ;Trifling with GOD'S truth;' and do you not think,
     sir, (addressing himself to me,) that she was right?"

     "Indeed I do," said I.

     "And," he said, "I was much confirmed in these opinions by
     constantly reading a very wise, and, as I may say to you, precious
     book, which a gentleman gave me some years ago, whom I met by
     chance, when I was going to see my father in the infirmary. It is
     called a ;Selection from Bishop Wilson's Works,' and
     there are many places in it which show what his opinions were on
     this subject; and, I suppose, Sir, there can be no doubt that Bishop
     Wilson was a man of extraordinary judgment and piety."

     "He has ever been considered so," I answered.

     "I could not think much of any one's judgment or piety either,
     who should say otherwise," he replied; "and what Bishop Wilson says
     is this, or to this effect: ;That to reject the government of
     Bishops, is to reject an ordinance of GOD."

     "That ;our salvation depends under GOD, upon the ministry of
     those whom JESUS CHRIST and the HOLY GHOST have appointed to
     reconcile men to GOD.'

     "That ;the personal failings of ministers do not make void
     their commission.'

     ;That ;if the Unity of the Church is once made a light
     master, and he who is the centre of Unity, and in CHRIST'S
     stead, shall come to be despised, and his authority set at nought,
     then will error and infidelity get ground; JESUS CHRIST and his
     Gospel will be despised, and the kingdom of Satan set up again here
     as well as in other nation.' With many other expressions like
     these.

     "And yet, Sir," he continued, "the gentleman who lives over there,
     (pointing to a great house in sight four or five miles on down the
     valley,) who is said to be a person of much learning, and who does a
     great deal of good, he does not take the matter in the same light.
     For he told a man of------ , whom I was working with, that if
     a person preached what was right and good, that was the best sign of
     his being ordained a minister, without the ceremony of laying on a
     Bishop's hands upon his head. And the man that told me very
     much admired the opinion, in regard (he said) of its being so very
     liberal, or some such word. Though I confess I could not exactly see
     what there was so much to admire. Because; if the opinion were true,
     it was good, and if it were false, it was bad, equally as much (to
     my thinking) whether it were called liberal or bigoted."

     "Doubtless you were right," said I. "And," he proceeded, "it seemed
     to me, (and I told the man so,) like going round and round in a
     wheel, to say, if he is GOD'S minister, he preaches what is
     good; and if he preaches what is good, he is GOD'S minister.
     For still the question will be, what is right and good? and some
     would say one thing and some another; and some would say there is
     nothing right nor good at all in itself, but only as seems most
     expedient to every person for the time being. So for my own
     satisfaction, and hoping for GOD'S blessing on my endeavour, I
     resolved to search the matter out for myself as well as I could. My
     plan was this. First to see what was said on the subject in the
     Church Prayer Book, and then to compare this with the Scriptures;
     and if, after all, I could not satisfy myself, I should have taken
     the liberty of consulting you, Sir, if I had been here, or Mr.
     ------ who was the minister at ------, where I came
     from."

     "Yours was a good plan" I said; "but I suppose you had forgotten
     that the chief part of the Church Services which relate to these
     subjects, is not contained in the Prayer Books which we commonly
     use."

     "I was aware of that," he answered, "but my wife's father had
     been clerk of --------- parish, and it so happened that
     the; churchwarden had given him a large Prayer Book in which all the
     Ordination Services were quite perfect, though the book was ancient
     and in some parts very ragged. This book my wife brought with her
     when we came here, and indeed she values it very highly on account
     of her poor father having used it for so many years. Thus you see,
     Sir, with the Bible and Prayer Book, and, (as I hoped,) GOD'S
     blessing on my labours, I was not, as you may say, unfurnished for
     the work."

     "Indeed, Richard, you were not," I replied.

     "Well then," he proceeded, "I first observed, that the Church is
     very particular in not allowing any administration of the
     Sacraments, or any public service of ALMIGHTY GOD to take place,
     except when there is one of her ministers to guide and take the lead
     in the solemnity. Thus not only in the administration of Baptism,
     and of the LORD'S Supper, but in the daily Morning and Evening
     Prayers, in the public Catechizing of Children, in the Solemnization
     of Marriage, in the Visitation of the Sick, and in the Burial of the
     Dead;---in all these cases the Christian congregation is never
     supposed complete, nor the service perfect, unless there be also
     present a minister authorized to lead the devotions of the people.
     And yet I also observed that neither minister nor people, not even
     with the leave of the Bishop himself, had power or authority given
     them to alter or vary from the Rules set down in the Prayer Book.
     And often have I thought how well it would be if Ministers and
     people too would be more careful to keep to the rules."

     "Yes," said I, "it is too true; we are all to blame."

     "But," he proceeded, taking a small Prayer Book out of his pocket,
     "the question I had next to ask was,---who are meant by these
     ministers so often referred to in the Church Service. To this
     question I found a general answer in the Twenty-third, Twenty-sixth,
     and Thirty-sixth Articles; where the judgment of the Church is thus
     plainly given."

     "1st. ;That it is not lawful for any man to take upon him the
     office of public preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the
     Congregation, before he be lawfully called and sent to execute the
     same.'

     "2ndly. ;That those are lawfully called and sent, who are
     chosen and called to the work by men who have public authority given
     them in the Congregation to call and send Ministers into the
     LORD'S vineyard.'

     "3rdly. ;That though sometimes evil men may have chief
     authority in the Ministration of the Word and Sacraments; yet,
     forasmuch, as they do not the same in their own name but in
     CHRIST'S, and do minister by His commission and authority, we
     may use their ministry with full hope of GOD'S blessing.'

     "4thly. ;That whosoever are consecrated and ordained according
     to the Rites there prescribed, are rightly, orderly, and lawfully
     consecrated and ordained.'

     "But here, Sir, I will take occasion to ask you whether it would not
     have been better, instead of calling the second order of Ministers
     Priests, to have used the word which is frequently found in the New
     Testament applied to them, "Elders," or "Presbyters."

     "Why," I said, "I have no doubt the wise and good men who framed the
     Prayer Book had a good reason for retaining the title of Priests.
     But in truth it is one of the very words you mentioned, only
     somewhat shortened by our forefathers in their pronunciation of
     it---Presbyter was made Prester, and that by degrees became Prest
     or Priest."

     "That," said he "is very remarkable, and proves that we ought to
     enquire before we find fault. But to go on with what I was
     saying---I next proceeded to read over, and I assure you, Sir, I
     did it with great care, the three Services in our great Prayer
     Book---namely, for Consecration of Bishops, Ordaining of Priests,
     and Making of Deacons. And I must confess to you that I could not
     but greatly admire them; and at the same time feel much astonishment
     at two considerations which they brought to my mind."

     "What were they, Richard?" I enquired.

     "The one was," he said, "to think that after such a solemn
     dedication to the ministry, there should be such a thing as a care
     less or a wicked Clergyman. And yet, Sir, is it not also
     astonishing, that after such a solemn dedication of ourselves as we
     all make to GOD in Baptism, there should be such a thing as a
     careless or a wicked Christian?"

     "So it is," I said, "when we judge others we condemn ourselves. But
     what was the other ground of your surprise?"

     "Why it was this; that there should be any doubt what the opinion of
     the Church is respecting the Christian Ministry. Comparing the
     Ordination Service with the liturgy and Articles, it seems to me
     quite clear, that in the judgment of the Church, none can show
     themselves duly authorized Ministers of CHRIST, who do not belong to
     one or other of the three orders, of Bishops, Priests, or Deacons.

     "But, said I to myself, other Churches have erred, why may not this
     then be the misfortune of the Church of England also? and this very
     opinion may be one of her errors. You see then, Sir, the next thing
     I had to do was to consult the Scriptures on the subject, and (if it
     be not too bold in such a one as I to say so) to try the Prayer Book
     by the Bible."

     "Your method was the best possible," I said. "But, if you please do
     not use the expression, the Church of England, but the Church in
     England."

     "Why indeed, Sir," said he, "in the present state of things perhaps
     it would be more proper. But to proceed with my enquiry. I first
     observed that in the history of the Jews, as contained in the Old
     Testament, as well as in that of Christians in the New, the ALMIGHTY
     seems almost or, quite always to have communicated His will to
     mankind through some chosen Minister; some one, whether it were
     angel or man, who could give suitable evidence of the authority by
     which he spoke or acted. But there seemed to me to be this great
     difference between Jews and Christians, in this as in other eases;
     that in the Jews' religion, all the rules and regulations were
     set down so plainly and distinctly, that no one could mistake their
     meaning; for instance, in the Levitical laws concerning the
     priesthood; of what family and tribe the Priest and High Priest
     should be, what their respective duties, and what their dress, &c.
     Whereas in the Christian religion, the rules and regulations,
     however important, and even necessary, are yet not so exactly set
     down. And I remember hearing a very good and wise clergyman say in a
     sermon at ------ Church, that this is probably what St. James
     means, when he calls the Gospel ;a Law of Liberty;'
     namely, that its rules and directions are not so plainly set
     down,---on purpose that Christians might have freer space, (I
     remember that was his expression,) and opportunity to exercise their
     faith and love for their Redeemer. And I have sometimes thought
     myself, that what St. Paul says about the difference between walking
     by faith and by sight, seems to suit the different cases of Jews and
     Christians. They walked by sight, we must walk by faith; and faith
     in this world we are told, can see but as through a glass darkly."

     "It seems so," I said.

     He proceeded.

     "With this view I went on to examine the New Testament, expecting to
     find therein some general instruction respecting the institution and
     authority of Ministers in the Christian Church. But I did not expect
     that these rules should be as particular and distinct as those on
     the same subject in the Old Testament, any more than I should expect
     to find a command to Christians to observe the LORD'S Day set
     down as distinctly as the command to observe the; Sabbath was set
     down for the Jews. And yet, Sir, I suppose all will agree, that no
     one who wilfully neglects the LORD'S Day can be a true
     Christian."

     "There are strange opinions now afloat," said I: "and if many
     despise the LORD'S Ministers, it is no wonder if many also
     despise the LORD'S Day?

     "Indeed, Sir," said he, "it is not to be wondered at. But to go on
     with my statement. On carefully perusing the New Testament history,
     I remarked that our LORD did not grant ministerial authority to His
     disciples in general, but first to twelve, and then to seventy; that
     of those twelve, one was among the wickedest of mankind, and that
     our LORD knew (St. John vi. 64. xiii. 18.) his character when he
     appointed him; and possibly some of those seventy also might be
     unworthy persons; that our LORD, just before His departure, gave
     what may be called a fresh commission to His apostles, which they
     should act upon after His ascension; that after that event the
     twelve Apostles were the leading persons in the Christian Church,
     having under them two orders or degrees, viz. Bishops (sometimes
     called Elders) and Deacons; that this threefold division of
     Ministers in the Church lasted as far as the New Testament history
     reaches, the Apostles having set men over different Churches with
     Apostolical authority, to preside during their absence, and co
     succeed them after their decease. This sufficiently appears from
     places in St. Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus."

     "Do you remember any of the passages?" I asked him.

     "I cannot," he said, "call to mind chapter and verse. But I have
     with me a little paper of memorandums which I use at the school, and
     which, if it be not too much trouble, I will thank you to look at."

     The paper was as follows:---for I thought it well to copy what he
     had written into my pocket memorandum-book.

     It appears that Timothy had authority at Ephesus to check false or
     unedifying Teachers. l Tim. i. 3, 4;---to select persons proper
     to be ordained Bishops, iii. 1---7;---and also Deacons, iii.
     8---13.

     That he should have particular regard to the Elders who rule well,
     v. l7.

     That he should be cautious of receiving accusations against Elders.
     v. 19.

     That if any [Elders] were convicted, it was his duty to reprimand
     them publicly. . v. 20.

     That in his decisions he should be strictly impartial. v. 21.

     That he should be very cautious on whom he laid his hands. v. 22.

     That Timothy was in a station which even the rich and great might
     respect, vi. 17.

     That Timothy had been ordained by St. Paul himself, once, if not
     twice, 2 Tim. i. 6.

     That at his ordination or consecration there was something
     remarkable in the Sermon. 1 Tim. iv. 14; i. 18.

     That he was to commit what he had heard from St. Paul to faithful
     men, who should be able to pass it on to others. 2 Tim. ii. 2.

     That Titus had authority to set in order what was wanting in the
     Cretan Church; Tit. i. 5; and to ordain Bishops in every city; i. 5.
     7.

     That he was to be cautious whom he selected for this office. i.
     6---9.

     That he should rebuke false teachers sharply. i. 13.

     That if Titus himself was a pattern of good works and a teacher of
     truth, the whole Church would gain Credit. ii. 7, 8.

     That he should rebuke with all authority. ii. 15.

     That he should suffer no man to despise him. ii. 15.

     That after one or two admonitions he should reject heretical
     persons. iii. 10.

     "Now, Sir, it seems to me evident, from these and other similar
     passages, that there were certainly in the Church, as far as the
     Testament History reaches, three different ranks or orders Ministers
     one above the other."

     "It is plainly so," I said.

     "But," said he, "there was one point which rather perplexed me, and
     I was some time before I could make out such an explanation of it as
     was satisfactory to myself."

     "What was that," I asked.

     "Why," said he, "it was this. I considered that any person to whom
     the Apostles granted Apostolical authority, (Timothy, for instance,)
     was from that time higher than a Presbyter or Bishop, and yet could
     not properly be called an Apostle. What then could he be called? I
     at last remembered a place in Bishop Wilson's little book,
     which led me to reflect, that surely as there were Angels, (whether
     it might mean guardians, or heavenly messengers, or missionary
     bishops, as we might say,) of the seven Churches in Asia, so Timothy
     might have been called the Angel of the Ephesian Church; and Titus,
     of the Church of Crete; and the same in other cases. And it came
     into my thoughts, that, perhaps, after St. John's decease,
     whether out of humility, or because (the Churches being settled,)
     the Ministers need no longer be missionaries, the title of Apostles
     or Angels was laid aside, and that of Bishops limited to the highest
     of the three orders.

     "Thus I seemed to myself every where to have traced the threefold
     order, down from the beginning of the Gospel; the authority and
     distinction peculiar to each being preserved, a difference in name
     only taking place.

     "Thus at first they were . . . . . . Apostles, Elders, Deacons.
     [sic]

     "After the decease of some of the Apostles, or at least, while St
     John was yet living .........Angels, Bishops, Deacons, [sic]

     "At some period after St. John's decease
     ........................Bishops, Priests, Deacons." [sic]

     " I do not see how what you have said can be contradicted," I
     replied.

     "But," he proceeded, "there is one thing I must, Sir, confess to
     you, and it is this;---that I have often said to myself, what a
     comfort it would be, if it had pleased GOD to preserve to us some
     few writings of the good men who lived close after the Apostles,
     that so we might have known their opinion on matters of this kind
     and we might have known, too, by what names they distinguished the
     different orders of Ministers, one from another. For, surely, what
     they would think most proper in such cases must be safest of all
     rules for us to follow; unless, (which is a thing not to be
     supposed,) their rules should be contrary to those of the Apostles,
     as set down in Scripture. So, Sir, I have often thought, if any such
     writings could be found, what a precious treasure they would be."

     "What!" said I, "Richard, did you never hear of those who are called
     the Apostolic Fathers: Clement, Polycarp, Ignatius?"

     "I believe I have heard of them," he answered; "but I observed that
     you, Sir, and other Clergymen, scarcely ever notice them in your
     sermons: and the man I mentioned just now told me that Mr.
     Cartwright, who is the minister of the Independent chapel at the
     town, and who is reckoned to be a very learned man and an admired
     preacher, that he should say in a sermon, that the works of the
     Fathers were very imperfect, and their opinion not much to be
     trusted to."

     "But," said I, "Richard, if a person, whose word you could take,
     were to show you an old book written by persons who had seen our
     SAVIOUR; who had heard St. John and St. Paul preach, and had been
     well acquainted with them; should you not value such a book, and
     wish to know whether there was any thing in it which could throw
     light on the history of those early times of the Church, and
     especially with reference to the subjects you and I have been now
     conversing on?"

     "Indeed, Sir, I should," he said.

     "But if what Mr. Cartwright said is true, it is too much to expect
     that any such treasure should be found by us."

     "No, Richard," I said, "it is not too much. The kind Providence of
     GOD has permitted some of the writings of those good men to be
     preserved to this day. And there is no more doubt that they are
     their genuine writings, than that Bishop Ken wrote the Evening Hymn,
     or Bishop Wilson that little book you like so much."

     "If this is indeed as you say," he replied, "we have great reason to
     be thankful for such a proof of GOD'S care for His Church. But
     I beg you, Sir, to tell me, whether there is any thing in these
     writings you speak of, which confirms what I have been venturing to
     state to you as my opinion gathered from Scripture, concerning the
     threefold distinction of Christian ministers."

     "Next Sunday," said I, "you shall see and judge for yourself."


     As we came home from church in the afternoon of the following
     Sunday, he reminded me of my promise, and I gave him a written
     paper, containing a few extracts, which I had translated from the
     works of the Apostolical Fathers, telling him that I might possibly
     have made a mistake here and there in the rendering, but that he
     might depend on such being the general force and meaning of the
     passages.

     The extracts I gave him were the following:

     "Clement, with other my fellow labourers."---Phil . iv. 3.

     "Ignatius and the holy Polycarp, the Bishop of the Smyrnaeans, had
     formerly been disciples of the holy apostle John."---Martyrdom of
     St. Ignatius.
       _______________________________________________________________

     "The Apostles, preaching throughout countries and cities, used to
     appoint their first fruits, after they had proved them by the
     Spirit, to be Bishops and Deacons of those who should hereafter
     believe."---St. Clement to the Cor.

     "The Apostles knew that there will be dispute about the name of
     Bishoprick or Episcopacy, wherefore they appointed the
     aforementioned, and gave them authority beforehand, in order that if
     themselves should fall asleep, other approved men might succeed to
     their ministerial office."---The same.

     "All of you follow the Bishop as JESUS CHRIST followed the FATHER;
     and the Presbytery as the Apostles; and reverence the Deacons as
     GOD'S ordinance. Let no man do any of those things which
     pertain to the Church without the Bishop. He that honoureth the
     Bishop, is honoured of GOD; he that doeth any thing without the
     privity of the Bishop, doeth service to the Devil."--- S. Ignat.
     to the Smyrn.

     "Have regard to the Bishop, that GOD also may regard you. My soul
     for theirs who are subject to the Bishops, Elders, and Deacons: and
     may it be my lot to have a portion with them in GOD."---S. Ignat
     to Polycarp.

     "The Bishops who were appointed in the farthest regions are
     according to the will of JESUS CHRIST; whence it becometh you to go
     along with the will of the Bishop."---S. Ignat to the Ephes.

     That ye may obey the Bishop and the Presbytery, having your mind
     without distraction, breaking one bread."---The same.

     "Some indeed talk of the Bishop, yet do every thing without him: but
     such persons do not appear to me conscientious; on account of their
     congregations not being assembled strictly according to the
     commandment."---S. Ignat. to the Magnes.

     "I exhort you to be zealous to do all things in divine concord: the
     Bishop presiding in the place of GOD, and the Presbyters in the
     place of the council of Apostles, and the Deacons, (in whom I most
     delight,) intrusted with the service of JESUS CHRIST."---The
     same.

     " For as many as are GOD'S and JESUS CHRIST'S, these are
     with the Bishop." ---S. Ignat. to the Philadelph.

     "Be ye earnest to keep one Eucharist, for the flesh of our LORD
     JESUS CHRIST is one, and there is one cup in the unity of His blood,
     one altar, as one Bishop, together with the Presbytery, and Deacons,
     my fellow-servants."---The same.

     "Hold to the Bishops and to the Presbytery, and Deacons. Without the
     Bishop do nothing."---The same.

     "When you are subject to the Bishop as to JESUS CHRIST, ye appear to
     me as living not according to man's rule, but according to
     JESUS CHRIST."---S. Ignat. to the Trall.

     "He that without the Bishop, and Presbytery, and Deacon, doeth
     ought, that person is not pure in his conscience."---The same.

     "Polycarp, and the Presbyters who are with him, to the Church of
     GOD, sojourning at Philippi."---S. Polyc. to the Philipp.

     "Being subject to the Presbyters. Deacons, as to GOD and
     CHRIST."---The same.

     Two or three weeks afterwards, as we were walking homewards after
     Evening Service, he gave me back the paper, with expressions of
     great satisfaction and thankfulness; and added, that he blessed GOD
     for having led him to make the inquiry, and that he was sure, if
     many religiously-disposed persons, who now think little of such
     matters, would turn their minds to them without partiality, they
     would fear to separate from a Church like ours, which, whatever may
     be its imperfections, is substantially pure in its doctrine, and in
     the apostolical succession of its ministry.

     "Sir," said he, "I am a poor, hard-working man, as you know; but the
     interests of my soul, and of those dear to me, are of as great
     importance in the sight of Almighty GOD, and ought to be to me also,
     as if my lot had been cast in a higher station. It is to me,
     therefore, no matter of indifference, (as many have told me it
     should be,) what is the truth on these great subjects; but I am more
     and more sure that it is a Christian duty first to enquire into
     them, and, when we have found the truth, to act up to it humbly but
     resolutely.

     "The times are bad, I confess: but yet, young though I am, I do not
     expect, as the world now goes, to see them much better.

     "What our LORD said about iniquity abounding, and love growing cold,
     seems to be but too suitable to our present state. I have often
     thought it and said it, though I have seldom met with anyone who
     would agree with me in the opinion. The Church of England, I can
     plainly see, more plainly perhaps than a person in a higher station,
     is in a manner gone. The Church in England? GOD be thanked, however
     afflicted, remains, and ever will, I trust, whether the world smiles
     or frowns upon her.

     "I have therefore determined, Sir, by GOD'S grace, to look to
     myself, my wife, and children, and not to trust the world to do us
     any good, either in time, or in eternity.

     "And if by following THE TRUTH now, we shall all be together
     hereafter in the society of Prophets, Apostles, Saints, and Martyrs,
     you know then, Sir, we shall have nothing more to wish for, nothing
     more to fear; every doubt will be satisfied, every difficulty
     removed. And I assure you, Sir, it is the very comfort of my life to
     spend a portion of every Sunday in looking forward to that happy
     time."

     "God bless you, Richard," said I, as we parted at his garden gate;
     and, when I came home, I could not but fall on my knees and thank
     GOD for having given me such a parishioner.
