                            Tracts for the Times

          Remarks on Certain Passages in the Thirty-Nine Articles.

                                 [Number 90]

                            By John Henry Newman
       _______________________________________________________________

                                INTRODUCTION.

     IT is often urged, and sometimes felt and granted, that there are in
     the Articles propositions or terms inconsistent with the Catholic
     faith; or, at least, when persons do not go so far as to feel the
     objection as of force, they are perplexed how best to reply to it,
     or how most simply to explain the passages on which it is made to
     rest. The following Tract is drawn up with the view of showing how
     groundless the objection is, and further of approximating towards
     the argumentative answer to it, of which most men have an implicit
     apprehension, though they may have nothing more. That there are real
     difficulties to a Catholic Christian in the Ecclesiastical position
     of our Church at this day, no one can deny; but the statements of
     the Articles are not in the number; and it may be right at the
     present moment to insist upon this. If in any quarter it is supposed
     that persons who profess to be disciples of the early Church will
     silently concur with those of very opposite sentiments in furthering
     a relaxation of subscriptions, which, it is imagined, are galling to
     both parties, though for different reasons, and that they will do
     this against the wish of the great body of the Church, the writer of
     the following pages would raise one voice, at least, in protest
     against any such anticipation. Even in such points as he may think
     the English Church deficient, never can he, without a great
     alteration of sentiment, be party to forcing the opinion or project
     of one school upon another. Religious changes, to be beneficial,
     should be the act of the whole body; they are worth little if they
     are the mere act of a majority. No good can come of any change which
     is not heartfelt, a development of feelings springing up freely and
     calmly within the bosom of the whole body itself. Moreover, a change
     in theological teaching involves either the profession or
     renunciation of erroneous doctrine, and if it does not succeed in
     proving the fact of past guilt, it, ipso facto, implies present. In
     other words, every change in religion carried with it its own
     condemnation, which is not attended by deep repentance. Even
     supposing then that any changes in contemplation, whatever they
     were, were good in themselves, they would cease to be good to a
     Church, in which they were the fruits not of the quiet conviction of
     all, but of the agitation, or tyranny, or intrigue of a few;
     nurtured not in mutual love, but in strife and envying; perfected
     not in humiliation and grief, but in pride, elation and triumph.
     Moreover, it is a very serious truth, that persons and bodies who
     put themselves into a disadvantageous state, cannot at their
     pleasure extricate themselves from it. They are unworthy of it; they
     are in prison, and CHRIST is the keeper. There is but one way
     towards a real reformation,---a return to Him in heart and
     spirit, whose sacred truth they have betrayed; all other methods,
     however fair they may promise, will prove to be but shadows and
     failure.

     On these grounds, were there no others, the present writer, for one,
     will be no party to the ordinary political methods by which
     professed reforms are carried or compassed in this day. We can do
     nothing well till we act "with one accord;" we can have no accord in
     action till we agree together in heart; we cannot agree without a
     supernatural influence; we cannot have a supernatural presence
     unless we pray for it; we cannot pray acceptably without repentance
     and confession. Our Church's strength would be irresistible,
     humanly speaking, were it but at unity with itself: if it remains
     divided, part against part, we shall see the energy which was meant
     to subdue the world preying upon itself, according to our
     SAVIOUR'S express assurance, that such a house "cannot stand."
     Till we feel this, till we seek one another as brethren, not lightly
     throwing aside our private opinions, which we seem to feel we have
     received from above, from an ill-regulated, untrue desire of unity,
     but returning to each other in heart, and coming together to GOD to
     do for us what we cannot do for ourselves, no change can be for the
     better. Till [we] [her children] are stirred up to this religious
     course, let the Church, [our Mother,] sit still; let [us] be content
     to live in bondage; let [us] work in chains; let [us] submit to our
     imperfections as a punishment; let [us] go on teaching [through the
     medium of indeterminate statements] and inconsistent precedents, and
     principles but partially developed. We are not better than our
     fathers; let us bear to be what Hammond was, or Andrews, or Hooker;
     let us not faint under that body of death, which they bore about in
     patience; nor shrink from the penalty of sins, which they inherited
     from the age before them.

     But these remarks are beyond our present scope, which is merely to
     show that, while our Prayer Book is acknowledged on all hands to be
     of Catholic origin, our articles also, the offspring of an
     uncatholic age, are, through GOD'S good providence, to say the
     least, not uncatholic, and may be subscribed by those who aim at
     being catholic in heart and doctrine. In entering upon the proposed
     examination, it is only necessary to add, that in several places the
     writer has found it convenient to express himself in language
     recently used, which he is willing altogether to make his own. He
     has distinguished the passages introduced by quotation marks.

     ÃY 1.---Holy Scripture and the Authority of the Church.

     Articles vi. & xx.---"Holy Scripture containeth all things
     necessary to salvation; so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor
     may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it
     should be believed as an article of the Faith, or be thought
     requisite or necessary to salvation. . . . . . . The Church hath
     [power to decree (statuendi) rites and ceremonies, and] authority in
     controversies of faith; and yet it is not lawful for the Church to
     [ordain (instituere) any thing that is contrary to God's word
     written, neither may it] so expound one place of Scripture, that it
     be repugnant to another. Wherefore, although the Church be a witness
     and a keeper of Holy Writ, yet [as it ought not to decree (decerne)
     anything against the same, so] besides the same, ought it not to
     enforce (obtrudere) anything to be believed for necessary of
     salvation."

     Two instruments of Christian teaching are spoken of in these
     Articles, Holy Scripture and the Church.

     Here then we have to inquire, first, what is meant by Holy
     Scripture; next, what is meant by the Church; and then, what their
     respective offices are in teaching revealed truth, and how these are
     adjusted with one another in their actual exercise.
    1. Now what the Church is, will be considered below in section 4.
    2. And the Books of Holy Scripture are enumerated in the latter part
       of the Article, so as to preclude question. Still two points
       deserve notice here.
       First, the Scripture or Canonical books are said to be those "of
       whose authority was never any doubt in the Church." Here it is not
       meant that there never was any doubt in portions of the Church or
       particular Churches concerning certain books, which the Article
       includes in its Canon; for some of them,---as, for instance, the
       Epistle to the Hebrews and the Apocalypse---have been the
       subject of much doubt in the West or East, as the case may be. But
       the Article asserts that there has been no doubt about them in the
       Church Catholic; that is, at the very first time that the Catholic
       or whole Church had the opportunity of forming a judgment on the
       subject, it pronounced in favour of the Canonical Books. The
       Epistle to the Hebrews was doubted by the West, and the Apocalypse
       by the East, only while those portions of the Church investigated
       separately from each other, only till they compared notes,
       interchanged sentiments, and formed a united judgment. The phrase
       must mean this, because, from the nature of the case, it can mean
       nothing else.
       And next, be it observed, that the books which are commonly called
       Apocrypha, are not asserted in the Article to be destitute of
       inspiration or to be simply human, but to be not Canonical; in
       other words, to differ from Canonical Scripture, specially in this
       respect, viz. that they are not adducible in proof of doctrine.
       "The other books (as Hierome saith) the Church doth read for
       example of life and instruction of manners, but yet doth not apply
       them to establish any doctrine." That this is the limit to which
       our disparagement of them extends, is plain, not only because the
       Article mentions nothing beyond it, but also from the reverential
       manner in which the Homilies speak of them, as shall be
       incidentally shown in Section 11. [The compatibility of such
       reverence with such disparagement is also shown from the feeling
       towards them of St. Jerome, who is quoted in the Article, who
       implies more or less their inferiority to Canonical Scripture, yet
       uses them freely and continually, as if Scripture. He distinctly
       names many of the books which he considers not canonical, and
       virtually names them all by naming what are canonical. For
       instance, he says, speaking of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, "As the
       Church reads Judith, Tobit, and the Maccabees, without receiving
       them among the Canonical Scriptures, so she reads these two books
       for the edification of the people, not for the confirmation of the
       authority of ecclesiastical doctrines." (PrÃSf in Libr. Salom.)
       Again, The Wisdom, as it is commonly styled, of Solomon, and the
       book of Jesus son of Sirach, and Judith, and Tobias, and the
       Shepherd, are not in the Canon." (PrÃSf ad Reges.) Such is the
       language of a writer who nevertheless is, to say the least, not
       wanting in reverence towards the books he thus disparages.]
       A further question may be asked, concerning our received version of
       the Scriptures, whether it is in any sense imposed on us as a true
       comment on the original text; as the Vulgate is upon the Roman
       Catholics. It would appear not. It was made and authorized by royal
       command, which cannot be supposed to have any claim upon our
       interior consent. At the same time every one who reads it in the
       Services of the Church, does, of course, thereby imply that he
       considers that it contains no deadly heresy or dangerous mistake.
       And about its simplicity, majesty, gravity, harmony, and
       venerableness, there can be but one opinion.
    3. Next we come to the main point, the adjustment which this Article
       effects between the respective offices of the Scripture and the
       Church; which seems to be as follows.

     It is laid down that, 1. Scripture contains all necessary articles
     of faith; 2. either in its text, or by inference 3. The Church is
     the keeper of Scripture; 4. and a witness of it; 5. and has
     authority in controversies of faith; 6. but may not expound one
     passage of Scripture to contradict another; 7. nor enforce as an
     article of faith any point not contained in Scripture.

     From this it appears, first, that the Church expounds and enforces
     the faith; for it is forbidden to expound in a particular way, or so
     to enforce as to obtrude; next, that it derives the faith wholly
     from Scripture; thirdly, that its office is to educe an harmonious
     interpretation of Scripture. Thus much the Article settles.

     Two important questions, however, it does not settle, viz. whether
     the Church judges, first, at her sole discretion; next, on her sole
     responsibility, i. e. first, what the media are by which the Church
     interprets Scripture, whether by a direct divine gift, or catholic
     tradition, or critical exegesis of the text, or in any other way;
     and next, who is to decide whether it interprets Scripture rightly
     or not;--what is her method, if any; and who is her judge, if any.
     In other words, not a word is said, on the one hand, in favour of
     Scripture having no rule or method to fix interpretation by, or, as
     it is commonly expressed, being the sole rule of faith; nor on the
     other, of the private judgment of the individual being the ultimate
     standard of interpretation. So much has been said lately on both
     these points, and indeed on the whole subject of these two Articles,
     that it is unnecessary to enlarge upon them; but since it is often
     supposed to be almost a first principle of our Church, that
     Scripture is "the rule of faith," it may be well, before passing on,
     to make an extract from a paper, published some years since, which
     shows, by instances from our divines, that the application of the
     phrase to Scripture is but of recent adoption. The other question,
     about the ultimate judge of the interpretation of Scripture, shall
     not be entered upon.

     "We may dispense with the phrase ;Rule of Faith,' as
     applied to Scripture, on the ground of its being ambiguous; and
     again, because it is then used in a novel sense; for the ancient
     Church made the Apostolic Tradition, as summed up in the Creed, and
     not the Bible, the Regula Fidei, or Rule. Moreover, its use as a
     technical phrase, seems to be of late introduction in the Church,
     that is, since the days of King William the Third. Our great divines
     use it without any fixed sense, sometimes for Scripture, sometimes
     for the whole and perfectly adjusted Christian doctrine, sometimes
     for the Creed; and at the risk of being tedious, we will prove this,
     by quotations, that the point may be put beyond dispute.

     "Ussher, after St. Austin, identifies it with the
     Creed'---when speaking of the Article of our LORD'S
     Descent to hell, he says,--

     "It having here likewise been further manifested, what
     different opinions have been entertained by the ancient Doctors of
     the Church, concerning the determinate place wherein our
     Saviour's soul did remain during the time of the separation of
     it from the body, I leave it to be considered by the learned,
     whether any such controverted matter may fitly be brought in to
     expound the Rule of Faith, which, being common both to the great and
     small ones of the Church, must contain such varieties only as are
     generally agreed upon by the common consent of all true
     Christians.'---Answer to a Jesuit, p. 362.

     "Taylor speaks to the same purpose: ;Let us see with what
     constancy that and the following ages of the Church did adhere to
     the Apostles' Creed, as the sufficient and perfect Rule of
     Faith.'---Dissuasive, part 2, i. 4, p. 470. Elsewhere he
     calls Scripture the Rule: ;That the Scripture is a full and
     sufficient Rule to Christians in faith and manners, a full and
     perfect declaration of the Will of GOD, is therefore certain,
     because we have no other.' Ibid. part 2, i. 2, p. 384.
     Elsewhere, Scriptures and the Creed: ;He hath, by His wise
     Providence, preserved the plain places of Scripture and the
     Apostles' Creed, in all Churches, to be the Rule and Measure of
     Faith, by which all Churches are saved.'---Ibid. part 2, i.
     1, p. 346. Elsewhere he identifies it with Scripture, the Creeds,
     and the first four Councils: ;We also [after Scripture] do
     believe the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene, with the additions of
     Constantinople, and that which is commonly called the symbol of St.
     Athanasius; and the four first General Councils are so entirely
     admitted by us, that they, together with the plain words of
     Scripture, are made the Rule and Measure of judging heresies among
     us.'---Ibid. part 1, i. p 131.

     "Laud calls the Creed, or rather the Creed with Scripture, the Rule.
     ;Since the Fathers make the Creed the Rule of Faith; since the
     agreeing sense of Scripture with those Articles are the Two Regular
     Precepts, by which a divine is governed about his faith,'
     &c.--Conference with Fisher, p. 42.

     Bramhall also: ;The Scripture and the Creed are not two
     different Rules of Faith, but one and the same Rule, dilated in
     Scripture, contracted in the Creed.'---Works, p. 402.
     Stillingfleet says the same (Grounds, i, 4. 3.);l as does Thorndike
     (De Rat. fin. Controv. p. 144 &c.). Elsewhere, Stillingfleet calls
     Scripture the Rule (Ibid. i. 6. 2.); as does Jackson (vol. i. p.
     226). But the most complete and decisive statement on the subject is
     contained in Field's work on the Church, from which shall
     follow a long extract.

     "It remained to show,' he says, ;what is he Rule of
     that judgment whereby the Church discerneth between truth and
     falsehood, the faith and heresy, and to whom it properly pertaineth
     to interpret those things which, touching this Rule, are doubtful.
     The Rule of our Faith in general, whereby we know it to be true, is
     the infinite excellency of G
     OD..... It being pre-supposed in he generality that the doctrine of
     the Christian faith is of GOD, and containeth nothing but heavenly
     truth, in the next place, we are to inquire by what Rule we are to
     judge of particular things contained within the compass of it

     " This Rule is, 1. The summary comprehension of such principal
     articles of this divine knowledge, as are the principles whence all
     other things are concluded and inferred. These are contained in the
     Creed of the Apostles.

     "All such things as every Christian is bound expressly to
     believe, by the light and direction whereof he judgeth of other
     things, which are not absolutely necessary so particularly to be
     known. These are rightly said to be the Rule of our Faith, because
     the principles of every science are the Rule whereby we judge of the
     truth of all things, as being better and more generally known than
     any other thing, and the cause of knowing them.

     "3. The analogy, due proportion, and correspondence, that one
     thing in this divine knowledge hath with another, so that men cannot
     err in one of them without erring in another; nor rightly understand
     one, but they must likewise rightly conceive the rest.

     "4. Whatsoever Books were delivered unto us, as written by
     them, to whom the first and immediate revelation of the divine truth
     was made.

     "5. Whatsoever hath been delivered by all the saints with one
     consent, which have left their judgment and opinion in writing.

     "6. Whatsoever the most famous have constantly and uniformly
     delivered, as a matter of faith, no one contradicting, though many
     other ecclesiastical writers be silent, and say nothing of it.

     "7. That which the most, and most famous in every age,
     constantly delivered as a mater of faith, and as received of them
     that went before them, in such sort that the contradictory and
     gainsayers were in their beginnings noted for singularity, novelty,
     and division, and afterwards, in process of time, if they persisted
     in such contradiction, charged with heresy.

     "These three latter Rules of our Faith we admit, not because
     they are equal with the former, and originally in themselves contain
     the direction of our Faith, but because nothing can be delivered,
     with such and so full consent of the people of G
     OD, as in them is expressed, but it must need be from those first
     authors and founders of our Christian profession. The Romanists add
     unto these the decrees of Councils and determination of Popes,
     making these also to be the Rules of Faith; but because we have no
     proof of their infallibility, we number them not with the rest.

     "Thus we see how many things, in several degrees and sorts,
     are said to be Rules of our Faith. The infinite excellency of G
     OD, as that whereby the truth of heavenly doctrine is proved. The
     Articles of Faith, and other verities ever expressly known in the
     Church as the first principles, are the Canon by which we judge of
     conclusions from thence inferred. The Scripture, as containing in it
     all that doctrine of Faith which CHRIST the SON of GOD delivered.
     The uniform practice and consenting judgment of tem that went before
     us, as a certain and undoubted explication of the things contained
     in the Scripture. .... So then, we do not make Scripture the Rule of
     our Father, but that other things in their are Rules likewise; in
     such sort that it is not safe, without respect had unto them, to
     judge things by the Scripture alone,' &c.---iv. 14. pp. 364,
     365.

     "These extracts show not only what the Anglican doctrine is, but, in
     particular, that the phrase ;Rule of Faith' is no
     symbolical expression with us, appropriated to some one sense;
     certainly not as a definition or attribute of Holy Scripture. And it
     is important to insist upon this, from the very great misconception
     to which the phrase gives rise. Perhaps its use had better to be
     avoided altogether. In the sense in which it is commonly understood
     at this day, Scripture, it is plain, is not, on Anglican principles,
     the Rule of Faith."
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 2.---Justification by Faith only.

     Article xi.---"That we are justified by Faith only, is a most
     wholesome doctrine."

     The Homilies add that Faith is the sole means, he sole instrument of
     justification. Now, to show briefly what such statements imply, and
     what they do not.
    1. They do not imply a denial of Baptism as a means an instrument of
       justification; which the Homilies elsewhere affirm, as will be
       shown incidentally in a later section.
       "The instrumental power of Faith cannot interfere with the
       instrumental power of Baptism; because Faith is the sole justifier,
       not in contrast to all means and agencies whatever, (for, it is not
       surely in contrast to our LORD'S merits, or GOD'S mercy,)
       but to all other graces. When, then, Faith is called the sole
       instrument, this means the sole internal instrument, not to sole
       instrument of any kind.
       "There is nothing inconsistent, then, in Faith being the sole
       instrument of justification, and yet Baptism also the sole
       instrument, and that at the same time, because in distinct senses;
       an inward instrument in no way interfering with an outward
       instrument, Baptism may be the hand of the giver, and Faith the
       hand of the receiver."
       Nor does the sole instrumentality of Faith interfere with the
       doctrine of Works as a mean also. And that it is a mean, the Homily
       of Alms-deeds declares in the strongest language, as will also be
       quoted in Section 11.
       "An assent to the doctrine that Faith alone justifies, does not at
       all preclude the doctrine of Works justifying also. If, indeed, it
       were said that Words justify in the same sense as Faith only
       justifies, this would be a contradiction in terms; but Faith only
       may justify in one sense---Good Works in another:--and this is
       all that is here maintained. After all does not CHRIST only
       justify? How is it that the doctrine of Faith justifying does not
       interfere with our LORD'S being the sole Justifier? It will,
       of course, be replied, that our LORD is the meritorious cause, and
       the Faith the means; that Faith justifies in a different and
       subordinate sense. As, then, CHRIST justifies in the sense in which
       He justifies alone, yet Faith also justifies in its own sense; so
       Works, whether moral or ritual, may justify us in their own
       respective senses, though in the sense in which Faith justifies, it
       only justifies. The only question is, What is that sense in which
       Works justify, so as not to interfere with Faith only justifying?
       It may, indeed, turn out on inquiry, that the sense alleged will
       not hold, either as being unscriptural, or for any other reason;
       but, whether so or not, at any rate the apparent inconsistency of
       language should not startle persons; nor should they so promptly
       condemn those who, though they do not use their language, use St.
       James's. Indeed, is not this argument the very weapon of the
       Arians, in their warfare against the Son of GOD? They said, CHRIST
       is not GOD, because the FATHER is called the ;Only God.'"
    2. Next we have to inquire in what sense Faith only does justify. In a
       number of ways, of which here two only shall be mentioned.

     First, it is the pleading or impetrating principle, or constitutes
     our title to justification; being analogous among the graces to
     Moses' lifting up his hands on the Mount, or the Israelites
     eyeing the Brazen Serpent,--actions which did not merit GOD'S
     mercy, but asked for it. A number of means go to effect our
     justification. We are justified by CHRIST alone, in that He has
     purchased the gift; by Faith alone, in that Faith asks for it; by
     Baptism alone, for Baptism conveys it; and by newness of heart
     alone, for newness of heart is the life of it.

     And, secondly, Faith, as being the beginning or perfect or
     justifying righteousness, is taken for what it tends towards, or
     ultimately will be. It is said by anticipation to be that which it
     promises; just as one might pay a labourer his hire before he began
     his work. Faith working by love is the seed of divine graces, which
     in due time will be brought forth and flourish---partly in this
     world, fully in the next.
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 3.---Works before and after Justification.

     Articles xii. & xiii.---"Works done before the grace of CHRIST,
     and the inspiration of HIS SPIRIT, [;before
     justification,' title of the Article,] are not pleasant to God
     (minimÃ< Deo grata sunt); forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in
     JESUS CHRIST, neither do they make man meet to receive grace, or (as
     the school authors say) deserve grace of congruity (merentur gratiam
     de congruo); yea, rather for that they are not done as GOD hath
     willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the
     nature of sin. Albeit good works, which are the fruits of faith, and
     follow after justification (justificatos sequuntur), cannot put away
     (expiare) our sins, and endure the severity of GOD'S judgment,
     yet are they pleasing and acceptable (grata et accepta) to GOD in
     CHRIST, and do spring out necessarily of a true and lively Faith."

     Two sorts of works are here mentioned---works before
     justification, and works after; and they are most strongly
     contrasted with each other.
    1. Works before justification, are done "before the grace of CHRIST,
       and the inspiration of His SPIRIT."
    2. Works before "do not spring of Faith in JESUS CHRIST;" works after
       are "the fruits of Faith."

     3. Works before "have the nature of sin;" works after are "good
     works."

     4. Works before "are not pleasant to GOD;" works after "are pleasing
     and acceptable (grata et accepta) to GOD."

     Two propositions, mentioned in these Articles, remain, and deserve
     consideration; First, that works before justification do not make or
     dispose men to receive grace, or as the school writers say, deserve
     grace of congruity; secondly, that works after "cannot put away our
     sins, and endure the severity of GOD'S judgment.
    1. As to the former statement,--to deserve de congruo, or of
       congruity, is to move the Divine regard, not from any claim upon
       it, but from a certain fitness or suitableness; as, for instance,
       it might be said that dry wood had a certain disposition or fitness
       towards heat which green wood had not. Now, the Article denies that
       works done before the grace of CHRIST, or in a mere state of
       nature, in this way dispose towards grace, or move GOD to grant
       grace. And it asserts, with or without reason, (for it is a
       question of historical fact, which need not specially concern us,)
       that certain schoolmen maintained the affirmative.

     Now, that this is what it means, is plain from the following
     passages of the Homilies, which in no respect have greater claims
     upon us than as comments upon the Articles:--

     "Therefore they that teach repentance without a lively faith in our
     S
     AVIOUR JESUS CHRIST, do teach none other but Judas's
     repentance, as all the schoolmen do, which do only allow these three
     parts of repentance,--the contrition of the heart, the confession of
     the mouth, and the satisfaction of the work. But all these things we
     find in Judas's repentance, which, in outward appearance, did
     far exceed and pass the repentance of Peter. . . . This was commonly
     the penance which CHRIST enjoined sinners, ;Go thy way, and sin
     no more;' which penance we shall never be able to fulfil,
     without the special grace of Him that doth say, ;Without Me, ye
     can do nothing.'"---On Repentance, p. 460.

     To take a passage which is still more clear:

     "As these examples are not brought in to the end that we should
     thereby take a boldness to sin, presuming on the mercy and goodness
     of G
     OD, but to the end that, if, through the frailness of our own flesh,
     and the temptation of the devil, we fall into the like sins, we
     should in no wise despair of the mercy and goodness of GOD: even so
     must we beware and take heed, that we do in no wise think in our
     hearts, imagine, or believe, that we are able to repent aright, or
     to turn effectively unto the LORD by our own might and strength."
     Ibid. part i. fin.

     The Article contemplates these two states,--one of justifying grace,
     and one of the utter destitution of grace; and it says, that those
     who are in utter destitution cannot do anything to gain
     justification; and indeed, to assert the contrary would be
     Pelagianism. However, there is an intermediate state, of which the
     Article says nothing, but which must not be forgotten, as being an
     actually existing one. Men are not always either in light or in
     darkness, but are sometimes between the two; they are sometimes not
     in a state of Christian justification, yet not utterly deserted by
     GOD, but in a state of something like that of Jews or of Heathen,
     turning to the thought of religion. They are not gifted with
     habitual grace, but they still are visited by Divine influences, or
     by actual grace, or rather aid; and these influences are the
     first-fruits of the grace of justification going before it, and are
     intended to lead on to it, and to be perfected in it, as twilight
     leads to day. And since it is a Scripture maxim, that "he that is
     faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much;" and "to
     whosoever hath, to him shall be given;" therefore, it is quite true
     that works done with divine aid, and in faith, before justification,
     do dispose men to receive the grace of justification;--such were
     Cornelius's alms, fastings, and prayers, which led to his
     baptism. At the same time it must be borne in mind that, even in
     such cases, it is not the works themselves which make them meet, as
     some schoolmen seem to have said, but the secret aid of GOD,
     vouchsafe, equally with the "grace and Spirit," which is the portion
     of the baptized, for the merits of CHRIST'S sacrifice.

     [But it may be objected, that the silence observed in the Article
     about a state between that of justification and grace, and that of
     neither, is a proof that there is none such. This argument, however,
     would prove too much; for in like manner there is a silence in the
     Sixth Article about a judge of the scripturalness of doctrine, yet a
     judge there must be. And again, few, it is supposed, would deny that
     Cornelius, before the angel came to him, was in a more hopeful
     state, that Simon Magus or Felix. The difficult then, if there be
     one, is common to persons of whatever school of opinion.]

     2. If works before justification, when done by the influence of
     divine aid, gain grace, much more do works after justification. They
     are, according to the Article, "grata," pleasing to GOD;" and they
     are accepted, "accepta" which means that GOD rewards them, and that
     of course according to their degree of excellence. At the same time,
     as works before justification may nevertheless be done under a
     divine influence, so works after justification are still liable to
     the infection of original sin; and, as not being perfect, "cannot
     expiate our sins," or "endure the severity of GOD'S judgment."
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 4.---The Visible Church.

     Art. xix.---"The visible Church of CHRIST is a congregation of
     faithful men (coe;tus fidelium), in the which the pure Word of
     GOD is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to
     CHRIST'S ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
     requisite to the same."

     This is not an abstract definition of a Church, but a description of
     the actually existing One Holy Catholic Church diffused throughout
     the world; as if it were read, "The Church is a certain society of
     the faithful," &c. This is evident from the mode of describing the
     Catholic Church familiar to all writers from the first stages down
     to the age of this Article. For instance, St. Clement of Alexandria
     says, "I mean by the Church, not a place, but the congregation of
     the elect." Origen: "The Church, the assembly of all the faithful."
     St. Ambrose: "One congregation, one Church." St. Isidore: "The
     Church is a congregation of saints, collected on a certain faith,
     and the best conduct of life." St. Augustin: "The Church is the
     people of God through all ages." Again: "The Church is the multitude
     which is spread over the whole earth." St. Cyril: "When we speak of
     the Church, we denote the most holy multitude of the pious."
     Theodoret: "The Apostle calls the Church the assembly of the
     faithful." Pope Gregory: The Church, a multitude of the faithful
     collected of both sexes." Bede: "The Church is the congregation of
     all saints." Alcuin: "The Holy Catholic Church,--in Latin, the
     congregation of the faithful." Amalarius: "The Church is the people
     called together by the Church's ministers." Pope Nicolas I.:
     "The Church, that is, the congregation of Catholics." St. Bernard:
     "What is the Spouse, but the congregation of the just?" Peter the
     Venerable: "The Church is called a congregation, but not of all
     things, not of cattle, but of men, faithful, good, just. Though bad
     among these good, and just among the unjust, are revealed or
     concealed, yet it is called a Church." Hugo Victorinus: "The Holy
     Church, that is, the university of the faithful." Arnulphus: "The
     Church is called the congregation of the faithful." Albertus Magnus:
     "The Greek word Church means in Latin convocation; and whereas works
     and callings belongs to rational animals, and reason in man is
     inward faith, therefore it is called the congregation of the
     faithful." Durandus: "The Church is in one sense material, in which
     divers offices are celebrated; in another spiritual, which is the
     collection of the faithful." Alvarus: "The Church is the multitude
     of the faithful, or the university of Christians." Pope Pius II.:
     "The Church is the multitude of the faithful dispersed through all
     nations." [And so the Reformers, in their own way, for instance, the
     Confession of Augsburgh. "The one Holy Church will remain for ever.
     Now the Church of Christ properly is the congregation of the members
     of Christ, that is, of saints who truly believe and obey Christ;
     though with this congregation many bad and hypocrites are mixed in
     this life, till the last judgment." vii.---And the Saxon: "We say
     then that the visible Church in this life is an assembly of those
     who embrace the Gospel of Christ and rightly use the Sacraments,"
     &c. xii.]

     These illustrations of the phraseology of the Article may be
     multiplied in any number. And they plainly show that it is not
     laying down any logical definition what a Church is, but is
     describing, and, as it were, pointing to the Catholic Church
     diffused throughout the world; which, being but one, cannot possibly
     be mistaken, and requires no other account of it beyond this single
     and majestic one. The ministration of the Word and Sacraments is
     mentioned as a further note of it. As to the question of its limits,
     whether Episcopal Succession or whether intercommunion with the
     whole be necessary to each part of it,--these are questions, most
     important indeed, but of detail, and are not expressly treated of in
     the Articles.

     This view is further illustrated by the following passage from the
     Homily for Whitsunday:--

     "Our Saviour C
     HRIST departing out of the world unto His FATHER, promised His
     Disciples to send down another COMFORTER, that should continue with
     them for ever, and direct them into all truth. Which thing, to be
     faithfully and truly performed, the Scriptures do sufficiently bear
     witness. Neither must we think that this COMFORTER was either
     promised, or else given, only to the Apostles, but also to the
     universal Church of CHRIST, dispersed through the whole world. For,
     unless the HOLY GHOST has been always present, governing and
     preserving the Church from the beginning, it could never have
     suffered so many and great brunts of affliction and persecution,
     with so little damage and harm as it hath. And the words of CHRIST
     are most plain in this behalf, saying, that ;the SPIRIT of
     Truth should abide with them for ever;' that ;He would be
     with them always (He meaneth by grace, virtue, and power) even to
     the world's end.'

     "Also in the prayer that He made to His F
     ATHER a little before His death, He maketh intercession, not only
     for Himself and His Apostles, but indifferently for all them that
     should believe in Him through their words, that is, to wit, for His
     whole Church. Again, St. Paul saith, ;If any man have not the
     SPIRIT of CHRIST, the same is not His.' Also, in the words
     following: ;We have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we
     cry, Abba, Father.' Hereby, then it is evident and plain to all
     men, that the HOLY GHOST was given, not only to the Apostles, but
     also to the whole body of CHRIST'S congregation, although not
     in like form and majesty as He came down at the feast of Pentecost.
     But now herein standeth the controversy,--whether all men do justly
     arrogate to themselves the HOLY GHOST, or no. The Bishops of Rome
     have for along time made a sore challenge thereto, reasoning with
     themselves after this sort: ;The HOLY GHOST,' say they,
     ;was promised to the Church, and never forsaketh the Church.
     But we are the chief heads and the principal part of the Church,
     therefore we have the HOLY GHOST for ever: and whatsoever things we
     decree are undoubted verities and oracles of the HOLY GHOST.'
     That ye may perceive the weakness of this argument, it is needful to
     teach you, first, what the true Church of CHRIST is, and then to
     confer the Church of Rome therewith, to discern how well they agree
     together. The true Church is an universal congregation or fellowship
     of GOD'S faithful and elect people, built upon the foundation
     of the Apostles and Prophets, JESUS CHRIST Himself being the head
     cornerstone. And it hath always three notes or marks, whereby it is
     known: pure and sound doctrine, the Sacraments ministered according
     to CHRIST'S holy institution, and the right use of
     ecclesiastical discipline. This description of the Church is
     agreeable both to the Scriptures of GOD, and also to the doctrine of
     the ancient Fathers, so that none may justly find fault therewith.
     Now, if you will compare this with the Church of Rome, not as it was
     in the beginning, but as it is at present, and hath been for the
     space of nine hundred years and odd; you shall well perceive the
     state thereof to be so gar wide from the nature of the Church, that
     nothing can be more."

     This passage is quotes, not for all it contains, but in that respect
     in which it claims attention, viz. as far as it is an illustration
     of the Article. It is speaking of the one Catholic Church, not of an
     abstract idea of a Church which may be multiplied indefinitely in
     fact; and it uses the same terms of it which the Articles does of
     "the visible Church." It says that "the true Church is an universal
     congregation or fellowship of GOD'S faithful and elect people."
     &c., which as closely corresponds to the coe;tus fidelium, or
     "congregation of faithful men" of the Article, as the above
     descriptions from Fathers or Divines do. Therefore, the coe;tus
     fidelium spoken of in the article is not a definition, which kirk,
     or connexion, or other communion maybe made to fall under, but the
     enunciation of a fact.
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 5.---General Councils.

     Article xxi.---"General Councils may not be gathered together
     without the commandment and will of princes. And when they be
     gathered together, forasmuch as they be an assembly of men, whereof
     all be not governed with the SPIRIT and Word of GOD, they may err,
     and sometimes have erred, in things pertaining to GOD."

     That great bodies of men, of different countries, may not meet
     together without the sanction of their rulers, is plain from the
     principles of civil obedience and from primitive practice. That,
     when met together, though Christians, they will not be all ruled by
     the SPIRIT or Word of GOD, is plain from our LORD'S parable of
     the net, and from melancholy experience. That bodies of men,
     deficient in this respect, may err, is a self-evident
     truth,--unless, indeed, they be favoured with some divine
     superintendence, which has to be proved, before it can be admitted.

     General councils then may err, [as such;--may err,] unless in any
     case it is promised, as a matter of express supernatural privilege,
     that they shall not err; a case which [as consisting in the
     fulfilment of additional or subsequent conditions,] lies beyond the
     scope of this Article, or at any rate beside its determination.

     Such a promise, however, does exist, in cases when general councils
     are not only gathered together according to "the commandment and
     will of princes," but in the Name of CHRIST, according to our
     LORD'S promised. The article merely contemplates the human
     prince, not the King of Saints. While councils are a thing of earth,
     their infallibility of course is not guaranteed; when they are thing
     of heaven, their deliberations are overruled, and their decrees
     authoritative. In such cases they are Catholic councils; and it
     would seem, from passages which will be quotes in Section 11, that
     the Homilies recognize four, or even six, as bearing this character.
     Thus Catholic or E;cumenical Councils are general councils, and
     something more. Some general councils are Catholic, and others are
     not. Nay, as even Romanists grant, the same councils may be partly
     Catholic, partly not.

     If Catholicity be thus a quality, found at times in general
     councils, rather than the differentia belonging to a certain class
     of them, it is still less surprising that the Article should be
     silent about it.

     What those conditions are, which fulfil the notion of a gather "in
     the Name of CHRIST," in the case of a particular council, it is not
     necessary here to determine. Some have included among these
     conditions, the subsequent reception of its decrees by the universal
     Church; others a ratification by the pope.

     Another of these conditions, however, the Article goes on to
     mention, viz. that in points necessary to salvation, a council
     should prove its decrees by Scripture.

     St. Gregory Nazianzen well illustrates the consistency of this
     Article with a belief in the infallibility of E;cumenical
     Councils, by his own language on the subject on different occasions.

     In the following passage he anticipates the Article:--

     "My mind is, if I must write the truth, to keep clear of every
     conference of bishops, for of conference never saw I good come, or a
     remedy so much as an increase of evils. For there is strife and
     ambition, and these have the upper hand of reason."---Ep. 55.

     Yet, on the other hand, he speaks elsewhere of "the Holy Council in
     NicÃSa, and that band of chosen men whom he HOLY GHOST brought
     together."---Orat. 21.
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 6.---Purgatory, Pardons, Images, Relics, Invocation of Saints.

     Article xxii.---"The Romish doctrine concerning purgatory,
     pardons (de indulgentiis), worshipping (de veneratione) and
     adoration, as well of images as of relics, and also invocation of
     saints, is a fond thing (res est futilis) vainly (inaniter)
     invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather
     repugnant (contradicit) to the Word of GOD."

     Now the first remark that occurs on perusing this Article is, that
     the doctrine objected to is "the Romish doctrine." For instance, no
     one would suppose that the Calvinistic doctrine containing
     purgatory, pardons, and image-worship, is spoken against. Not every
     doctrine on these matters is a fond thing, but the Romish doctrine.
     Accordingly, the Primitive doctrine is not condemned in it, unless,
     indeed, the Primitive Doctrine be the Romish, which must not be
     supposed. Now there was a primitive doctrine on all these
     points,--how far Catholic or universal, is a further
     question---but still so widely received and so respectably
     supported, that it may well be entertained as a matter of opinion by
     a theologian now; this, then, whatever be its merits, is not
     condemned by this Article.

     This is clear without proof on the face of the matter, at least as
     regards pardons. Of course, the article never meant to make light of
     every doctrine about pardons, but a certain doctrine, the Romish
     doctrine, [as indeed the plural form itself shows.]

     And [such an understanding of the Article is supported by] some
     sentences in the Homily on the Peril of Idolatry, in which, as far
     as regards relics, a certain veneration is sanctioned by its tone in
     speaking of them, thought not of course the Romish veneration.

     The sentences referred to run as follow:--

     "In the Tripartite Ecclesiastical History, the Ninth Book, and
     Forty-eighth Chapter, is testified, that ;Epiphanius, being yet
     alive, did work miracles: and after his death, devils, being
     expelled at his grave or tomb, did roar.' Thus you see what
     authority St. Jerome (who has just been mentioned) and that most
     ancient history give unto the holy and learned Bishop Epiphanius."

     Again:

     "St. Ambrose, in his Treatise of the Death of Theodosius the
     Emperor, saith, ;Helena found the Cross, and the title on it.
     She worshipped the King, and not the wood, surely (for that is an
     heathenish error and the vanity of the wicked), but she worshipped
     Him that hanged on the Cross, and whose Name was written on the
     title,' and so forth. See both the godly empress's fact,
     and St. Ambrose's judgment at once; they thought it had been an
     heathenish error, and vanity of the wicked, to have worshipped the
     Cross itself which was imbrued with our SAVIOUR CHRIST'S own
     precious blood."---Peril of Idolatry, part 2, circ. init.

     In these passages the writer does not positively commit himself to
     the miracles at Epiphanius's tomb, or the discovery of the true
     Cross, but he evidently wishes the hearer to think he believes in
     both. This he would not do, if he thought all honour paid to relics
     wrong.

     If, then, in the judgment of the Homilies, not all doctrine
     concerning veneration of relics is condemned in the Article before
     us, but a certain toleration of them is compatible with its wording;
     neither is all doctrine concerning purgatory, pardons, images, and
     saints, condemned by the Article, but only "the Romish."

     And further by "the Romish doctrine," is not meant the Tridentine
     [statement], because this Article was drawn up before the decree of
     the Council of Trent. What is opposed is the received doctrine of
     the day, and unhappily of this day too, or the doctrine of the Roman
     schools; a conclusion which is still more clear, by considering that
     there are portions in the Tridentine [statements] on these subjects,
     which the Article, far from condemning, by anticipation approves, as
     far as they go. For instance, the Decree of Trent enjoins concerning
     purgatory thus:--"Among the uneducated and vulgar let difficult and
     subtle questions, which make not for edification, and seldom
     contribute aught towards piety, be kept back from popular
     discourses. Neither let them suffer the public mention and treatment
     of uncertain points, or such as look like falsehood." Session 25.
     Again, about images: "Due honour and veneration is to be paid unto
     them, not that we believe that any divinity or virtue is in them,
     for which they should be worshipped (colendÃS) or that we should ask
     any thing of them, or that trust should be reposed in images, as
     formerly was done by the Gentiles, which used to place their hope on
     idols."---Ibid.

     If, then the doctrine condemned in this Article concerning
     purgatory, pardons, images, relics, and saints, be not the Primitive
     doctrine, nor the Catholic doctrine, nor the Tridentine [statement]
     but the Romish, doctrina Romanensium, let us next consider what in
     matter of fact it is. And
    1. As to the doctrine of the Romanists concerning Purgatory.
       Now here there was a primitive doctrine, whatever its merits,
       concerning the fire of judgment, which is a possible or a probable
       opinion, and is not condemned. That doctrine is this: that the
       conflagration of the world, or the flames which attend the Judge,
       will be an ordeal through which all men will pass; that great
       saints, such as St. Mary, will pass it unharmed; that others will
       suffer loss; but none will fail under it who are built upon the
       right foundation. Here is one [purgatorian doctrine] not "Romish."
       Another doctrine, purgatorian, but not Romish, is that said to be
       maintained by the Greeks at Florence, in which the cleansing,
       though a punishment, was but a poe;na damni, not a poe;na
       sensÃ¶s; not a positive sensible infliction, much less the torment
       of fire, but the absence of GOD'S presence. And another
       purgatory is that in which the cleansing is but a progressive
       sanctification, and has no pain at all.
       None of these doctrines does the Article condemn; any of them may
       be held by the Anglo-Catholic as a matter of private belief; not
       hat they are here advocated, one or other, but they are adduced as
       an illustration of what the Article does not mean, and to vindicate
       our Christian liberty in a matter where the Church has not confined
       it.
       [For what the doctrine which is reprobated is, we might refer, in
       the first place, to the Council of Florence, where a decree was
       passed on the subject, were not that decree almost as vague as the
       Tridentine; viz. that deficiency of penance is made up by
       poe;nÃS purgatoriÃS.]
       "Now doth St. Augustine say, that those men which are cast into
       prison after this life, on that condition, may in no wise be
       holpen, though we would help them never so much. And shy? Because
       the sentence of GOD is unchangeable, and cannot be revoked again.
       Therefore let us not deceive ourselves, thinking that either we may
       help others, or others may help us, by their good and charitable
       prayers in time to come. For, as the preacher saith, ;Where
       the tree falleth, whether it be toward the south, or toward the
       north, in what place soever the tree falleth, there it lieth:'
       meaning thereby, that every mortal man dieth either in the state of
       salvation or damnation, according as the words of the Evangelist
       John do plainly import, saying, ;He that believeth the S
       ON of GOD hath eternal life; but he that believeth not on the SON,
       shall never seen life, but the wrath of GOD abideth upon
       him.'---where is then the third place, which they call
       purgatory? Or where shall our prayers help and profit the dead? St.
       Augustine doth only acknowledge two places after this life, heaven
       and hell. As for the third place, he doth plainly deny that there
       is any such to be found in all Scripture. Chrysostom likewise is of
       this mind, that, unless we wash away our sins in this present
       world, we shall find no comfort afterward. And St. Cyprian saith,
       that, after death, repentance and sorrow of pain shall be without
       fruit, weeping also shall be in vain, and prayer shall be to no
       purpose. Therefore he counselleth all men to make provision for
       themselves while they may, because, when they are once departed out
       of this life, there is no place for repentance, nor yet for
       satisfaction."---Homily concerning Prayer, pp. 282, 283.
       Now it would seem], from this passage, that the Purgatory
       contemplated by the Homily, was one for which no one will for an
       instance pretend to adduce even those Fathers who most favour Rome,
       viz. one in which our state would be changed, in which GOD'S
       sentence would be reversed. "The sentence of GOD," says the writer,
       "is unchangeable, and cannot be revoked again; there is no place
       for repentance." On the other hand, the Council of Trent, and
       Augustin and Cyprian, so far as they express or imply an opinion
       approximating to that of the Council, held Purgatory to be a place
       for believers, not unbelievers, not where men who have lived and
       died in GOD'S wrath, may gain pardon, but where those who have
       already been pardoned in this life, may be cleansed and purified
       for beholding the face of GOD. The Homily, then, and therefore the
       Article [as far as the Homily may be taken to explain it], does not
       speak of the Tridentine purgatory. The mention of Prayers for the
       dead in the above passage, affords an additional illustration of
       the limited and [relative] sense of the terms of the article now
       under consideration. For such prayers are obviously not condemned
       in it in the abstract, or in every shape, but as offered to rescue
       the lost from eternal fire.
       [Hooker, in his Sermon on Pride, gives us a second view of the
       "Romish doctrine of Purgatory," from the schoolmen. After speaking
       of the poe;na damni, he says---
       "The other punishment, which hath in it not only loss of joy, but
       also sense of grief, vexation, and woe, is that whereunto they give
       the name of purgatory pains, in nothing different from those very
       infernal torments which the souls of castaways, together with
       damned spirits, do endure, save only in this, there is an appointed
       term to the one, to the other none; but for the time they last they
       are equal."---Vol. iii. p. 798.]
       Such doctrine, too, as the following may well be included in that
       which the Article condemns under the name of "Romish." The passage
       to be quoted has already appeared in these Tracts.
       "In the ;Speculum Exemplorum' it is said, that a certain
       priest, in an ecstasy, saw the soul of Constantius Turritanus in
       the eaves of his house, tormented with frosts and cold rains, and
       afterwards climbing up to heaven upon a shining pillar. and a
       certain monk saw some souls roasted upon spits like pigs, and some
       devils basting them with scalding lard; but a while after, they
       were carried to a cool place, and so proved purgatory. But Bishop
       Theobald, standing upon a piece of ice to cool his feet, was nearer
       purgatory than he was aware, and was convinced of it, when he heard
       a poor soul telling him, that under that ice he was tormented; and
       that he should be delivered, if for thirty days continual, he would
       say for him thirty masses. And some such thing was seen by Conrade
       and Udalric in a pool of water; for the place of purgatory was not
       yet resolved on, till St. Patrick had the key of it delivered to
       him, which when one Nicholas borrowed of him, he saw as strange and
       true things there, as ever Virgil dreamed of in his purgatory, or
       Cicero in his dream of Scipio, or Plato in his Gorgias, or PhÃSdo,
       who indeed are the surest authors to prove purgatory. But because
       to preach false stories was forbidden by the Council of Trent,
       there are yet remaining more certain arguments, even relations made
       by angels, and the testimony of St. Odilio himself, who heard the
       devil complain (and he had great reason surely), that the souls of
       dead men were daily snatched out of his hands, by the alms and
       prayers of the living; and the sister of St. Damianus, being too
       much pleased with hearing of a piper, told her brother, that she
       was to be tormented for fifteen days in a purgatory.
       "We do not think that the wise men in the Church of Rome believe
       these narratives; for if they did, they were not wise; but this we
       know, that by such stories the people were brought into a belief of
       it, and having served their turn of them, the master builders used
       them as false arches and centries, taking them away when the parts
       of the building were made firm and stable by authority."---Jer.
       Taylor, Works, vol. x. pp. 151, 152.
       Another specimen of doctrine, which no one will attempt to prove
       from Scripture, is the following:--
       "Eastwardly, between two walls, was a vast place of purgatory
       fixed, and beyond it a pond to rinse souls in, that had waded
       through purgatory, the water being salt and colt beyond comparison.
       Over this purgatory St. Nicholas was the owner.
       "There was a mighty bridge, all beset with nails and spikes, and
       leading to the mount of joy; on which mount was a stately church,
       seemingly capable to contain all the inhabitants of the world, and
       into which the souls were no sooner entered, but that they forgot
       all their former torments.
       "Returning to the first Church, there they found St. Michael the
       Archangel and the Apostles Peter and Paul. St. Michael caused all
       the white souls to pass through the flames, unharmed, to the mount
       of joy; and those that had black and white spots, St. Peter led
       into purgatory to be purified.
       "In one part sate St. Paul, and the devil opposite to him with his
       guards, with a pair of scales between them, weighing all such souls
       as were all over black; when upon turning a soul, the scale turned
       towards St. Paul, he sent it to purgatory, there to expiate its
       sins; when towards the devil, his crew, with great triumph, plunged
       it into the flaming pit. . . . .
       "The rustic likewise saw near the entrance of the town-hall, as it
       were, four streets; the first was full of innumerable furnaces and
       cauldrons willed with flaming pitch and other liquids, and boiling
       of souls, whose heads were like those of black fishes in seething
       liquor. The second had its cauldrons stored with snow and ice, to
       torment souls with horrid cold. The third had thereof boiling
       sulphur and other materials, affording the worst of stinks, for the
       vexing of souls that had wallowed in the filth of lust. The fourth
       had cauldrons of a most horrid salt and black water. Now sinners of
       all sorts were alternately tormented in these
       cauldrons."---Purgatory proved by Miracle, by S. Johnson, pp.
       8---10.
       [Let it be considered, then, whether on the whole the "Romish
       doctrine of Purgatory," which the Article condemns, and which was
       generally believed in the Roman Church three centuries since, as
       well as now, viewed in its essence, be not the doctrine, that the
       punishment of unrighteous Christians is temporary, not eternal, and
       that the purification of the righteous is a portion of the same
       punishment, together with the superstitions, and impostures for the
       sake of gain, consequent thereupon.]
    2. Pardons, or Indulgences.
       The history of the rise of the Reformation will interpret "the
       Romish doctrine concerning pardons," without going further. Burnet
       thus speaks on the subject:--
       "In the primitive church there were very severe rules made,
       obliging all that had sinned publicly (and they were afterwards
       applied to such as had sinned secretly) to continue for many years
       in a state of separation from the Sacrament, and of penance and
       discipline. But because all such general rules admit of a great
       variety of circumstances, taken from men's sins, their
       persons, and their repentance, there was a power given to all
       Bishops, by the Council of Nice, to shorten the time, and to relax
       the severity of those Canons, and such favour as they saw cause to
       grant, was called indulgence. This was just and necessary, and was
       a provision without which no constitution or society can be well
       governed. But after the tenth century, as the Popes came to take
       this power in the whole extent of it into their own hands, so they
       found it too feeble to carry on the great designs that they grafted
       upon it.
       "They gave it high names, and called it a plenary remission, and
       the pardon of all sins: which the world was taught to look on as a
       thing of a much higher nature, than the bare excusing of men from
       discipline and penance. Purgatory was then got to be firmly
       believed, and all men were strangely possessed with the terror of
       it: so a deliverance from purgatory, and by consequence an
       immediate admission into heaven, was believed to be the certain
       effect of it. Multitudes were, by these means, engaged to go to the
       Holy Land, to recover it out of the hands of the Saracens:
       afterwards they armed vast numbers against the heretics, to
       extirpate them: they fought also all those quarrels, which their
       ambitious pretensions engaged them in, with emperors and other
       princes, by the same pay; and at least they set it to sale with the
       same impudence, and almost with the same methods, that mountebanks
       use in venting of their secrets.
       "This was so gross, even in an ignorant age, and among the ruder
       sort, that it gave the first rise to the Reformation: and as the
       progress of it was a very signal work of G
       OD, so it was in a great measure owing to the scandals that this
       shameless practice had given the world."---Burnet on Article
       XIV. p. 190.
       Again:---
       "The virtue of indulgences is the applying the treasure of the
       Church upon such terms as Popes shall think fit to prescribe, in
       order to the redeeming souls from purgatory, and from all other
       temporal punishments, and that for such a number of years as shall
       be specified in the bulls; some of which have gone to thousands of
       years; one I have seen to ten hundred thousand: and as these
       indulgences are sometimes granted by special tickets, like tallies
       struck on that treasure; so sometimes they are affixed to
       particular churches and altars, to particular times, or days,
       chiefly to the year of jubilee; they are also affixed to such
       things as may be carried about, to Agnus Dei's, to medals, to
       rosaries, and scapularies; they are also affixed to some prayers,
       the devout saying of them being a mean to procure great
       indulgences. The granting these is left to the Pope's
       discretion, who ought to distribute them as he thinks may tend most
       to the honour of G
       OD and the good of the Church; and he ought not to be too profuse,
       much less to be too scanty in dispensing them.
       "This has been the received doctrine and practice of the Church of
       Rome since the twelfth century: and the Council of Trent, in a
       hurry, in its last session, did, in very general words, approve of
       the practice of the Church in this matter, and decreed that
       indulgences should be continued; only they restrained some abuses,
       in particular that of selling them."---Burnet on Article XXII.
       p. 305.
       Burnet goes on to maintain that the act of the Council was
       incomplete and evaded. If it be necessary to say more on the
       subject, let us attend to the following passage from Jeremy
       Taylor:---
       "I might have instanced in worse matters, made by the Popes of Rome
       to be pious works, the condition of obtaining indulgences. Such was
       the bull of Pope Julius the Second, giving indulgence to him that
       meeting a Frenchman should kill him, and another for the killing of
       a Venetian. . . . . I desire this only instance may be added to it,
       that Pope Paul the Third, he that convened the Council of Trent,
       and Julius the Third, for fear, as I may suppose, the Council
       should forbid any more such follies, for a farewell to this game,
       gave an indulgence to the fraternity of the Sacrament of the Altar,
       or of the Blessed Body of O
       UR LORD JESUS CHRIST, of such a vastness and unreasonable folly,
       that it puts us beyond the question of religion, to an inquiry,
       whether it were not done either in perfect distraction, or, with
       worse design, to make religion to be ridiculous, and to expose it
       to a contempt and scorn. The conditions of the indulgence are,
       either to visit the Church of St. Hilary of Chartres, to say a
       ;Pater Noster' and an ;Ave Mary' every Friday,
       or, at most, to be present at processions and other divine service
       upon ;Corpus Christi day.' The gift is---as many
       privileges, indults, exemptions, liberties, immunities, plenary
       pardons of sins, and other spiritual graces, as were given to the
       fraternity of the Image of our SAVIOUR ;ad Sancta
       Sanctorum;' the fraternity of the charity and great hospital
       of St. James in Augusta, of St. John Baptist, of St. Cosmas and
       Damianus; of the Florentine nation; of the hospital of the HOLY
       GHOST in Saxia; of the order of St. Austin and St. Champ; of the
       fraternities of said city; of the church of our Lady ;de
       populo et verbo;' and all those that were ever given to them
       that visited these churches, or those which should ever be given
       hereafter---a pretty large gift! In which there were so many
       pardons, quarter-pardons, half-pardons, true pardons, plenary
       pardons, quarantines, and years of quarantines; that is a harder
       thing to number them, than to purchase them. I shall remark in
       these some particulars to be considered.
       "1. That a most scandalous and unchristian dissolution and death of
       all ecclesiastical discipline, is consequent to the making all sin
       so cheap and trivial a thing; that the horrible demerits and
       exemplary punishment and remotion of scandal and satisfaction to
       the Church, are indeed reduced to trifling and mock penances. He
       that shall send a servant with a candle to attend the holy
       Sacrament, when it shall be carried to sick people, or shall go
       himself; or if he can neither go nor send, if he say a ;Pater
       Noster' and an ;Ave,' he shall have a hundred years
       of true pardon. This is fair and easy. But then,
       "2. It would be considered what is meant by so many years of
       pardon, and so many years of true pardon. I know but of one natural
       interpretation of it; and that it can mean nothing, but that some
       of the pardons are but fantastical, and not true; and in this I
       find no fault, save only that it ought to have been said, that all
       of them are fantastical.
       "3. It were fit we learned how to compute four thousand and eight
       hundred years of quarantines, and a remission of a third part of
       all their sins; for so much is given to every brother and sister of
       this fraternity, upon Easter-day, and eight days after. Now if a
       brother needs not thus many, it would be considered whether it did
       not encourage a brother or a frail sister to use all their
       medicine, and sin more freely, let so great a gift become useless.
       "4. And this is so much the more considerable because the gift is
       vast beyond all imagination. The first four days in lent they may
       purchase thirty-three thousand years of pardon, besides a plenary
       remission of all their sins over and above. The first week of Lent
       a hundred and three-and-thirty thousand years of pardon, besides
       five plenary remissions of all their sins, and two third parts
       besides, and the delivery of one soul out of purgatory. The second
       week in Lent a hundred and eight-and-fifty thousand years of
       pardon, besides the remission of all their sins, and a third part
       besides; and the delivery of one soul. The third week in Lent,
       eighty thousand years, besides a plenary remission, and the
       delivery of one soul out of purgatory. The fourth week in Lent,
       threescore thousand years of pardon, besides a remission of
       two-thirds of all their sins, and one plenary remission, and one
       soul delivered. The fifth week, seventy-nine thousand years of
       pardon, and the deliverance of two souls; only the two thousand
       seven hundred years that are given for the Sunday, may be had twice
       that day, if they will visit the altar twice, and as many
       quarantines. The sixth week, two hundred and five thousand years,
       besides quarantines, and four plenary pardons. Only on Palm Sunday,
       whose portion is twenty-five thousand years, it may be had twice
       that day. And all this is the price of him that shall, upon these
       days, visit the altar in the Church of St. Hilary. And this runs on
       to the Fridays, and many festivals and other solemn days in the
       other parts of the year."---Jer. Taylor, vol. xi. pp.
       53---56.
       [The doctrine then of pardons, spoken of in the Article, is the
       doctrine maintained and acted on in the Roman Church, that
       remission of the penalties of sin in the next life may be obtained
       by the power of the Pope, with such abuses as money payments
       consequent thereupon.]
    3. Veneration and worshipping of Images and Relics.
       That the Homilies do not altogether discard reverence towards
       relics, has already been shown. Now let us see what they do
       discard.
       "What meaneth it that Christian men, after the use of the Gentiles
       idolaters, cap and kneel before images? which if they had any sense
       and gratitude, would kneel before men, carpenters, masons,
       plasterers, founders, and goldsmiths, their makers and framers, by
       whose means they have attained this honour, which else would have
       been evil-favoured, and rude lumps of clay or plaster, pieces of
       timber, stone, or metal, without shape or fashion, and so without
       all estimation and honour, as that idol in the Pagan poet
       confesseth, saying, ;I was once a vile block, but now I am
       become a god,' &c. What a fond thing is it for man, who hath
       life and reason, to bow himself, to a dead and insensible image,
       the work of his own hand! Is not this stooping and kneeling before
       them, which is forbidden so earnestly by GOD'S word? Let such
       as so fall down before images of saints, know and confess that they
       exhibit that honour to dead stocks and stones, which the saints
       themselves, Peter, Paul and Barnabas, would not to be given to
       them, being alive; which the angel of G
       OD forbiddeth to be given to him. And if they say they exhibit such
       honour not to the image, but to the saint whom it representeth,
       they are convicted of folly, to believe that they please saints
       with that honour, which they abhor as a spoil of GOD'S
       honour."--Homily on Peril of Idolatry, p. 191.
       Again:
       "Thus far Lactantius, and much more, too long here to write, of
       candle lighting in temples before images and idols for religion;
       whereby appeareth both the foolishness thereof, and also that in
       opinion and act we do agree altogether in our candle-religion with
       the Gentiles idolaters. What meaneth it that they, after the
       example of the Gentiles idolaters, burn incense, offer up gold to
       images, hang up crutches, chains, and ships, legs, arms, and whole
       men and women of wax, before images, as though by them, or saints
       (as they say) they were delivered from lameness, sickness,
       captivity, or shipwreck? Is not this ;colere imagines,'
       to worship images, so earnestly forbidden in GOD'S word? If
       they deny it, let them read the eleventh chapter of Daniel the
       Prophet, who saith of antichrist, ;He shall worship GOD, whom
       his fathers knew not, with gold, silver, and with precious stones,
       and other things of pleasure:' in which place the Latin word
       is colet." ...... "To increase this madness, wicked men, which have
       the keeping of such images, for their great lucre and advantage,
       after the example of the Gentiles idolaters, have reported and
       spread abroad, as well by lying tales as written fables, divers
       miracles of images: as that such an image miraculously was sent
       from heaven, even like the Palladium, or Magna Diana Ephesiorum.
       Such another was as miraculously found in the earth, as the
       man's head was in the Capitol, or the horse's head in
       Capua. Such an image was brought by angels. Such an one came itself
       far from the East to the West, as Dame Fortune fled to Rome. Such
       an image of our Lady was painted by St. Luke, whom of a physician
       they have made a painter for that purpose. Such an one an hundred
       yokes of oxen could not move, like Bona Dea, whom the whip could
       not carry; or Jupiter Olympius, which laughed the artificers to
       scorn, that went about to remove him to Rome. Some images, though
       they were hard and stony, yet, for tender heart and pity, wept.
       Some, like Castor and Pollux, helping their friends in battle,
       sweat, as marble pillars do in dankish weather. Some spake more
       monstrously than ever did Balaam's ass, who had life and
       breath in him. Such a cripple came and saluted this saint of oak,
       and by and by he was made whole; and lo! here hangeth his crutch.
       Such an one in a tempest vowed to St. Christopher, and
       'scaped; and behold, here is a ship of wax. Such an one, by
       St. Leonard's help, brake out of prison, and see here his
       fetters hang." . . . . . . "The Relics we must kiss and offer unto,
       specially on Relic Sunday. And while we offer, (that we should not
       be weary, or repent us of our cost,) the music and minstrelsy goeth
       merrily all the offertory time, with praising and calling upon
       those saints, whose relics be then in presence. Yea, and the water
       also, wherein those relics have been dipped, must with great
       reverence be reserved, as very holy and effectuous." . . . . . .
       "Because Relics were so gainful, few places were there but they had
       relics provided for them. And for more plenty of Relics, some one
       saint had many heads, one in one place, and another in another
       place. Some had six arms, and twenty-six fingers. And where our
       LORD bare His cross alone, if all the pieces of the relics thereof
       were gathered together, the greatest ship in England would scarcely
       bear them; and yet the greatest part of it, they say, doth yet
       remain in the hands of the Infidels; for the which they pray in
       their beads-bidding, that they may get it also in their hands, for
       such godly use and purpose. And not only the bones of the saints,
       but every thing appertaining to them, was a holy relic. In some
       place they offer a sword, in some the scabbard, in some a shoe, in
       some a saddle that had been set upon some holy horse, in some the
       coals wherewith St. Laurence was roasted, in some place the tail of
       the ass which our LORD JESUS CHRIST sat on, to be kissed and
       offered unto for a relic. For rather than they would lack a relic,
       they would offer you a horse bone instead of a virgin's arm,
       or the tail of the ass to be kissed and offered unto for relics. O
       wicked, impudent, and most shameless men, the devisers of these
       things! O silly, foolish, and dastardly daws, and more beastly than
       the ass whose tail they kissed, that believe such things!" . . . .
       . . "Of these things already rehearsed, it is evident that our
       image maintainers have not only made images, and set them up in
       temples, as did the Gentiles their idols; but also that they have
       had the same idolatrous opinions of the saints, to whom they have
       made images, which the Gentiles idolaters had of their false gods;
       and have not only worshipped their images with the same rites,
       ceremonies, superstition, and all circumstances, as did the
       Gentiles idolaters for their idols, but in many points have also
       far exceeded them in all wickedness, foolishness and
       madness."---Homily on Peril of Idolatry, pp. 193---197.
       It will be observed that in this extract, as elsewhere in the
       Homilies, it is implied that the Bishop or the Church of Rome is
       Antichrist; but this is a statement bearing on prophetical
       interpretation, not on doctrine; and one besides which cannot be
       reasonably brought to illustrate or explain any of the positions of
       the Articles: and therefore it may be suitably passed over.
       In another place the Homilies speak as follows:--
       "Our churches stand full of such great puppets, wondrously decked
       and adorned; garlands and coronets be set on their heads, precious
       pearls hanging about their necks; their fingers shine with rings,
       set with precious stones; their dead and stiff bodies are clothed
       with garments stiff with gold. You would believer that the images
       of our men-saints were some princes of Persia land with their prod
       apparel; and the idols of our women-saints were nice and
       well-trimmed harlots, tempting their paramours to wantonness:
       whereby the saints of GOD are not honoured, but most dishonoured,
       and their godliness, soberness, chastity, contempt of riches, and
       of the vanity of the world, defaced and brought in doubt by such
       monstrous decking, most differing from their sober and godly lives.
       And because the whole pageant most thoroughly be played, it is not
       enough thus to deck idols, but at last come in the priests
       themselves, likewise decked with gold and pearl, that they may be
       meet servants for such lords and ladies, and fit worshippers of
       such gods and goddesses. And with a solemn pace they pass forth
       before these golden puppets, and fall down to the ground on their
       marrow-bones before these honourable idols; and then rising up
       again, offer up odours and incense unto them, to give the people an
       example of double idolatry, by worshipping not only the idol, but
       the god also, and riches, wherewith it is garnished. Which thing,
       the most part of our old Martyrs, rather than they would do, or
       once kneel, or offer up one crumb of incense before an image,
       suffered most cruel and terrible deaths, as the histories of them
       at large do declare." . . . . . . "O books and scriptures, in the
       which the devilish schoolmaster, Satan, hath penned the lewd
       lessons of wicked idolatry, for his dastardly disciples and
       scholars to behold, reach, and learn, to GOD'S most high
       dishonour, and their most terrible damnation! Have we not been much
       bound, think you, to those which should have taught us the truth
       out of GOD'S Book and His Holy Scripture, that they have shut
       up that Book and Scripture from us, and none of us so bold as once
       to open it, or read in it?
       Again, with a covert allusion to the abuses of the day, the
       Homilist says elsewhere, of Scripture,
       "There shall you read of Baal, Moloch, Chamos, Melchom, Baalpeor,
       Astaroth, Bel, the Dragon, Priapus, the brazen Serpent, the twelve
       Signs, and many others, unto whose images the people, with great
       devotion, invented pilgrimages, precious decking, and censing them,
       kneeling down, and offering to them, thinking that an high merit
       before GOD, and to be esteemed above the precepts and commandments
       of GOD."---Homily on Good Works, p. 42.
       Again, soon after:
       "What man, having any judgment or learning, joined with a true zeal
       unto GOD, doth not see and lament to have entered into
       CHRIST'S religion, such false doctrine, superstition,
       idolatry, hypocrisy, and other enormities and abuses, so as by
       little and little, through the sour leaven thereof, the sweet bread
       of GOD'S holy word had been much hindered and laid apart?
       Never had the Jews, in their most blindness, so many pilgrimages
       unto images, nor used so much kneeling, kissing, and censing of
       them, as hath been used in our time. Sects and feigned religions
       were neither the fortieth part so many among the Jews, nor more
       superstitiously and ungodly abused, than of late years they have
       been among us: which sects and religions had so many hypocritical
       and feigned works in their state of religion, as they arrogantly
       named it, that their lamps, as they said, ran always over, able to
       satisfy not only for their own sins, but also for all other their
       benefactors, brothers, and sisters of religion, as most ungodly and
       craftily they had persuaded the multitude of ignorant people;
       keeping in divers places, as it were, marts or markets of merits,
       being full of their holy relics, images, shrines, and works of
       overflowing abundance, ready to be sold; and all things which they
       had were called holy---holy cowls, holy girdles, holy pardons,
       holy beads, holy shows, holy rules, and all full of holiness. And
       what thing can be more foolish, more superstitious, or ungodly,
       than that men, women, and children, should wear a friar's coat
       to deliver them from agues or pestilence; or when they die, or when
       their be buried, cause it to be cast upon them, in hope thereby to
       be saved? Which superstition, although ((thanks be to GOD) it hath
       been little used in this realm, yet in divers other realms it hath
       been, and yet it, used among many, both learned and
       unlearned."---Homily on Good Works, pp. 45, 46.
       [Once more:--
       "True religion, then, and pleasing of GOD, standeth not in making,
       setting up, painting, gilding, and decking of dumb and dead images
       (which be but great puppets and babies for old fools in dotage, and
       wicked idolatry, to dally and play with), nor in kissing of them,
       capping, kneeling, offering to them, incensing of them, setting up
       of candles, hanging up of legs, arms, or whole bodies of wax before
       them, or praying or asking of them, or of saints, things belonging
       only to GOD to give. But all these things be vain and abominable,
       and most damnable before GOD."---Homily on Peril of Idolatry, p.
       223.]
       Now the veneration and worship condemned in these and other
       passages are such as these: kneeling before images, lighting
       candles to them, offering them incense, going on pilgrimage to
       them, hanging up crutches, &c. before them, lying tales about them,
       belief in miracles as if wrought by them through illusion of the
       devil, decking them up immodestly, and providing incentives by them
       to bad passions; and, in like manner, merry music and minstrelsy,
       and licentious practices in honour of relics, counterfeit relics,
       multiplication of them, absurd pretences about them. This is what
       the Article means by "the Romish doctrine," which, in agreement to
       one of the above extracts, it calls "a fond thing," res futilis;
       for who can ever hope, except the grossest and most blinded minds,
       to be gaining the favour of the blessed saints, while they come
       with unchaste thoughts and eyes, that cannot cease from sin; and to
       be profited by "pilgrimage-going," in which "Lady Venus and her son
       Cupid were rather worshipped wantonly in the flesh, than GOD the
       FATHER, and our SAVIOUR CHRIST HIS SON, truly worshipped in the
       SPIRIT?"
       Here again it is remarkable that, urged by the truth of the
       allegation, the Council of Trent is obliged, both to confess the
       above-mentioned enormities in the veneration of relics and images,
       and to forbid them.
       "Into these thy holy and salutary observances should any abuses
       creep, of these the Holy Council strongly [vehementer] desires the
       utter extinction; so that no images of a false doctrine, and
       supplying to the uninstructed opportunity of perilous error, should
       be set up. . . . . all superstition also in invocation of saints,
       veneration of relics, and sacred use of images, be put away; all
       filthy lucre be cast out of doors; and all wantonness be avoided;
       so that images be not painted or adorned with an immodest beauty;
       or the celebration of Saints and attendance on Relics be abused to
       revelries and drunkenness; as though festival days were kept in
       honour of saints by luxury and lasciviousness."---Sess . 25.
       [On the whole, then, by the Romish doctrine of the veneration and
       worshipping of images and relics, the Article means all maintenance
       of those idolatrous honours which have been and are paid to them so
       commonly throughout the Church of Rome, with the superstitions,
       profanities, and impurities consequent thereupon.]
    4. Invocation of Saints.

     By "invocation" here is not meant the mere circumstance of
     addressing beings out of sight, because we use the Psalms in our
     daily service, which are frequent invocations of Angels to praise
     and bless GOD. In the Benedicite too we address "the spirits and
     souls of the righteous."

     Nor is it a "fond" invocation to pray that unseen beings may bless
     us; [for this Bishop Ken does in his Evening Hymn:---

     O may my Guardian, while I sleep,

     Close to my bed his vigils keep,

     His love angelical instil,

     Stop all the avenues of ill, &c.]

     On the other hand, judging from the example set us in the Homilies
     themselves, invocations are not censurable, and certainly not
     "fond," if we mean nothing definite by them, addressing them to
     beings which we know cannot hear, and using them as interjections.
     The Homilist seems to avail himself of this proviso in a passage,
     which will serve to begin our extracts in illustration of the
     superstitious use of invocations.

     "We have left Him neither heaven, nor earth, nor water, nor country,
     nor city, peace nor war to rule and govern, neither men, nor beasts,
     nor their diseases to cure; that a godly man might justly, for
     zealous indignation, cry out, O heaven, O earth, and seas, what
     madness and wickedness against GOD are men fallen into! What
     dishonour do the creatures to their CREATOR and MAKER! And if we
     remember GOD sometimes, yet, because we doubt of His ability or will
     to help, we join to Him another helper, as if He were a noun
     adjective, using these sayings: such as learn, GOD and St. Nicholas
     be my speed: such as neese, GOD help and St. John: to the horse, GOD
     and St. Loy save thee. Thus are we become like horses and mules,
     which have no understanding. For is there not one GOD only, who by
     His power and wisdom made all things, and by His providence
     governeth the same, and by His goodness maintaineth and saveth them?
     be not all things of Him, by Him and through Him? Why dost thou turn
     from the CREATOR to the creatures? This is the manner of the
     Gentiles idolaters: but thou art a Christian, and therefore by
     CHRIST alone hast access to GOD the FATHER, and help of Him
     only."---Homily on Peril of Idolatry, p. 189.

     Again, just before:

     Terentius Varro showeth, that there were three hundred Jupiters in
     his time: there were no fewer Veneres and DianÃS: we had no fewer
     Christophers, Ladies and Mary Magdalens, and other saints.
     E;nomaus and Hesodius shew, that in their time there were thirty
     thousand gods. I think we had no fewer saints, to whom we gave the
     honour due to GOD. And they have not only spoiled the true living
     GOD of His due honour in temples, cities, countries and lands, by
     such devices and inventions as the Gentiles idolaters have done
     before them: but the sea and waters have as well special saints with
     them, as they had gods with the Gentiles, Neptune, Triton, Nereus,
     Castor and Pollux, Venus, and such other: in whose places be come
     St. Christopher, St. Clement, and divers other, and specially our
     Lady, to whom shipmen sing, ;Ave, maris stella.' Neither
     hath the fire escaped their idolatrous inventions. For, instead of
     Vulcan and Vesta, the Gentiles' gods of the fire, our men have
     placed St. Agatha, and make litters on her day for to quench fire
     with. Every artificer and profession hath his special saint, as a
     peculiar god. As for example, scholars have St. Nicholas and St.
     Gregory: painters, St. Luke; neither lack soldiers their Mars, nor
     lovers their Venus, amongst Christians. All diseases have their
     special saints, as gods the curers of them; ...... the falling-evil
     St. Cornelio, the tooth-ache St. Apollin, &c. Neither do beats nor
     cattle lack their gods with us; for St. Loy is the horse-leech, and
     St. Anthony the swineherd." --Ibid., p. 188.
     The same subject is introduced in connexion with a lament over the
     falling off of attendance on religious worship consequent upon the
     Reformation:

     "GOD'S vengeance hath been and is daily provoked, because much
     wicked people pass nothing to resort to the Church, either for that
     they are so sore blinded, that they understand nothing of GOD and
     godliness, and care not with devilish example to offend their
     neighbours; or else for that they see the Church altogether scoured
     of such gay gozing sights, as their gross fantasy was greatly
     delighted with, because they see the false religion abandoned, and
     the true restored, which seemeth an unsavoury thing to their
     unsavoury taste; as may appear by this, that a woman said to her
     neighbour, ;Alas, gossip, what shall we now do at church, since
     all the saints are taken away, since all the goodly sights we were
     wont to have are gone, since we cannot hear the like piping,
     singing, chanting, and playing upon the organs, that we could before
     ?' But, dearly beloved, we ought greatly to rejoice, and give
     GOD thanks that our churches are delivered of all those things which
     displeased GOD so sore, and filthily defiled His house and His place
     of prayer, for the which He hath justly destroyed many nations,
     according to the saying of St. Paul: ;If any man defile the
     temple of GOD, GOD will him destroy.' And this ought we greatly
     to praise GOD for, that superstitious and idolatrous manners as were
     utterly naught, and defaced GOD'S glory, are utterly abolished,
     as they most justly deserved: and yet those things that either GOD
     was honoured with, or His people edified, are decently retained, and
     inour churches comely practised."--On the Place and Time of Prayer,
     pp. 203, 294.

     Again:

     "There are certain conditions most requisite to be found in every
     such a one that must be called upon, which if they be not found in
     Him unto whom we pray, then doth our prayer avail us nothing, but is
     altogether in vain.

     "The first is this, that He, to whom we make our prayers, be able to
     help us. The second is, that He will help us, The third is, that He
     be such a one as may hear our prayers. The fourth is, that He
     understand better than ourselves what we lack, and how far we have
     need of help. If these things be to be found in any other, saving
     only GOD, then may we lawfully call upon some other besides GOD. But
     what man is so gross, but he well understandeth that those things
     are only proper to Him, who is omnipotent, and knoweth all things,
     even the very secrets of the heart; that is to say, only and to GOD
     alone? Whereof it followeth that we must call neither upon angel,
     nor yet upon saint, but only and solely upon GOD, as St. Paul doth
     write: ;How shall men call upon Him, in whom they have not
     believed?' So that invocation or prayer may not be made without
     faith in Him on whom they call; but that we must first believe in
     Him before we can make our prayer unto Him, whereupon we must only
     and solely pray unto GOD. For to say that we should believe in
     either angel or saint, or in any other living creature, were most
     horrible blasphemy against GOD and His holy word; neither ought this
     fancy to enter into the heart of any Christian man, because we are
     expressly taught in the word of the LORD only to repose our faith in
     the blessed TRINITY, in whose only name we are also baptized,
     according to the express commandment of our SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST, in
     the last of St. Matthew.

     "But that the truth thereof may better appear, even to them that be
     most simple and unlearned, let us consider what prayer is. St.
     Augustine calleth it a lifting up of the mind to GOD; that is to
     say, an humble and lowly pouring out of the heart to GOD. Isidorus
     saith, that it is an affection of the heart, and not a labour of the
     lips. So that, by these plans, true prayer doth consist not so much
     in the outward sound and voice of words, as in the inward groaning
     and crying of the heart to GOD.

     "Now, then, is there any angel, any virgin, any patriarch, or
     prophet, among the dead, that can understand or know the meaning of
     the hear? The Scripture saith, ;it is GOD that searcheth the
     heart and reins, and that He only knoweth the hearts of the children
     of men.' As for the saints, they have so little knowledge of
     the secrets of the heart, that many of the ancient fathers greatly
     doubt whether they know any thing at all, that is commonly done on
     earth. And albeit some think they do, yet St Augustine, a doctor of
     great authority, and also antiquity, hath this opinion of them; that
     they know no more what we do on earth, than we know what they do in
     heaven. For proof whereof, he allegeth the words of Isaiah the
     prophet, where it is said, ;Abraham is ignorant of us, and
     Israel knoweth us not.' His mind therefore is this, not that we
     should put any religion in worshipping them, or praying unto them;
     but that we should honour them by following their virtuous and godly
     life. For, as he witnesseth in another place, the martyrs, and holy
     men in time past, were wont, after their death, to be remembered and
     named of the priest at divine service; but never to be invocated or
     called upon. And why so? Because the priest, saith he, is GOD'S
     priest, and not theirs: whereby he is bound to call upon GOD, and
     not upon them. ...... O but I dare not (will some man say) trouble
     GOD at all times with my prayers we see that in kings' houses,
     and courts of princes, men cannot be admitted, unless they first use
     the help and means of some special nobleman, to come to the speech
     of the king, and to obtain the thing that they would have.

     "CHRIST, sitting in heaven, hath an everlasting priesthood, and
     always prayeth to His FATHER for them that be penitent, obtaining,
     by virtue of His wounds, which are evermore in the sight of GOD, not
     only perfect remission of our sins, but also all other necessaries
     that we lack in this world; so that this Holy Mediator is sufficient
     in heaven, and needeth no others to help Him.

     "Invocation is a thing proper unto GOD, which if we attribute unto
     the saints, it soundeth unto their reproach, neither can they well
     bear it at our hands. When Paul healed a certain lame man, which was
     impotent in his feet, at Lystra, the people would have done
     sacrifice unto him and Barnabas; who, rending their clothes, refused
     it, and exhorted them to worship the true GOD. Likewise in
     Revelation, when St. John fell before the angel's feet to
     worship him, the angel would not permit him to do it, but commanded
     him that he should worship GOD. Which examples declare unto us, that
     the saints and angels in heaven will not have us to do any honour
     unto them that is due and proper unto GOD."---Homily on Prayer,
     pp. 272---277.

     Whereas, then, it has already been shown that not all invocation is
     wrong, this last passage plainly tells us what kind of invocation is
     not allowable, or what is meant by invocation in its exceptionable
     sense: viz. "a thing proper to GOD," as being part of the "honour
     that is due and proper unto GOD." And two instances are specially
     given of such calling and invocating, viz., sacrificing, and falling
     down in worship. Besides this, the Homilist adds, that it is wrong
     to pray to them for "necessaries in this world," and to accompany
     their services with "piping, singing, chanting, and playing" on the
     organ, and of invoking saints as patrons of particular elements,
     countries arts, or remedies.

     Here again, as before, the Article gains a witness and concurrence
     from the Council of Trent. . "Though," say the divines there
     assembled, "the Church has been accustomed sometimes to celebrate a
     few masses to the honour and remembrance of saints, yet she doth not
     teach that sacrifice is offered to them, but to GOD alone, who
     crowned them; wherefore neither is the priest wont to say, I offer
     sacrifice to thee, O Peter, or O Paul, but to GOD." (Sess. 22.) Or,
     to know what is meant by fond invocations, we may refer to the
     following passage of Bishop Andrews's Answer to Cardinal
     Perron:---

     "This one point is needful to be observed throughout all the
     Cardinal's answer, that he hath framed to himself five
     distinctions:---(1.) Prayer direct, and prayer oblique, or
     indirect. (2.) Prayer absolute, and prayer relative. (3.) Prayer
     sovereign, and prayer subaltern. (4.) Prayer final, and prayer
     transitory. (5.) Prayer sacrificial, and prayer out of, or from the
     sacrifice. Prayer direct, absolute, final, sovereign, sacrificial,
     that must not be made to the saints, but to GOD only: but as for
     prayer oblique, relative, transitory, subaltern, from, or out of the
     sacrifice, that (saith he) we may make to the saints.

     "For all the world, like the question in Scotland, which was made
     some fifty years since, whether the Pater noster might not be said
     to saints. For then they in like sort devised the distinction
     of---(1.) Ultimate, et non ultimate. (2.) Principaliter, et minus
     principaliter. (3.) Primarie et secundarie: Capiendo stricte et
     capiendo large. And as for ultimate, principaliter, primarie et
     capiendo stricte, they conclude it must go to GOD: but non ultimate,
     minus principaliter, secundarie, et capiendo large, it might be
     allowed saints.

     "Yet it is sure, that in these distinctions is the whole substance
     of his answer. And whensoever he is pressed, he flees straight to
     his prayer relative and prayer transitory; as if prier pour prier
     were all the Church of Rome did hold; and that they made no prayers
     to the saints, but only to pray for them. The Bishop well remembers,
     that Master Casaubon more than once told him that reasoning with the
     Cardinal, touching the invocation of saints, the Cardinal freely
     confessed to him that he had never prayed to saint in all his life,
     save only when he happened to follow the procession; and that then
     he sung Ora pro nobis with the clerks indeed, but else not.

     "Which cometh much to this opinion he now seemeth to defend: but
     wherein others of the Church of Rome will surely give him over, so
     that it is to be feared that the Cardinal will be shent for this,
     and some censure come out against him by the Sorbonne. For the world
     cannot believe that oblique relative prayer is all that is sought;
     seeing it is most evident, by their breviaries, hours, and rosaries,
     that they pray directly, absolutely, and finally to saints, and make
     no mention at all of prier pour prier, to pray to GOD to forgive
     them; but to the saints, to give it themselves. So that all he saith
     comes to nothing. They say to the blessed Virgin, ;Sancta
     Maria,' not only ;Ora pro nobis:' but ;Succure
     miseris, juva pusillanimes, refove flebiles, accipe quod offerimus,
     dona quod rogamus, excusa quod timemus,' &c. &c.....

     All which, and many more, shew plainly that the practice of the
     Church of Rome, in this point of invocation of saints, is far
     otherwise than Cardinal Perron would bear the world in hand; and
     that prier pour prier is not at all, but that ;To dona
     coe;lum, Tu laxa, Tu sana, Tu solve crimina, Tu duc, conduc,
     induc, perduc ad gloriam; Tu serva, Tu fer opem, To aufer, Tu confer
     vitam,' are said to them (totidem verbis); more than which
     cannot be said to GOD Himself. And again, ;Hic nos solvat Ã½
     peccatis, Hic nostros tergat reatus, Hic arma conferat, His hostem
     fuget, Hic gubernet, Hic aptet tuo conspectui;' which if they
     be not direct and absolute, it would be asked of them, what is
     absolute or direct?"---Bishop Andrews's Answer to Chapter
     XX. of Cardinal Perron's Reply, pp. 57---62.

     Bellarmine's admissions quite bear out the principles laid down
     by Bishop Andrews and the Homilist:---

     "It is not lawful," he says, "to ask of the saints to grant to us,
     as if they were the authors of divine benefits, glory or grace, or
     the other means of blessedness. . . . . . . This is proved, first,
     from Scripture, ;The LORD will give grace and glory.'
     (Psal. lxxxiv.) Secondly, from the usage of the Church; for in the
     mass-prayers, and the saints' offices, we never ask any thing
     else, but that at their prayers, benefits may be granted to us by
     GOD. Thirdly, from reason: for what we need surpasses the powers of
     the creature, and therefore even of saints; therefore we ought to
     ask nothing of saints beyond their impetrating from GOD what is
     profitable for us. Fourthly, from Augustine and Theodoret, who
     expressly teach that saints are not to be invoked as gods, but as
     able to gain from GOD what they wish. However, it must be observed,
     when we say, that nothing should be asked of saints but their
     prayers for us, the question is not about the words, but the sense
     of the words. For, as far as words go it is lawful to say: ;St.
     Peter, pity me, save me, open for me the gate of heaven;' also,
     ;give me health of body, patience, fortitude,' &c.,
     provided that we mean ;save and pity me by praying for
     me;' ;grant this or that by thy prayers and merits." For
     so speaks Gregory Nazianzen, and many others of the ancients,
     &c."---De Sanct. Beat. i. 17.

     [By the doctrine of the invocation of saints then, the Article means
     all maintenance of addresses to them which intrench upon the
     incommunicable honour due to GOD alone, such as have been, and are
     in the Church of Rome, and such as, equally with the peculiar
     doctrine of purgatory, pardons, and worshipping and adoration of
     images and relics, as actually taught in that Church, are unknown to
     the Catholic Church.]
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 7.---The Sacraments.

     Art. xxv.---"Those five, commonly called Sacraments, that is to
     say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction,
     are not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel, being such as
     have grown, partly of the corrupt following (pravâEUR(TM)
     imitatione) of the Apostles, partly from states of life allowed in
     the Scriptures; but yet have not like natuire of sacraments
     (sacramentorum eandem rationem,) with Baptism and the LORD'S
     Supper, for that they have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained
     of GOD."

     This Articles does not deny the five rites in question to be
     sacraments, but to be sacraments in the sense in which Baptism and
     the Lord's Supper are sacraments; "sacraments of the Gospel,"
     sacraments with an outward sign ordained of God.

     They are not sacraments in any sense, unless the Church has the
     power of dispensing grace through rites of its own appointing, or is
     endued with the gift of blessing and hallowing the "rites or
     ceremonies" which, according to the Twentieth Article, it "hath
     power to decree." But we may well believe that the Church has this
     gift.

     If, then, a sacrament be merely an outward sign of an invisible
     grace under it, the five rites may be sacraments; but if it must be
     an outward sign ordained by GOD or CHRIST, then only Baptism and the
     LORD'S Supper are sacraments.

     Our Church acknowledges both definitions;---in the Article before
     us, the stricter; and again in the Catechism, where a sacrament is
     defined to be "an outward visible sign of an inward spiritual grace,
     given unto us, ordained by CHRIST Himself." And this, it should be
     remarked, is a characteristic of our formularies in various places,
     not to deny the truth or obligation of certain doctrines or
     ordinances, but simply to deny, (what no Roman opponent now can
     successfully maintain,) that CHRIST for certain directly ordained
     them. For instance, in regard to the visible Church it is sufficient
     that the ministration of the sacraments should be "according to
     CHRIST'S ordinance." Art. xix.---And it is added, "in all
     those things that of necessity are requisite to the same." The
     question entertained is, "what is the least that GOD requires of
     us." Again, "the baptism of young children is to be retained, as
     most agreeable to the institution of CHRIST." Art.
     xxvii.---Again, "the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not
     by CHRIST'S ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, or
     worshipped." Art. xxviii.---Who will maintain the paradox that
     what the Apostles "set in order when they came" had been already
     done by CHRIST? Again, "both parts of the LORD'S sacrament, by
     CHRIST'S ordinance and commandment, ought to be administered to
     all Christian men alike." Art. xxx.---Again, "bishops, priests,
     and deacons, are not commanded by GOD'S law either to vow the
     estate of single life or to abstain from marriage." Art.
     xxxii.---[In making this distinction, however, it is not here
     insinuated, though the question is not entered on in these
     particular Articles, that every one of these points, of which it is
     only said that they are not ordained by CHRIST, is justifiable on
     grounds short of His appointment.]

     On the other hand, our Church takes the wider sense of the meaning
     of the word sacrament in the Homilies; observing---

     "In the second Book again the Adversary of the Law and the Prophets,
     he [St. Augustine] calleth sacraments holy signs. And writing to
     Bonifacius of the baptism of infants, he saith, ;If sacraments
     had not a certain similitude of those things whereof they be
     sacraments, they should be no sacraments at all. And of this
     similitude they do for the most part receive the names of the
     self-same things they signify.' By these words of St. Augustine
     it appeareth, that he alloweth the common description of a
     sacrament, which is, that it is a visible sign of an invisible
     grace; that is to say, that setteth out to the eyes and other
     outward senses the inward working of God's free mercy, and
     doth, as it were, sealing our hearts the promises of
     God."---Homily on Common Prayer and Sacraments, pp. 296, 297.

     Accordingly, starting with this definition of St. Augustine's,
     the writer is necessarily carried on as follows:---

     "You shall hear how many sacraments there be, that were instituted
     by our SAVIOUR CHRIST, and are to be continued, and received of
     every Christian in due time and order, and for such purpose as our
     SAVIOUR CHRIST willed them to be received. And as for the number of
     them, if they should be considered according to the exact
     signification of a sacrament, namely, for visible signs expressly
     commanded in the New Testament, whereunto is annexed the promise of
     free forgiveness of our sins, and of our holiness and joining in
     CHRIST, there be but two; namely, Baptism, and the Supper of the
     Lord. For although absolution hath the promise of forgiveness of
     sin; yet by the express word of the New Testament, it hath not this
     promise annexed and tied to the visible sign, which is imposition of
     hands. For this visible sign (I mean laying on of hands) is not
     expressly commanded in the New Testament to be used in absolution,
     as the visible signs in Baptism and he LORD'S Supper are: and
     therefore absolution is no such sacrament as Baptism and Communion
     are. And though the ordering of ministers hath this visible sign and
     promise; yet it lacks the promise of remission of sin, as all other
     sacraments besides the two above named do. Therefore neither it, nor
     any other sacrament else, be such sacraments as Baptism and the
     Communion are. But in a general acception, the name of a sacrament
     may be attributed to any thing, whereby an holy thing is signified.
     In which understanding of the word, the ancient writers have given
     this name, not only to the other five, commonly of late years taken
     and used for supplying the number of the seven sacraments; but also
     to divers and sundry other ceremonies, as to oil, washing of feet,
     and such like; not meaning thereby to repute them as sacraments, in
     the same signification that the two forenamed sacraments are. And
     therefore St. Augustine, weighing the true signification and exact
     meaning of the word, writing to Januarius, and also in the third
     Book of Christian Doctrine, affirmeth, that the sacraments of the
     Christians, as they are most excellent in signification, so are they
     most few in number, and in both places maketh mention expressly of
     two, the sacrament of Baptism, and the Supper of the LORD. and
     although there are retained by order of the Church of England,
     besides these two, certain other rites and ceremonies, about the
     institution of ministers in the Church, Matrimony, Confirmation of
     Children, by examining them of their knowledge in the Articles of
     the Faith, and joining thereto the prayers of the Church for them,
     and likewise for the Visitation of the Sick; yet no man ought to
     take these for sacraments, in such signification and meaning as the
     sacraments of Baptism and the LORD'S Supper are: but either for
     godly states of life, necessary in Christ's Church, and
     therefore worthy to be set forth by public action and solemnity, by
     the ministry of the Church, or else judged to be such ordinances as
     may make for the instruction, comfort, and edification of
     CHRIST'S Church."---Homily on Common Prayer and Sacraments,
     pp. 298-300.

     Another definition of the word sacrament, which equally succeeds in
     limiting it to the two principal rites of the Christian Church, is
     also contained in the Catechism, as well as alluded to in the above
     passage:---"Two only, as generally necessary to salvation,
     Baptism and the Supper of the LORD." On this subject the following
     remark has been made:---

     "The Roman Catholic considers that there are seven [sacraments]; we
     do not strictly determine the number. We define the word generally
     to be an ;outward sign of an inward grace,' without saying
     to how many ordinances this applies. However, what we do determine
     is, that CHRIST has ordained two special sacraments, as generally
     necessary to salvation. This, then is the characteristic mark of
     those two, separating them from all other whatever; and this is
     nothing else but saying in other words that they are the only
     justifying rites, or instruments of communicating the Atonement,
     which is the one thing necessary to us. Ordination, for instance,
     gives power, yet without making the soul acceptable to God;
     Confirmation gives light and strength, yet is the mere completion of
     Baptism; and Absolution may be viewed as a negative ordinance
     removing the barrier which sin has raised between us and that grace,
     which by inheritance is ours. But the two sacraments ;of the
     Gospel,' as they may be emphatically styled, are the
     instruments of inward life, according to our LORD'S
     declaration, that Baptism is a new birth, and that in the Eucharist
     we eat the living bread."
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 8.---Transubstantiation.

     Article xxviii.---"Transubstantiation, or the change of the
     substance of bread and wine, in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be
     proved by Holy Writ; but is repugnant to the plain words of
     Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a sacraments, and hath given
     occasion to many superstitions."

     What is here opposed as "Transubstantiation," is the shocking
     doctrine that "the body of CHRIST," as the article goes on to
     express it, is not "given, taken, and eaten, after an heavenly and
     spiritual manner, but is carnally pressed with the teeth;" that It
     is a body or substance of a certain extension and bulk in space, and
     a certain figure and due disposition of parts, whereas we hold that
     the only substance such, is the bread we see.

     This is plain from Article xxix., which quotes St. Augustine as
     speaking of the wicked as "carnally and visible pressing with their
     teeth the sacrament of the body and blood of CHRIST," not the real
     substance, a statement which even the Breviary introduces into the
     service for Corpus Christi day.

     This is plain also from the words of the Homily:---"Saith
     Cyprian, ;when we do these things, we need not whet our teeth,
     but with sincere faith we break and divide that holy bread. It is
     well known that the meat we seek in this supper is spiritual food,
     the nourishment of the soul, a heavenly refection, and not earthly;
     an invisible meat, and not a bodily; a ghostly substance, and not
     carnal.'"

     Some extracts may be quoted to the same effect from Bishop Taylor.
     Speaking of what has been believed in the Church of Rome, he
     says:---

     "Sometimes CHRIST hath appeared in His own shape, and blood and
     flesh hath been pulled out of the mouths of the communicants: and
     Plegilus, the priest, saw an angel, showing CHRIST to him in form of
     a child upon the altar, whom first he took in his arms and kissed,
     but did eat him up presently in his other shape, in the shape of a
     wafer. ;Speciosa certÃ< pax nebulonis, ut qui oris prÃSbuerat
     basium, dentius inferret exitium,' said Berengarius: ;It
     was but a Judas' kiss to kiss with he lip, and bite with the
     teeth.'"---Bp. Taylor, vol. x. p. 12.

     Again:---

     "Yet if this and the other miracles pretended, had not been
     illusions or directly fabulous, it had made very much against the
     present doctrine of the Roman Church; for they represent the body in
     such measure, as by their explications it is not, and it cannot be:
     they represent it broken, a finger, or a piece of flesh, or bloody,
     or bleeding, or in the form of an infant; and then, when it is in
     the species of bread: for if, as they say, CHRIST'S body is
     present no longer than the form of bread remained, how can it be
     CHRIST'S body in the miracle, when the species being gone, it
     is no longer a sacrament? But the dull inventors of miracles in
     those ages considered nothing of this; the article itself was then
     gross and rude, and so were the instruments of probation. I noted
     this, not only to show at what door so incredible a persuasion
     entered, but that the zeal of prevailing in it hath so blinded the
     refiners of it in this age, that they still urge those miracles for
     proof, when, if they do any thing at all, they reprove the present
     doctrine."---Bp. Taylor's Works, vol. ix. p. ccccxi.

     Again: the change which is denied in the Article is accurately
     specified in another passage of the same author:---

     " I will not insist upon the unworthy questions which this carnal
     doctrine introduces . . . neither will I make scrutiny concerning
     CHRIST'S bones, hair, and nails; nor suppose the Roman priests
     to be such [karcharodontes] and to have such ;saws in their
     mouths:' these are appendages of their persuasion, but to be
     abominated by all Christian and modest persons, who use to eat not
     the bodies but the flesh of beasts, and not to devour, but to
     worship the body of Christ in the exaltation, and now in union with
     His divinity."---On the Real Presence, 11.

     And again:---

     "They that deny the spiritual sense, and affirm the natural, are to
     remember that CHRIST reproved all senses of these words that were
     not spiritual. And by the way let me observe, that the expressions
     of some chief men among the Romanists are so rude and crass, that it
     will be impossible to excuse them from the understanding the words
     in the sense of the men of Capernaum; for, as they understood CHRIST
     to mean His ;true flesh natural and proper,' so do they:
     as they thought CHRIST intended they should tear Him with their
     teeth and such His blood, for which they were offended; so do these
     men not only think so, but say so, and are not offended. So said
     Alanus, ;Apertissime laquimur, corpus Christi vere a nobis
     contrectari, manducari, circumgestari, dentibus teri [ground by the
     teeth], sensibilter sacrificari [sensibly sacrificed], non minus
     quam ante consecrationem panis,' [not less than the bread
     before consecration] . . . I thought that the Romanists had been
     glad to separate their own opinion from the carnal conceit of the
     men of Capernaum and the offended disciples . . . . but I find that
     Bellarmine owns it, even in them, in their ruse circumstances, for
     he affirms that ;CHRIST corrected them not for supposing so,
     but reproved them for not believing it to be so.' And indeed
     himself says as much: ;The body of CHRIST is truly and properly
     manducated or chewed with the bread in the Eucharist;' and to
     take off the foulness of the expression, by avoiding a worse, he is
     pleased to speak nonsense: ;A thing may be manducated or
     chewed, though it be not attrite or broken.' . . . But
     Bellarmine adds, that if you will not allow him to say so, then he
     grants it in plain terms, that CHRIST'S body is chewed, is
     attrite, or broken with the teeth, and that not tropically, but
     properly. . . . How? under the species of bread, and
     invisibly."---Ibid. 3.

     Take again the statement of Ussher:---

     "Paschasius Radbertus, who was one of the first setters forward of
     this doctrine in the West, spendeth a large chapter upon this point,
     wherein he telleth us, that CHRIST in the sacrament did show himself
     ;oftentimes in a visible shape, either in the form of a lamb,
     or in the colour of flesh and blood; so that while the host was a
     breaking or an offering, a lamb in the priest's hands, and
     blood in the chalice should be seen as it were flowing from the
     sacrifice, that what lay hid in a mystery might to them that yet
     doubted be made manifest in a miracle.' . . . . The first
     [tale] was . . . . of a Roman matron, who found a piece of the
     sacramental bread turned into the fashion of a finger, all bloody;
     which afterwards, upon the prayers of St. Gregory, was converted to
     its former shape again. The other two were first coined by the
     Grecian liars. . . . . The former of these is not only related
     there, but also in the legend of Simeon Metaphrastes (which is such
     another author among the Grecians as Jacobus de Voragine was among
     the Latins) in the life of Arsenius, .... how that a little child
     was seen upon the altar, and an angel cutting him into small, pieces
     with a knife, and receiving his blood into the chalice, as long as
     the priest was breaking the bread into little parts. The latter is
     of a certain Jew receiving the sacrament at St. Basil's hands,
     converted visibly into true flesh and blood." Ussher's Answer
     to a Jesuit, pp. 62---04.


     Or the following:---

     "When St. Odo was celebrating the mass in the presence of certain of
     the clergy of Canterbury, (who maintained that the bread and wine,
     after consecration, do remain in their former substance, and are not
     CHRIST'S true body and blood, but a figure of it:) when he was come
     to confraction, presently the fragments of the body of CHRIST which
     he held in his hands, began to pour forth blood into the chalice.
     Whereupon he shed tears of joy; and beckoning to them that wavered
     in their faith, to come near and see the wonderful work of GOD; as
     soon as they beheld it they cried out, ;O holy Prelate! to whom
     the SON of GOD has been pleased to reveal Himself visibly in the
     flesh, pray for us, that the blood we see here present to our eyes,
     may again be changed, lest for our unbelief the Divine vengeance
     fall upon us.' He prayed accordingly; after which, looking in
     the chalice, he saw the species of bread and wine, where he had left
     blood.....

     "St. Wittekundus, in the administration of the Eucharist saw a child
     enter into every one's mouth, playing and smiling when some
     received him, and with an abhorring countenance when he went into
     the mouths of others; CHRIST thus showing this saint in His
     countenance, who were worthy and who unworthy
     receivers."---Johnson's Miracles of Saints, pp. 27, 28.

     The same doctrine was imposed by Nicholas the Second which runs
     thus:---

     "I, Berengarius .... anathematize every heresy, and more
     particularly that of which I have hitherto been accused .... I agree
     with the Roman Church .... that the bread and wine which are placed
     on the altar are, after consecration, not only a sacrament, but even
     the true body and blood of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; and that they are
     sensibly, and not merely sacramentally, but in truth, handled and
     broken, by the hands of the priest, and ground by the teeth of the
     faithful."---Bowden's Life of Gregory VII., vol. ii. p. 243.

     Another illustration of the sort of doctrine offered in the Article,
     may be given from Bellarmine, whose controversial statements have
     already been introduced in the course of the above extracts. He thus
     opposes the doctrine of introsusception, which the spiritual view of
     the Real Presence naturally suggests:---

     He observes, that there are "two particular opinions, false and
     erroneous, excogitated in the schools: that of Durandus, who thought
     it probable that the substance of the body of CHRIST in the
     Eucharist, was without magnitude; and that of certain ancients,
     which Occam seems afterwards to have followed, that though it has
     magnitude, (which they think not really separable from substance;)
     yet every part is so penetrated by every other, that the body of
     CHRIST is without figure, without distinction and order of parts."
     With this he contrasts the doctrine which, he maintains, is that of
     the Church of Rome as well as the general doctrine of the schools,
     that "in the Eucharist whole CHRIST exists with magnitude and all
     accidents, except that relation to a heavenly location which He has
     as He is in heaven, and those things which are concomitants on His
     existence in that location; and that the parts and members of
     CHRIST'S body do not penetrate each other, but are so distinct
     and arranged one with another, as to have a figure and order
     suitable to a human body."---De Euchar. iii. 5.

     We see then, that, by transubstantiation, our Article does not
     confine itself to any abstract theory, nor aim at any definition of
     the word substance, nor in rejecting it, rejects a word, nor in
     denying a "mutatio panis et vini," is denying every kind of change,
     but opposes itself to a certain plain and unambiguous statement, not
     of this or that council, but one generally received or taught both
     in the schools and in the multitude, that the material elements are
     changed into an earthly, fleshly, and organized body, extended in
     size, distinct in its parts, which is there where the outward
     appearances of bread and wine are, and only does not meet the
     senses, nor even that always.

     Objections against "substance," "nature," "change," "accidents," and
     the like, seem more or less questions of words, and inadequate
     expressions of the great offence which we find in the received Roman
     view of this sacred doctrine.

     In this connexion it may be suitable to proceed to notice the
     Explanation appended to the Communion Service, of our kneeling at
     the LORD'S Supper, which requires explanation itself, more
     perhaps than any part of our formularies. It runs as follows:---

     "Whereas it is ordained in this office for the Administration of the
     LORD's Supper, that the communicants should receive the same
     kneeling: (which order is well meant, for a signification of our
     humble and grateful acknowledgement of the benefits of CHRIST
     therein given to all worthy receivers, and for the avoiding of such
     profanation and disorder in the holy communion, as might otherwise
     ensue ;) yet, lest the same kneeling should by any persons, either
     out of ignorance and infirmity, or out of malice and obstinacy, be
     misconstrued and depraved,---It is hereby declared, that thereby
     no adoration is intended, or ought to be done, either unto the
     sacramental bread or wine there bodily received, or unto any
     corporal presence of CHRIST'S natural flesh and blood. For the
     sacramental bread and wine remain still in their very natural
     substances, and therefore may not be adored, (for that were
     idolatry, to be abhorred of all faithful Christians ;) and the
     natural body and blood of our SAVIOUR CHRIST are in heaven, and not
     here, it being against the truth of CHRIST'S natural body to be
     at one time in more places than one."

     Now it may be admitted without difficulty,---1. That "no
     adoration ought to be done unto the sacramental bread and wine there
     bodily received." 2. Nor "unto any corporal (i. e. carnal) presence
     of CHRIST'S natural flesh and blood."

     3. That "the sacramental bread and wine remain still in their very
     natural substances." 4. That to adore them "were idolatry to be
     abhorred of all faithful Christians;" and 5. That "the natural body
     and blood of our SAVIOUR CHRIST are in heaven."

     But "to heaven" is added, "and not here." Now, though it be allowed
     that there is no "corporal presence" [i. e. carnal] of
     "CHRIST'S natural flesh and blood" here, it is a further point
     to allow that "CHRIST'S natural body and blood" are "not here."
     And the question is, how can there be any presence at all of His
     body and blood, yet a presence such, as not to be here? How can
     there be any presence, yet not local?

     Yet that this is the meaning of the paragraph in question is plain,
     from what it goes on to say in proof of its position: "It being
     against the truth of CHRIST'S natural body to be at one time in
     more places than one." It is here asserted then, 1. Generally, "no
     natural body can be in more places than one;" therefore, 2.
     CHRIST'S natural body cannot be in the bread and wine, or there
     where the bread and wine are seen. In other words, there is no local
     presence in the Sacrament. Yet, that there is a presence is asserted
     in the Homilies, as quoted above, and the question is, as just now
     stated, "How can there be a presence, yet not a local one?"

     Now, first, let it be observed that the question to be solved is the
     truth of a certain philosophical deduction, not of a certain
     doctrine of Scripture. That there is a real presence, Scripture
     asserts, and the Homilies, Catechism, and Communion Service confess;
     but the explanation before us adds, that it is philosophically
     impossible that it should be a particular kind of presence, a
     presence of which one can say "it is here," or which is "local." It
     states then a philosophical deduction; but to such deduction none of
     us have subscribed. We have professed in the words of the Canon:
     "That the Book of Prayer, &c. containeth in it nothing contrary to
     the Word of God." Now, a position like this may not be, and is not,
     "contrary to the word of God," and yet need not be true; e. g. we
     may accept St. Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians, as
     containing nothing contrary to Scripture, nay, as altogether most
     scriptural, and yet this would not hinder us from rejecting the
     account of the Phoe;nix---as contrary, not to GOD'S word,
     but to matter of fact. Even the infallibility of the Roman see is
     not considered to extend to matters of fact or points of philosophy.
     Nay, we commonly do not consider that we need take the words of
     Scripture itself literally about the sun's standing still, or the
     earth being fixed, or the firmament being above. Those at least who
     distinguish between what is theological in Scripture and what is
     scientific, and yet admit that Scripture is true, have no ground for
     wondering at such persons as subscribe to a paragraph, of which at
     the same time they disallow the philosophy; especially considering
     they expressly subscribe it only as not "contrary to the word of
     GOD." This then is what must be said first of all.

     Next, the philosophical position is itself capable of a very
     specious defence. The truth is, we do not at all know what is meant
     by distance or intervals absolutely, any more than we know what is
     meant by absolute time. Late discoveries in geology have tended to
     make it probable that time may under circumstances go indefinitely
     faster or slower than it does at present; or in other words, that
     indefinitely more may be accomplished in a given portion of it. What
     Moses calls a day, geologists wish to prove to be thousands of
     years, if we measure time by the operations at present effected in
     it. It is equally difficult to determine what we mean by distance,
     or why we should not be at this moment close to the throne of GOD,
     though we seem far from it. Our measure of distance is our hand or
     our foot; but as an object a foot off is not called distant, though
     the interval is indefinitely divisible; neither need it be distant
     either, after it has been multiplied indefinitely. Why should any
     conventual measure of ours---why should the perceptions of our
     eyes or our ears, be the standard of presence or distance CHRIST may
     really be close to us, though in heaven, and His presence in the
     Sacrament may but be a manifestation to the worshipper of that
     nearness, not a change of place, which may be unnecessary. But on
     this subject some extracts may be suitably made from a pamphlet
     published several years since, and admitting of one or two verbal
     corrections, which, as in the case of other similar quotations
     above, shall here be made without scruple:---

     "In the note at the end of the Communion Service, it is argued, that
     a body cannot be in two places at once; and that therefore the Body
     of CHRIST is not locally present, in the sense in which we speak of
     the bread as being locally present. On the other hand, in the
     Communion Service itself, Catechism, Articles, and Homilies, it is
     plainly declared, that the Body of CHRIST is in a mysterious way, if
     not locally, yet really present, so that we are able after some
     ineffable manner to receive It. Whereas, then, the objection stands,
     ;CHRIST is not really here, because He is not locally here,'
     our formularies answer, ;He is really here, yet not
     locally.'

     "But it may be asked, What is the meaning of saying that CHRIST is
     really present, yet not locally? I will make a suggestion on the
     subject. What do we mean by being present? How do we define and
     measure it? To a blind and deaf man, that only is present which he
     touches: give him hearing, and the range of things present enlarges;
     every thing is present to him which he hears. Give him at length
     sight, and the sun may be said to be present to him in the day-time,
     and myriads of stars by night. The presence, then, of a thing is a
     relative word, depending, in a popular sense of it, upon the
     channels of communication between it and him to whom it is present;
     and thus it is a word of degree.

     "Such is the meaning of presence, when used of material
     objects;---very different from this is the conception we form of
     the presence of spirit with spirit. The most intimate presence we
     can fancy is a spiritual presence in the soul; it is nearer to us
     than any material object can possibly be; for our body, which is the
     organ of conveying to us the presence of matter, sets bounds to its
     approach towards us.' If, then, spiritual beings can be brought
     near to us, (and that they can, we know, from what is told us of the
     influences of Divine grace, and again of evil angels upon our
     souls,) their presence is something sui generis of a more perfect
     and simple character than any presence we commonly call local. And
     further, their presence has nothing to do with the degrees of
     nearness; they are either present or not present, or, in other
     words, their coming is not measured by space, nor their absence
     ascertained by distance. In the case of things material, a transit
     through space is the necessary condition of approach and presence;
     but in things spiritual, (whatever be the condition,) such a transit
     seems not to be a condition. Thc condition is unknown. Once more:
     while beings simply spiritual seem not to exist in place, the
     Incarnate SON does; according to our Church's statement already
     alluded to, that ;the natural body and blood of our SAVIOUR
     CHRIST are in heaven and not here, it being against the truth of
     CHRIST'S natural body to be at one time in more places than
     one.'

     "Such seems to be the mystery attending our LORD and SAVIOUR; He has
     a body, and that spiritual. He is in place; and yet, as being a
     spirit, His mode of approach--- the mode in which He makes
     Himself present here or there ---may be, for what we know, as
     different from the mode in which material bodies approach and come,
     as a spiritual presence is more perfect. As material bodies approach
     by moving from place to place, so the approach and presence of a
     spiritual body may be in some other way,---probably is in some
     other way, since in some other way, (as it would appear) not
     gradual, progressive, approximating, that is, locomotive, but at
     once, spirits become present,---may be such as to be consistent
     with His remaining on GOD'S right hand while He becomes present
     here,---that is, it may be real yet not local, or, in a word, is
     mysterious. The Body and Blood of CHRIST may be really, literally
     present in the holy Eucharist, yet not having become present by
     local passage, may still literally and really be on GOD'S right
     hand; so that, though they be present in deed and truth, it may be
     impossible, it may be untrue to say, that they are literally in the
     elements, or about them, or in the soul of the receiver. These may
     be useful modes of speech ac cording to the occasion; but the true
     determination of all such questions may be this, that CHRIST'S
     Body and Blood are locally at GOD'S right hand, yet really
     present here,--- present here, but not here in
     place,---because they are spirit.

     "To assist our conceptions on this subject, I would recur to what I
     said just now about the presence of material objects, by way of
     putting my meaning in a different point of view. The presence of a
     material object, in the popular sense of the word, is a matter of
     degree, and ascertained by the means of apprehending it which belong
     to him to whom it is present. It is in some sense a correlative of
     the senses. A fly may be as near an edifice as a man; yet we do not
     call it present to the fly, because it cannot see it; and we call it
     present to the man because he can. This, however, is but a popular
     view of the matter: when we consider it carefully, it certainly is
     difficult to say what is meant by the presence of a material object
     relatively to us. It is in some respects truer to say that a thing
     is present, which is so circumstanced as to act upon us and
     influence us, whether we are sensible of it or not. Now this is what
     the Catholic Church seems to hold concerning our LORD'S
     Presence in the Sacrament, that He then personally and bodily is
     with us in the way an object is which we call present; how He is so,
     we know not, but that He should be so, though He be millions of
     miles away, is not more inconceivable than the influence of eyesight
     upon us is to a blind man. The stars are millions of miles off, yet
     they impress ideas upon our souls through our sight. We know but of
     five senses: we know not whether or not human nature be capable of
     more; we know not whether or not the soul possesses any thing
     analogous to them. We know nothing to negative the notion that the
     soul may be capable of having CHRIST present to it by the
     stimulating of dormant, or the development of possible energies.

     "As sight for certain purposes annihilates space, so other known
     capacities, bodily or spiritual, may annihilate it other purposes.
     Such a practical annihilation was involved in the appearance of
     CHRIST to St. Paul on his conversion. Such a practical annihilation
     is involved in the doctrine of CHRIST'S ascension; to speak
     according to the ideas of space and time commonly received, what
     must have been the rapidity of that motion by which, within ten
     days, placed our human nature at the right hand of God? Is more
     mysterious that He should ;open the heavens,' to use the
     Scripture phrase, in the sacramental rite; that He should then
     dispense with time and space, in the sense in which they are daily
     dispensed with, in the sun's warming at thc distance of
     100,000,000 of miles, than that He could have dispensed with them on
     occasion of His ascending on high? He who showed what the passage of
     an incorruptible body was ere it had reached GOD'S throne,
     thereby suggests to us what may be its coming back and presence with
     us now, when at length glorified and become a spirit.

     "In answer, then, to the problem, how CHRIST comes to us while
     remaining on high, I answer just as much as this,---that He comes
     by the agency of the HOLY GHOST, and by the Sacrament. Locomotion is
     the means of a material Presence; the Sacrament is the means of His
     spiritual presence. As faith is the means of our receiving It, the
     HOLY GHOST is the Agent and the Sacrament the leans of His imparting
     It; and therefore we call It a sacramental Presence. We kneel before
     His heavenly throne, and the distance is as nothing; it is as if
     that throne were the Altar close to us.

     "Let it be carefully observed, that I am not proving or determining
     any thing. I am only showing how it is that certain proposition
     which at first sight seem contradictions in terms, are not
     so,---I am but pointing out one way of reconciling them. If there
     is but one way assignable, the force of all antecedent objection
     against the possibility of any at all is removed, and then of course
     there may be other ways supposable though not assignable. It seems
     at first sight a mere idle use of words to say that CHRIST is really
     and literally, yet not locally, present in the Sacrament; that He is
     there given to us, not in figure but in truth, and yet is still only
     on the right hand of GOD. I have wished to remove this seeming
     impossibility.

     "If it be asked, why attempt to remove it, I answer that I have no
     wish to do so, if persons will not urge it against the Catholic
     doctrine. Men maintain it as an impossibility, a contradiction in
     terms, and force a believer in it to say why it should not be so
     accounted. And then when he gives a reason, they turn round and
     accuse him of subtleties, and refinements, and scholastic trifling.
     Let them but believe and act on the truth that the consecrated bread
     is CHRIST'S body, as He says, and no officious comment on His
     words will be attempted by any well judging mind. But when they say,
     ;this cannot be literally true, because it is impossible;'
     then they force those who think it is literally true, to explain
     how, according to their notions, it is not impossible. And those who
     ask hard questions must put up with hard answers."

     There is nothing, then, in the Explanatory Paragraph which has given
     rise to these remarks, to interfere with the doctrine, elsewhere
     taught in our formularies, of a real super-local presence in the
     Holy Sacrament.
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 9.---Masses.

     Article xxxi.---"The sacrifices (sacrificia) of Masses, in the
     which it was commonly said, that the priest did offer CHRIST for the
     quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, were
     blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits (perniciosÃS imposturÃS)."

     Nothing can show more clearly than this passage that the Articles
     are not written against the creed of the Roman Church, but against
     actual existing errors in it, whether taken into its system or not.
     Here the sacrifice of the Mass is not spoken of, in which the
     special question of doctrine should be introduced; but " the
     sacrifice of masses," certain observances, for the most part private
     and solitary, which the writers of the Articles knew to have been in
     force in time past, and saw before their eyes, and which involved
     certain opinions and a certain teaching. Accordingly the passage
     proceeds, "in which it was commonly said;" which surely is a
     strictly historical mode of speaking.

     If any testimony is necessary in aid of what is so plain from the
     wording of the Article itself, it is found in the drift of the
     following passage from Burnet:---

     "It were easy from all the rituals of the ancients to shew, that
     they had none of those ideas that are now in the Roman Church. They
     had but one altar in a Church, and probably but one in a city: they
     had but one communion in a day at that altar: So far were they from
     the many altars in every church, and the many masses at every altar,
     that are now in the Roman Church. They did not know what solitary
     masses were, without a communion. All the liturgies and all the
     writings of ancients are as express in this matter as is possible.
     The whole constitution of their worship and discipline shews it.
     Their worship always concluded with the Eucharist such as were not
     capable of it, as the catechumens, and those who were doing public
     penance for their sins, assisted at the more general parts of the
     worship; and so much of it was called their mass, because they were
     dismissed at the conclusion of it. When that was done, then the
     faithful stayed, and did partake of the Eucharist; and at the
     conclusion of it they were likewise dismissed, from whence it came
     to be called the mass of the faithful."---Burnet on the XXXIst
     Article, p. 482.

     These sacrifices are said to be "blasphemous fables and pernicious
     impostures." Now the "blasphemous fable" is the teaching that there
     is a sacrifice for sin other than CHRIST'S death, and that
     masses are that sacrifice. And the "pernicious imposture" is the
     turning this belief into a means of filthy lucre.

     1. That the "blasphemous fable" is the teaching that masses are
     sacrifices for sin distinct from the sacrifice of CHRIST'S
     death, is plain from the first sentence of the Article. "The
     offering of CHRIST once made, is that perfect redemption,
     propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world,
     both original and actual. And there is none other satisfaction for
     sin, but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifice of masses, &c." It is
     observable too that the heading of the Article runs, "Of the one
     oblation of CHRIST finished upon the cross," which interprets the
     drift of the statement contained in it about masses.

     Our Communion Service shows it also, in which the prayer of
     consecration commences pointedly with a declaration, which has the
     force of a protest, that CHRIST made on the cross, "by His one
     oblation of Himself once offered, a full perfect and sufficient
     sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
     world."

     And again in the offering of the sacrifice: "We entirely desire thy
     fatherly goodness mercifully to accept our sacrifice of praise and
     thanksgiving, most humbly beseeching Thee to grant that by the
     merits and death of Thy SON JESUS CHRIST, and through faith in His
     blood, we and all Thy whole Church may obtain remission of our sins
     and all other benefits of His passion."

     [And in the notice of the celebration: "I purpose, through
     God's assistance, to administer to all such as shall be
     religiously and devoutly disposed, the most comfortable Sacrament of
     the Body and Blood of CHRIST; to be by them received in remembrance
     of His meritorious Cross and Passion; whereby alone we obtain
     remission of our sins, and are made partakers of the kingdom of
     heaven."]

     But the popular charge still urged against the Roman system, as
     introducing in the Mass a second or rather continually recurring
     atonement, is a sufficient illustration, without further quotations,
     of this part of the Article.
    1. That the "blasphemous and pernicious imposture" is the turning the
       Mass into a gain, is plain from such passages as the
       following:---
    2.

     "With what earnestness, with what vehement zeal, did our SAVIOUR
     CHRIST drive the buyers and sellers out of the temple of GOD, and
     hurled down the tables of the changers of money, and the seats of
     the dove-sellers, and could not abide that a man should carry a
     vessel through the temple. He told them, that they had made His
     FATHER's house a den of thieves, partly through their
     superstition, hypocrisy, false worship false doctrine, and
     insatiable covetousness, and partly through contempt, abusing that
     place with walking and talking, with worldly matters, without all
     fear of GOD, and due reverence to that place. What dens of thieves
     the Churches of England have been made by the blasphemous buying and
     selling the most precious body and blood of CHRIST in the Mass, as
     the world was made to believe, at dirges, at months minds, at
     trentalls, in abbeys and chantries, besides other horrible abuses,
     (GOD'S holy name be blessed for over,) which we now see and
     understand. All those abominations they that supply the room of
     CHRIST hare cleaned and purged the Churches of England of, taking
     away all such fulsomeness and filthiness, as through blind devotion
     and ignorance bath crept into the Church these many hundred
     years"---On repairing and keeping clean of Churches, pp. 229,
     230.

     Other passages are as follow:---

     "Have not the Christians of late days, and even in our days also, in
     like manner provoked the displeasure and indignation of ALMIGHTY
     GOD; partly because they have profaned and defiled their Churches
     with heathenish and Jewish abuses, with images and idols, with
     numbers of altars, too superstitiously and intolerably abused, with
     gross abusing and filthy corrupting of the LORD'S holy Supper,
     the blessed Sacrament of His body and blood, with an infinite number
     of toys and trifles of their own devices, to make a goodly outward
     shew, and to deface the homely, simple, and sincere religion of
     CHRIST JESUS; partly, they resort to the Church like hypocrites,
     full of all iniquity and sinful life, having in vain and dangerous
     fancy and persuasion, that if they come to the Church, besprinkle
     them with holy water, hear a mass, and be blessed with a chalice,
     though they understand not one word of the whole service, nor feel
     one motion of repentance in their hearts all is well, all is
     sure?"---On the Place and Time of Prayer, p. 293.

     Again:---

     "What hath been the cause of this gross idolatry, but the ignorance
     hereof? What hath been the cause of this mummish massing, but the
     ignorance hereof? Yea, what hath been, and what is at this day the
     cause of this want of love and charity, but the ignorance hereof?
     Let us therefore so travel to understand the LORD'S Supper,
     that we be no cause of the decay of GOD'S worship, of no
     idolatry, of no dumb massing, of no hate and malice; so may we the
     bolder have access thither to our comfort."---Homily concerning
     the Sacrament, pp 377, 378.

     To the same purpose is the following passage from Bishop Bull's
     Sermons:---

     "It were easy to shew, how the whole frame of religion and doctrine
     of the Church of Rome, as it is distinguished from that Christianity
     which we hold is common with them, is evidently designed and
     contrived to serve the interest and profit of them that rule that
     Church, by the disservices, yea, and ruin of those souls that are
     under their government . . What can the doctrine of men's
     playing an after game for their salvation in purgatory be designed
     for, but to enhance the price of the priest's masses and dirges
     for the dead? Why must a solitary mass, bought for a piece of money,
     performed and participated by a priest alone, in a private corner of
     a church, be, not only against the sense of Scripture and the
     primitive Church, but also against common sense and grammar, called
     a Communion, and be accounted useful to him that buys it, though he
     never himself receive the Sacrament, or but once a year; but for
     this reason, that there is great gain, but no godliness at all, in
     this doctrine?"---Bp. Bull's Sermons, p. 10.

     And Burnet says:---

     "Without going far in tragical expressions, we cannot hold saying
     what our SAVIOUR said upon another occasion, ;My house is a
     house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.' A trade
     was set up on this foundation. The world was made believe, that by
     the virtue of so many masses, which were to be purchased by great
     endowments, souls were redeemed out of purgatory, and scenes of
     visions and apparitions, sometimes of the tormented, and sometimes
     of the delivered souls, were published in all places: which had so
     wonderful an effect, that in two or three centuries, endowments
     increased to so vast a degree, that if the scandals of the clergy on
     the one hand, and the statutes of mortmain on the other, had not
     restrained the profuseness that the world was wrought up to on this
     account, it is not easy to imagine how far this might have gone;
     perhaps to an entire subjecting of the temporality to the
     spirituality. The practices by which this was managed, and the
     effects that followed on it, we can call by no other name than
     downright impostures; worse than the making or vending false coin:
     when the world was drawn in by such arts to plain bargains, to
     redeem their own souls, and the souls of their ancestors and
     posterity, so many masses were to bc said, and forfeitures were to
     follow upon their not being said: thus the masses were really the
     price of the lands."---On Article XXII., pp. 303, 304.

     The Truth of these representations cannot be better shown than by
     extracting the following passage from the Session 22 of the Council
     of Trent:---

     "Whereas many things appear to have crept in heretofore, whether by
     the fault of the times or by the neglect and wickedness of men,
     foreign to the dignity of so great a sacrifice, in order that it may
     regain its due honour and observance, to the glory of GOD and the
     edification of His faithful people, the Holy Council decrees, that
     the bishops, ordinaries of each place, diligently take care and be
     bound, to forbid and put an end to all those things, which either
     avarice, which is idolatry, or irreverence, which is scarcely
     separable from impiety, or superstition, the pretence of true piety,
     has introduced. And, to say much in a few words, first of all, as to
     avarice, let them altogether forbid agreements, and bargains of
     payment of whatever kind, and whatever is given for celebrating new
     masses; moreover importunate and mean extortion, rather than
     petition of alms, and such like practices, which border on
     simoniacal sin, certainly on filthy lucre. . . . And let them banish
     from the church those musical practices, when with the organ or with
     the chant any thing lascivious or impure is mingled; also all
     secular practices, vain and therefore profane conversations,
     promenadings, bustle, clamour; so that the house of GOD may truly
     seem and be called the house of prayer. Lastly, lest any opening be
     given to superstition, let them provide by edict and punishments
     appointed, that the priests celebrate it at no other than the due
     hours, nor use rites or ceremonies and prayers in the celebration of
     masses, other than those which have been approved by the Church, and
     received on frequent and laudable use. And let them altogether
     remove from the Church a set number of certain masses and candles,
     which has proceeded rather from superstitious observance than from
     true religion, and teach the people in what consists, and from whom,
     above all, proceeds the so precious and heavenly fruit of this most
     holy sacrifice. And let them admonish the same people to come
     frequently to their parish Churches, at least on Sundays and the
     greater feasts," &c.

     On the whole, then, it is conceived that the Article before us
     neither speaks against the Mass in itself, nor against its being [an
     offering, though commemorative,] for the quick and the dead for the
     remission of sin; [(especially since the decree of Trent says, that
     "the fruits of the Bloody Oblation are through this most abundantly
     obtained; so far is the latter from detracting in any way from the
     former;")] but against its being viewed, on the one hand, as
     independent of or distinct from the Sacrifice on the Cross, which is
     blasphemy; and, on the other, its being directed to the emolument of
     those to whom it pertains to celebrate it, which is imposture in
     addition.
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 10.---Marriage of Clergy.

     Article xxxii.---"Bishops, Priests, and Deacon, are not commanded
     by God's law, either to vow the estate of single life, or to
     abstain from marriage."

     There is literally no subject for controversy in these words, since
     even the most determined advocates of the celibacy of clergy admit
     their truth. [As far as clerical celibacy is a duty, it] is grounded
     not on GOD'S law, but on the Church's rule, or on vow. No
     one, for instance, can question the vehement zeal of St. Jerome in
     behalf of this observance, yet he makes the following admission in
     his attack upon Jovinian:---

     "Jovinian says, ;You speak in vain, since the Apostle appointed
     Bishops, and Presbyters, and Deacons, the husbands of one wife, and
     having children.' But, as the Apostle says, that he has not a
     precept concerning virgins, yet gives a counsel, as having received
     mercy of the Lord, and urges throughout that discourse a preference
     of virginity to marriage, and advises what he does not command, lest
     he seem to cast a snare, and to impose a burden too great for
     man's nature; so also, in ecclesiastical order, seeing that an
     infant Church was then forming out of the Gentiles, he gives the
     lighter precepts to recent converts, lest they should fail under
     them through fear."---Adv. Jovinian. i. 34.

     And the Council of Trent merely lays down:---

     "If any shall say that clerks in holy orders, or regulars, who have
     solemnly professed chastity, can contract matrimony, and that the
     contract is valid in spite of ecclesiastical law or vow, let him be
     anathema."---Sess. 24, Can. 9.

     Here the observance is placed simply upon rule of the Church or upon
     vow, neither of which exists in the English Church; "therefore," as
     the Article logically proceeds, "it is lawful for them, as for all
     other Christian men, to marry at their own discretion, as they shall
     judge the same to serve better to godliness." Our Church leaves the
     discretion with the clergy; and most persons will allow that, under
     our circumstances, she acts wisely in doing so. That she has power
     did she choose, to take from them this discretion, and to oblige
     them either to marriage [(as is said to be the case as regards the
     parish priests of the Greek Church)] or to celibacy, would seem to
     be involved in the doctrine of the following extract from the
     Homilies; though, whether an enforcement either of the one or the
     other rule would be expedient and pious, is another matter. Speaking
     of fasting, the Homily says:---

     "GOD'S Church ought not, neither may it be so tied to that or
     any other order now made, or hereafter to be made and devised by the
     authority of man, but that it may lawfully, for just cause, alter,
     change, or mitigate those ecclesiastical decrees and orders, yea,
     recede wholly from them, and break them, when they tend either to
     superstition or to impiety; when they draw the people from GOD
     rather than work any edification in them. this authority CHRIST
     Himself used, and left it to His Church. He used it, I say, for the
     order or decree made by the elders for washing ofttimes, which was
     diligently observed of the Jews; yet tending to superstition, our
     SAVIOUR CHRIST altered and changed the same in His Church into a
     profitable sacrament, the sacrament of regeneration, or new birth.
     This authority to mitigate laws and decrees ecclesiastical, the
     Apostles practiced, when they, writing from Jerusalem unto the
     congregation that was at Antioch, signified unto them, that they
     would not lay any further burden upon them, but these necessaries:
     that, ;that they should abstain from things offered unto idols,
     from blood, from that which is strangled, and from
     fornication;' notwithstanding that Moses's law required
     many other observances. This authority to change the orders,
     degrees, and constitutions of the Church, was, after the
     Apostles' time, used of the father about the manner of fasting,
     as it appeareth in the Tripartite History. . . . . Thus ye have
     heard, good people, first, that Christian subjects are bound even in
     conscience to obey princes' laws, which are not repugnant to
     the laws of God. Ye have also heard that CHRIST'S Church is not
     so bound to observe any order, law, or decree made by man, to
     prescribe a form in religion, but that the Church hath full power
     and authority from God to change and alter the same, when need shall
     require; which hath been shewed you by the example of our SAVIOUR
     CHRIST, by the practice of the Apostles, and of the Fathers since
     that time."---Homily on Fasting, pp. 242---244.

     To the same effect the 34th Article declares, that,

     "It is not necessary that traditions and ceremonies be in all places
     one, and utterly like; for at all times they have been divers, and
     may be changed according to diversities of countries, times and
     men's manners, so that nothing be ordained against God's
     Word. Whosoever, through his private judgment, willingly and
     purposely doth openly break the traditions and ceremonies of the
     Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of GOD, and be ordained
     and approved by common authority, ought to be rebuked
     openly."---Article XXXIV.
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 11.---The Homilies.

     Art. xxxv.---"The Second Book of Homilies doth contain a godly
     and wholesome doctrine, and necessary for these times, as doth the
     former Book of Homilies."

     This Article has been treated of in No. 82 of these Tracts, in the
     course of an answer given to an opponent, who accused its author of
     not fairly receiving the Homilies, because he dissented from their
     doctrine, that the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist, and that
     regeneration was vouchsafed under the law. The passage of the Tract
     shall be here inserted, with some abridgment.

     "I say plainly, then, I have not subscribed the Homilies, nor was it
     ever intended that any member of the English Church should be
     subjected to what, if considered as an extended confession, would
     indeed be a yoke of bondage. Romanism surely is innocent, compared
     with that system which should impose upon the conscience a thick
     octavo volume, written exactly, sentence by sentence: I cannot
     conceive any grosser instance of a pharisaical tradition than this
     would be. No: such a proceeding would render it impossible (I would
     say), for any one member, lay or clerical, of the Church to remain
     in it, who was subjected to such an ordeal. For instance; I do not
     suppose that any reader would be satisfied with the political
     reasons for fasting, though indirectly introduced, yet fully
     admitted and dwelt upon in the Homily on that subject. He would not
     like to subscribe the declaration that eating fish was a duty, not
     only as being a kind of fasting, but as making provisions cheap, and
     encouraging the fisheries. He would not like the association of
     religion with earthly politics.

     "How, then, are we bound to the Homilies? By the Thirty-fifth
     Article, which speaks as follows:---;The second Book of
     Homilies . . . doth contain a godly and wholesome doctrine, and
     necessary for these times, as doth the former Book of
     Homilies.' Now, observe, this Article does not speak of every
     statement made in them, but of the ;doctrine.' It speaks
     of the view or cast or body of doctrine contained in them. In spite
     of ten thousand incidental propositions, as in any large book, there
     is, it is obvious, a certain line of doctrine, which may be
     contemplated continuously in its shape and direction. For instance;
     if you say you disapprove the doctrine contained in the Tracts for
     the Times, no one supposes you to mean that every sentence and half
     sentence is a lie. I say then, that in like manner, when the Article
     speaks of the doctrine of the Homilies, it does not measure the
     letter of them by the inch, it does not imply that they contain no
     propositions which admit of two opinions; but it speaks of a certain
     determinate line of doctrine, and moreover adds, it is
     ;necessary for these times.' Does not this too show the
     same thing 1 If a man said, the Tracts for the Times are seasonable
     at this moment, as their title signifies, would he not speak of them
     as taking a certain line, and bearing in a certain way? Would he not
     be speaking, not of phrases or sentences, but of a
     ;doctrine' in them tending one way, viewed as a whole?
     Would he be consistent, if after praising them as seasonable, he
     continued, ;yet I do not pledge myself to every view or
     sentiment; there are some things in them hard of digestion, or
     overstated, or doubtful, or subtle?'

     "If any thing could add to the irrelevancy of the charge in
     question, it is the particular point in which it is urged that I
     dissent from the Homilies,---a question concerning the fulfilment
     of prophecy; viz. whether Papal Rome is Antichrist? An iron yoke
     indeed you would forge for thc conscience, when you oblige us to
     assent, not only to all matters of doctrine which the Homilies
     contain, but even to their opinion concerning the fulfilment of
     prophecy. Why, we do not ascribe authority in such matters even to
     the unanimous consent of all the fathers.

     "I will put what I have been saying in a second point of view. The
     Homilies are subsidiary to the Articles; therefore they are of
     authority so far as they bring out the sense of the Articles, and
     are not of authority where they do not. For instance, they say that
     David, though unbaptized, was regenerated, as you have quoted. This
     statement cannot be of authority, because it not only does not
     agree, but it even disagrees, with the ninth Article, which
     translates the Latin word ;renatis' by the English
     ;baptized.' But, observe, if this mode of viewing the
     Homilies be taken, as it fairly may, you suffer from it; for the
     Apocrypha, being the subject of an Article the comment furnished in
     the Homily is binding on you, whereas you reject it.

     "A further remark will bring us to the same point Another test of
     acquiescence in the doctrine of the Homilies is this:---Take
     their table of contents; examine the headings; these surely, taken
     together, will give the substance of their teaching. Now I hold
     fully and heartily the doctrine of the Homilies, under every one of
     these headings the only points to which I should not accede, nor
     think myself called upon to accede, would be certain matters, sub
     ordinate to the doctrines to which the headings refer---matters
     not of doctrine, but of opinion, as, that Rome is the Antichrist; or
     of historical fact, as, that there was a Pope Joan. But now, on the
     other hand, can you subscribe the doctrine of the Homilies under
     every one of its formal headings? I believe you cannot. The Homily
     against Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion is, in many of its
     elementary principles, decidedly uncongenial with your sentiments."

     This illustration of the subject may be thought enough; yet it may
     be allowable to add from the Homilies a number of propositions and
     statements of more or less importance, which are too much forgotten
     at this day, and are decidedly opposed to the views of certain
     schools of religion, which at the present moment are so eager in
     claiming the Homilies to themselves. This is not done, as the
     extract already read will show, with the intention of maintaining
     that they are one and all binding on the conscience of those who
     subscribe the Thirty-fifth Article; but since the strong language of
     the Homilies against the Bishop of Rome is often quoted, as if it
     were thus proved to be the doctrine of our Church, it may be as well
     to show that, following the same rule, we shall be also introducing
     Catholic doctrines, which indeed it far more belongs to a Church to
     profess than a certain view of prophecy, but which do not approve
     themselves to those who hold it. For instance, we read as
     follows:---

     1. "The great clerk and godly preacher, St. John Chrysostom"---1
     B. i. l. And, in like manner, mention is made elsewhere of St.
     Augustine, St. Ambrose, St. Hilary, St. Basil, St. Cyprian, St.
     Hierome, St. Martin, Origen, Prosper, Ecumenius, Photius, Bernardus,
     Anselm, Didymus, Theophylactus, Tertullian, Athanasius, Lactantius,
     (Cyrillus. Epiphanius, (Gregory, IrenÃSus, Clemens, Rabanus,
     Isidorus; Eusebius, Justinus Martyr, Optatus, Eusebius Emissenus,
     and Bede.

     2. "Infants, being baptized, and dying in their infancy, are by this
     Sacrifice washed from their sins . . . and they, which in act or
     deed do in after this baptism, when they turn to GOD unfeignedly,
     they are likewise washed by this Sacrifice," &c.---1 B. iii. 1.
     init.

     3. "Our office is, not to pass the time of this present life
     unfruitfully and idly, after that we are baptized or justified,"
     &c.---1 B. iii. 3.

     4. "By holy promises, we be made lively members of CHRIST, receiving
     the sacrament of Baptism. By like holy promises the sacrament of
     Matrimony knitteth man and wife in perpetual love."---1 B. vi;.
     1.

     5. "Let us learn also here [in the Book of Wisdom] by the infallible
     and undeceivable Word of GOD, that," &c.---1 B. x. 1.

     6. "The due receiving of His blessed Body and Blood under the form
     of bread and wine."---Note at end of B. i.

     7. "In the Primitive Church, which was most holy and godly . . .
     open offenders were not suffered once to enter into the house of the
     LORD . . . until they had done open penance . . . but this was
     practised, not only upon mean persons, but also upon the rich,
     noble, and mighty persons, yea, upon Theodosius, that puissant and
     mighty Emperor, whom . . . St. Ambrose . . . did . . .
     excommunicate." 2 B. i. 2.

     8. "Open offenders were not . . . admitted to common prayer, and the
     use of the holy sacraments"---Ibid.

     9. "Let us amend this our negligence and contempt coming to the
     house of the LORD; and resorting, thither diligently together, let
     us there . . . celebrating also reverently the LORD'S holy
     sacraments, serve the LORD in His holy house."---Ibid.

     10. "Contrary to the . . . most manifest doctrine of the Scriptures,
     and contrary to the usages of the Primitive Church, which was most
     pure and uncorrupt, and contrary to the sentences and judgments of
     the most ancient, learned and godly doctors of the Church."---2
     B. ii. 1. init.

     11. "This truth . . . was believed and taught by the old holy
     fathers, and most ancient learned doctors, and received by the old
     Primitive Church, which was most uncorrupt and pure."---2 B. ii:
     2. init.

     12. "Athanasius, a very ancient, holy, and learned bishop and
     doctor."---Ibid.

     13. "Cyrillus, an old and holy doctor"---Ibid.

     14. "Epiphanius, Bishop of Salamine, in Cyprus, a very holy and
     learned man."---Ibid.

     15. "To whose (Epiphanius's) judgment you have . . . all the
     learned and godly bishops and clerks, yea, and the whole Church of
     that age," [the Nicene] "and so upward to our SAVIOUR CHRIST'S
     time, by the space of about four hundred years, consenting and
     agreeing."---Ibid.

     16. "Epiphanius, a bishop and doctor of such antiquity, holiness,
     and authority."---Ibid.

     17. "St. Augustine, the best learned of all ancient
     doctors."---Ibid.

     18. "That ye may know why and when, and by whom images were first
     used privately, and afterwards not only received into Christian
     churches and temples, but, in conclusion, worshipped also; and how
     the same was gainsaid, resisted, and forbidden, as well by godly
     bishops and learned doctors, as also by sundry Christian princes, I
     will briefly collect," &c. [The bishops and doctors which follow
     are:] St. Jerome, Serenus, Gregory, the Fathers of the Council of
     Eliberis."

     19. "Constantine, Bishop of Rome, assembled a council of bishops of
     the West, and did condemn Philippicus, the Emperor, and John, Bishop
     of Constantinople, of the heresy of the Monothelites, not without a
     cause indeed, but very justly."---Ibid.

     20. "Those six Councils which were allowed and received, of all
     men."---Ibid.

     21. "There were no images publicly by the space of almost seven
     hundred years. And there is no doubt but the Primitive Church, next
     the Apostles' times, was most pure." ---Ibid.

     22. "Let us beseech GOD that we, being warned by His holy Word . . .
     and by the writings of old godly doctors and ecclesiastical
     histories," &c.---Ibid.

     23. "It shall be declared, both by GOD'S Word, and the
     sentences of the ancient doctors, and judgment of the Primitive
     Church," &c.---2 n. ii. 3.

     24. "Saints, whose souls reign in joy with GOD."---Ibid.

     25. "That the law of GOD is likewise to be understood against all
     our images . . . appeareth further by the judgment of the old
     doctors and the Primitive Church."---Ibid.

     26. "The Primitive Church, which is specially to be followed, as
     most incorrupt and pure."---Ibid.

     27. "Thus it is declared by GOD'S Word, the sentences of the
     doctors, and the judgment of the Primitive Church."---Ibid.

     28. "The rude people, who specially, as the Scripture teacheth, are
     in danger of superstition and idolatry; viz. Wisdom xiii.
     xiv."---Ibid.

     29. "They [the ;learned and holy bishops and doctors of the
     Church' of the eight first centuries] were the preaching
     bishops .... And as they were most zealous and diligent so were they
     of excellent learning and godliness of life and by both of great
     authority and credit with the people.---Ibid.

     30. "The most virtuous and best learned, the most diligent also, and
     in number almost infinite, ancient fathers, bishops, and doctors . .
     . could do nothing against images and idolatry."---Ibid.

     31. "As the Word of God testifieth, Wisdom iv."---Ibid.

     32. " The saints, now reigning in heaven with GOD."---Ibid.

     33. " The fountain of our regeneration is there [in GOD' house]
     presented unto us."---2 B. iii.

     36. "Somewhat shall now be spoken of one particular good work, whose
     commendation is both in the law and in the Gospel [fasting]."---2
     B. iv. 1.

     37. " If any man shall say . . . we are not now under the yoke of
     the law, we are set at liberty by the freedom of the Gospel;
     therefore these rites and customs of the old law bind not us, except
     it can be showed by the Scriptures of the New Testament, or by
     examples out of the same, that fasting, now under the Gospel, is a
     restraint of meat, drink and all bodily food and pleasures from the
     body, as before: that we ought to fast, is a truth more manifest,
     then it should here need, to be proved . . . Fasting, even by
     CHRIST'S assent, is a withholding meat, drink, and all natural
     food from the body," &c.---Ibid.

     38. "That it [fasting] was used in the Primitive Church, appeareth
     most evidently by the Chalcedon council, one of the first four
     general councils. The fathers assembled there . . . . decreed in
     that council that every person, as well in his private as public
     fast, should continue all the day without meat and drink, till after
     the evening prayer. . . . . This Canon teacheth how fasting was used
     in the Primitive Church."---Ibid. [The council was A.D. 452.]

     39. "Fasting then, by the decree of those 630 fathers, grounding
     their determinations in this matter upon the sacred Scriptures . . .
     is a withholding of meat, drink, and all natural food from the body,
     for the determined time of fasting."---Ibid.

     40. "The order or decree made by the elders for washing ofttimes,
     tending to superstition, our SAVIOUR CHRIST altered and changed the
     same in His Church, into a profit able sacrament, the sacrament of
     our regeneration or new birth." ---2 B. iv. 2.

     41. "Fasting, thus used with prayer is of great efficacy and
     weigheth much with God, so the angel Raphael told
     Tobias."---Ibid.

     42. "As he" [St. Augustine] "witnesseth in another place, the
     martyrs and holy men in times past were wont after their death to be
     remembered and named of the priest at divine service; but never to
     be invocated or called upon."---2B.vii.2.

     43. "Thus you see that the authority both of Scripture and also of
     Augustine, doth not permit that we should pray to them."---Ibid.

     44. "To temples have the Christians customably used to resort from
     time to time as to most meet places, where they might . . . receive
     His holy sacraments ministered unto them duly and purely."---2 B.
     viii. 1.

     45. "The which thing both CHRIST and His apostles, with all the rest
     of the holy fathers, do sufficiently declare so."---Ibid.

     46. "Our godly predecessors, and the ancient fathers of the
     Primitive Church, spared not their goods to build
     churches."---Ibid.

     47. "If we will show ourselves true Christians, if we will be
     followers of CHRIST our MASTER, and of those godly fathers that have
     lived before us, and now have received the reward of true and
     faithful Christians," &c.---Ibid.

     48. "We must . . . come unto the material churches and temples to
     pray . . . whereby we may reconcile ourselves to GOD, be partakers
     of His holy sacraments, and be devout hearers of His holy
     Word,"---Ibid.

     49. "It [Ordination] lacks the promise of remission of sin, as all
     other sacraments besides the two above name do. Therefore neither
     it, nor any other sacrament else, be such sacraments as Baptism and
     the Communion are." 2 Hom. ix.

     50. "Thus we are taught, both by the Scriptures an ancient doctors,
     that," &c.---Ibid.

     51. "The holy apostles and disciples of CHRIST . . . the godly
     fathers also, that were both before and since CHRIST, endued without
     doubt with the HOLY GHOST, . . they both do most earnestly exhort
     us, &c.... that we should remember the poor . . . St. Paul crieth
     unto us after this sort .... Isaiah the Prophet teacheth us on this
     wise. . . And the holy father Tobit giveth this counsel. And the
     learned and godly doctor Chrysostom giveth this admonition .... But
     what mean these often admonitions and earnest exhortations of the
     prophets, apostles, fathers, and holy doctors?" 2 B. xi. 2.

     52. "The holy fathers, Job and Tobit."---Ibid.

     53. "CHRIST, whose especial favour we may be assured by this means
     to obtain," [viz. by almsgiving]---2 B. xi. 2.

     54. "Now will I . . . show unto you how profitable it is for us to
     exercise them [alms-deeds] . . . [CHRIST'S saying] serveth to .
     . . prick us forwards . . . to learn . . . how may recover our
     health, if it be lost or impaired, and how it may be defended and
     maintained if we have it. Yea, He teacheth us also therefore to
     esteem that as a precious medicine and an inestimable jewel that
     hath such strength and virtue in it, that can either procure or
     preserve so incomparable a treasure."---Ibid.

     55. "Then He and His disciples were grievously accused of the
     Pharisees, . . . because they went to meat and washed not their
     hands before, . . . CHRIST, answering their superstitious complaint,
     teacheth them an especial remedy how to keep clean their souls, . .
     . Give alms," &c.---Ibid.

     56. "Merciful alms-dealing is profitable to purge the soul from the
     infection and filthy spots of sin."---Ibid.

     57. "The same lesson doth the HOLY GHOST teach in sundry places of
     the Scripture saying, ;Mercifulness and almsgiving,' &c.
     [Tobit iv.] . . . The wise preacher, the son of Sirach, confirmeth
     the same, when he says, that ;as water quencheth burning
     fire,'"&c.---Ibid.

     58. "A great confidence may they have before the high GOD, that show
     mercy and compassion to them that are afflicted."---Ibid.

     59. "If ye have by any infirmity or weakness been touched or annoyed
     with them . . . straightway shall mercifulness wipe and wash them
     away as salves and remedies to heal their sores and grievous
     disease."---Ibid.

     60. "And therefore that holy father Cyprian admonisheth to consider
     how wholesome and profitable it is to relieve the needy, &c.... by
     the which we may purge our sins and heal our wounded
     souls."---Ibid.

     61. "We be therefore washed in our baptism from the filthiness of
     sin, that we should live afterwards in the pureness of life."---2
     B. xiii. 1.

     62. "By these means [by love, compassion, &c.] shall we move GOD to
     be merciful to our sins."---Ibid.

     63. "He was dead,' saith St. Paul, ; for our sins,
     and rose again for our justification' . . . He died to destroy
     the rule of the devil in us, and He rose again to send down His HOLY
     SPIRIT to rule in our hearts, to [endow] us with perfect
     righteousness."---2 B. xiv.

     64. "The ancient Catholic fathers," [in marg.] IrenÃSus, Ignatius,
     Dionysius, Origen, Optatus, Cyprian, Athanasius, .... "were not
     afraid to call this supper, some of them, the salve of immortality
     and sovereign preservative against death; other, the sweet dainties
     of our SAVIOUR, the pledge of eternal health, the defence of faith,
     the hope of the resurrection; other, the food of immortality, the
     healthful grace, and the conservatory to everlasting life."---2
     B. xv. 1.

     65. "The meat we seek in this supper is spiritual for the
     nourishment of our souls, a heavenly refection, and an earthly; an
     invisible meat and not bodily; a ghostly substance and not
     carnal."---Ibid.

     66. "Take this lesson . . . of Emissenus, a godly father, that . . .
     thou look up with faith upon the holy body a blood of thy GOD, thou
     marvel with reverence, thou touch with thy mind, thou receive it
     with the hand of thy heart and thou take it fully with thy inward
     man."---Ibid.

     67. "The saying of the holy martyr of GOD, St. Cyprian ---2 B.
     xx. 3.

     Thus we see the authority of the fathers, of the first councils, and
     of the judgements of the Church generally, holiness of the Primitive
     Church, the inspiration of Apocrypha, the sacramental character of
     marriage other ordinances, the Real Presence in the Eucharist,
     Church's power of excommunicating kings, the profitableness of
     fasting, the propitiatory virtue of good works, the Eucharistic
     commemoration, and justification by a righteousness [within us], are
     taught in the Homilies. Let it said again, it is not here asserted
     that a subscription to; and every of these quotations is involved in
     the subscription of an Article which does but generally approve the
     Homilies: but they who insist so strongly on our Church holding that
     the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist because the Homilies declare it,
     should recollect that there are other doctrines contained in them
     beside it, which they [themselves] should be understood to hold,
     before their argument has the force of consistency.
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 12.---The Bishop of Rome.

     Article xxxviii.---"The Bishop of Rome hath no jurisdiction in
     this realm of England."

     By "hath" is meant "ought to have," as the Articl in the 36th Canon
     and the Oath of Supremacy show, in which the same doctrine is drawn
     out more at length. "No foreign prince, person, prelate, state, or
     potentate, hath, or ought to have, any jurisdiction, power,
     superiority, pre-eminence, or authority, ecclesiastical or
     spiritual, within this realm."

     This is the profession which every one must in consistency make, who
     does not join the Roman Church. If the Bishop of Rome has
     jurisdiction and authority here, why do we not acknowledge it, and
     submit to him? To say then the above words, is nothing more or less
     than to say "I am not a Roman Catholic;" and whatever reasons there
     are against saying them, are so far reasons against remaining in the
     English Church. They are a mere enunciation of the principle of
     Anglicanism.

     Anglicans maintain that the supremacy of the Pope is not directly
     from revelation, but an event in Providence. All things may be
     undone by the agents and causes by which they are done. What
     revelation gives, revelation takes away; what Providence gives,
     Providence takes away. GOD ordained by miracle, He reversed by
     miracle, the Jewish election; He promoted in the way of Providence,
     and He cast down by the same way, the Roman empire. "The powers that
     be, are ordained of GOD," while they be, and have a claim on our
     obedience. When they cease to be, they cease to have a claim. They
     cease to be when GOD removes them. He may be considered to remove
     them when He undoes what He had done. The Jewish election did not
     cease to be, when the Jews went into captivity: this was an event in
     Providence; and what miracle had ordained, it was miracle that
     annulled. But the Roman power ceased to be when the barbarians
     overthrew it; for it rose by the sword, and it therefore perished by
     the sword. The Gospel Ministry began in CHRIST and His Apostles; and
     what they began, they only can end. The Papacy began in the
     exertions and passions of man; and what man can make, man can
     destroy. Its jurisdiction, while it lasted, was "ordained of GOD;"
     when it ceased to be, it ceased to claim our obedience; and it
     ceased to be at the Reformation. The Reformers, who could not
     destroy a Ministry, which the Apostles began, could destroy a
     Dominion which the Popes founded.

     Perhaps the following passage will throw additional light upon this
     point:---

     "The Anglican view of the Church has ever been this: that its
     portions need not otherwise have been united together for their
     essential completeness, than as being descended from one original.
     They are like a number of colonies sent out from a mother-country. .
     . . . Each Church is independent of all the rest, and is to act on
     the principle of what may be called Episcopal independence, except,
     indeed, so far as the civil power unites any of them together. . . .
     Each diocese is a perfect independent Church, sufficient for itself;
     and the communion of Christians one with another, and the unity of
     them altogether, lie, not in a mutual understanding, intercourse,
     and combination, not in what they do in common, but in what they are
     and have in common, in their possession of the Succession, their
     Episcopal form, their Apostolical faith, and the use of the
     Sacraments. . . . . Mutual intercourse is but an accident of the
     Church, not of its essence. . . . . Intercommunion is a duty, as
     other duties, but is not the tenure or instrument of the communion
     between the unseen world and this; and much more the confederacy of
     sees and churches, the metropolitan, patriarchal, and papal systems,
     are matters of expedience or of natural duty from long custom, or of
     propriety from gratitude and reverence, or of necessity from
     voluntary oaths and engagements, or of ecclesiastical force from the
     canons of Councils, but not necessary in order to the conveyance of
     grace, or for fulfilment of the ceremonial law, as it may be called,
     or unity. Bishop is superior to bishop only in rank, not in real
     power; and the Bishop of Rome, the head of the Catholic world, is
     not the centre of unity, except as having a primacy of order.
     Accordingly, even granting for argument's sake, that the
     English Church violated a duty in the 16th century, in releasing
     itself from the Roman supremacy, still it did not thereby commit
     that special sin, which cuts off from it the fountains of grace, and
     is called schism. It was essentially complete without Rome, and
     naturally independent of it; it had, in the course of years, whether
     by usurpation or not, come under the supremacy of Rome; and now,
     whether by rebellion or not, it is free from it: and as it did not
     enter into the Church invisible by joining Rome, so it was not cast
     out of it by breaking from Rome. These were accidents in its
     history, involving, indeed, sin in individuals, but not affecting
     the Church as a Church.

     "Accordingly, the Oath of Supremacy declares ;that no foreign
     prelate hath or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, pre-eminence,
     or authority within this realm.' In other words, there is
     nothing in the Apostolic system which gives an authority to the Pope
     over the Church, such as it does not give to a Bishop. It is
     altogether an ecclesiastical arrangement; not a point de fide, but
     of expedience, custom, or piety, which cannot be claimed as if the
     Pope ought to have it, any more than, on the other hand, the King
     could of Divine right claim the supremacy; the claim of both one and
     the other resting, not on duty or revelation, but on specific
     engagement. We find ourselves, as a Church, under the King now, and
     we obey him; we were under the Pope formerly, and we obeyed him.
     ;Ought' does not, in any degree, come into the question."
       _______________________________________________________________

     Conclusion
     .

     One remark may be made in conclusion. It may be objected that the
     tenor of the above explanations is anti-Protestant, whereas it is
     notorious that the Articles were drawn up by Protestants, and
     intended for the establishment of Protestantism; accordingly, that
     it is an evasion of their meaning to give them any other than a
     Protestant drift, possible as it may be to do so grammatically, or
     in each separate part.

     But the answer is simple:
    1. In the first place, it is a duty which we owe both to the Catholic
       Church and to our own, to take our reformed confessions in the most
       Catholic sense they will admit; we have no duties toward their
       framers. [Nor do we receive the Articles from their original
       framers, but from several successive convocations after their time;
       in the last instance, from that of 1662.]
    2. In giving the Articles a Catholic interpretation, we bring them in
       to harmony with the Book of Common Prayers, an object of the most
       serious moment in those who have given their assent to both
       formularies.
    3. Whatever be the authority of the [Declaration] prefixed to the
       Articles, so far as it has any weight at all, it sanctions the mode
       of interpreting them above given. For its enjoining the "literal
       and grammatical sense," relieves us from the necessity of making
       the known opinions of their framers, a comment upon their text; and
       its forbidding any person to "affix any new sense to any Article,"
       was promulgated at a time when the leading men of our Church were
       especially noted for those Catholic views which have been here
       advocated.
    4. It may be remarked, moreover, that such an interpretation is in
       accordance with the well-known general leading of Melanchthon, from
       whose writings our Articles are principally drawn, and whose
       Catholic tendencies gained for him that same reproach of popery,
       which has ever been so freely bestowed upon members of our own
       reformed Church.
       "Melanchthon was of opinion, says Mosheim, "that, for the sake of
       peace and concord, many thing might be given up and tolerated in
       the Church of Rome, which Luther considered could by no means be
       endured. . . . In the class of matters indifferent, this great man
       and his associates placed many things which had appeared of the
       highest importance to Luther, and could not of consequence be
       considered as indifferent by his true disciples. For he regarded as
       such, the doctrine of justification by faith alone; the necessity
       of good works to eternal salvation; the number of the sacraments;
       the jurisdiction claimed by the Pope and the Bishops; extreme
       unction; the observation of certain religious festivals, and
       several superstitious rites and ceremonies."---Cent. XVI. ÃY 3,
       part 2. 27, 28
       .
    5. Further: the Articles are evidently framed on the principle of
       leaving open large questions, on which the controversy hinges. They
       state broadly extreme truths, and are silent about their
       adjustment. For instance, they say that all necessary faith must be
       proved from Scripture, but they do not say who is to prove it. They
       say that the Church has authority in controversies, they do not say
       what authority. They say that it may enforce nothing beyond
       Scripture, but do not say where the remedy lies when it does. They
       say the works before grace and justification are worthless and
       worse, and that works after grace and justification are acceptable,
       but they do not speak at all of works with GOD'S aid, before
       justification. They say that men are lawfully called and sent to
       minister and preach, who are chosen and called by men who have
       public authority given them in the congregation to call and send;
       but they do not add by whom the authority is to be given. They say
       that councils called by princes may err; they do not determine
       whether councils called in the name of CHRIST will err.

     [6. The variety of doctrinal views contained in the Homilies, as
     above shown, views which cannot be brought under Protestantism
     itself, in its widest comprehension of opinions, is an additional
     proof, considering the connexion of the Articles with the Homilies,
     that the Articles are not framed on the principle of excluding those
     who prefer the theology of the early ages to that of the
     Reformation; or rather since both Homilies are Articles appeal to
     the Fathers and Catholic antiquity, let it be considered whether, in
     interpreting them by these, we are not going to the very authority
     to which they profess to submit themselves.]
    7. Lastly, their framers constructed them in such a way as best to
       comprehend those who did not go so far in Protestantism as
       themselves. Anglo-Catholics then are but the successors and
       representatives of those moderate reformers; and heir case has been
       directly anticipated in the wording of the Articles. It follows
       that they are not perverting, they are using them, for an express
       purpose for which among others their authors framed them. The
       interpretation they take was intended to be admissible; though not
       that which their authors took themselves. Had it not been provided
       for, possible the Articles never would have been accepted by our
       Church at all. If, then, their framers have gained their side of
       the compact in effecting the reception of the Articles, the
       Catholics have theirs too in retaining their own Catholic
       interpretation of them.

     An illustration of this occurs in the history of the 28th Article.
     In the beginning of Elizabeth's reign a paragraph formed part
     of it, much like that which is now appended to the Communion
     Service, but in which the Real Presence was denied in words. It was
     adopted by the clergy at the first convocation, but not published.
     Burnet observes on it thus:---

     "When these Articles were first prepared by the convocation in Queen
     Elizabeth's reign, this paragraph was made a part of them; for
     the original subscription by both houses of convocation, yet extant,
     shows this. But the design of the government was at that time much
     turned to the drawing over the body of the nation to the
     Reformation, in whom the old leaven had gone deep; and no part of it
     deeper than the belief of the corporeal presence of CHRIST in the
     Sacrament; therefore it was thought not expedient to offend them by
     so particular a definition in this matter; in which the very word
     Real Presence was rejected. It might, perhaps, be also suggested,
     that here a definition was made that went too much upon the
     principles of natural philosophy; which how true soever, they might
     not be the proper subject of an article of religion. Therefore it
     was thought fit to suppress this paragraph; though it was a part of
     the Article that was subscribed, yet it was not published, but the
     paragraph that follows, ;The Body of CHRIST,' &c., was put
     in its stead, and was received and published by the next
     convocation; which upon the matter was a full explanation of the way
     of CHRIST'S presence in this Sacrament; that ;He is by
     which He is received.' This seemed to be more theological; and
     it does indeed amount to the same thing. But howsoever we see what
     was the sense of the first convocation in Queen Elizabeth's
     reign, it differed in nothing from that in King Edward's time;
     and therefore though this paragraph is now no part of our Articles,
     yet we are certain that the clergy at that time did not at all doubt
     of the truth of it; we are sure it was their opinion; since they
     subscribed it, though they did not think fit to publish it at first;
     and though it was afterwards changes for another, that was the same
     in sense."---Burnet on Article XXVIII., p. 416.

     What lately has taken place in the political world will afford an
     illustration in point. A French minister, desirous of war,
     nevertheless, as a matter of policy, draws up his state papers in
     such moderate language, that his successor, who is for peace, can
     act up to them, without compromising his own principles. The world,
     observing this, has considered it a circumstance for congratulation;
     as if the former minister, who acted a double part, had been caught
     in his own snare. It is neither decorous, nor necessary, nor
     altogether fair, to urge the parallel rigidly; but it will explain
     what it is here meant to convey. The Protestant Confession was drawn
     up with the purpose of including Catholics; and Catholics now will
     not be excluded. What was an economy in the reformers, now a
     protection to us. What would have been a perplexity to us then, is a
     perplexity to Protestants now. We could not then have found fault
     with their words; they cannot now repudiate our meaning.

     OXFORD,

     The Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul,

     1841.
