                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                   SERMONS FOR SAINTS' DAYS AND HOLIDAYS.

                     (No. 4. ST. PHILIP AND ST. JAMES.)

                                 [Number 60]
     __________________________________________________________________

       "If any man love not the LORD JESUS CHRIST, let him be Anathema,
                       Maranatha."---1 Cor. xvi. 21.
       _______________________________________________________________

     THE services appointed by the Church for this festival of St. Philip
     and St. James, turn our attention very particularly to the subject
     of personal live and devotion to our Lord. St. James was, in some
     sense, His brother. St. Philip seems, by what is related of him, to
     have had, in some respects, a more simple and uneducated mind than
     the other Apostles: and, accordingly, to have sought our Saviour
     with a faith not unlike that with which a pious untaught countryman
     may be supposed to seek Him now. Thus, when our Saviour had first
     called him, and he in his turn would persuade Nathanael to come to
     Him, and Nathanael made the objection so obvious to a Jew, Can any
     good thing come our of Nazareth? Philip did not pretend at all to
     argue the matter with him, but simply said, as a plain man might,
     "Come and see."

     And again, it was of St. Philip that our Saviour, with a kind of
     cheerful condescension, made as if He would ask advice, when He was
     about to feed the five thousand with a few loaves and fishes, and so
     to prefigure that Divine Feast, which He meant in due time to ordain
     for the spiritual food of the whole world. "Whence shall we buy
     bread that these may eat?" The Apostle answered in a homely,
     straightforward way, as one having no suspicion that our Lord meant
     more than He said, "Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not
     sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a little." It
     would seem quite in unison with this sort of simple-mindedness, very
     sincere, but rather unreflecting, that St. Philip should take that
     part which the Gospel of the day records of him, in the farewell
     conversation between our Lord and His Apostles. When CHRIST had
     said, He was the way, the truth, and the life: when He had assured
     them, that if they had known Him, they had known the Father; when He
     pointed out to them, as the chief fruit of His blessed Gospel made
     known to the world, that from henceforth they knew the Father, and
     had seen Him: St. Philip put up a request which shewed how possible
     it is, even for a thoroughly sincere person, to be very imperfect in
     his notions of Christian Truth: to be with CHRIST, and yet not to
     know Him. He said, "Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us."
     Bring us at once to the Beatific vision---bring us into clear and
     evident communion with Him, whom, as yet, we know only by
     faith---and that indeed is enough for us. The answer of our Lord
     is a calm and grave rebuke, intimating, that even at that time,
     before the Holy Ghost had come, when the knowledge of the Apostles
     was necessarily obscure and imperfect, St. Philip's ignorance
     was hardly such as might be excused. "Have I been so long time with
     you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip?" He that hath seen Me,
     hath seen the Father: and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?"
     Even before the Comforter came, the disciples of our Lord were to be
     blamed for their thoughtlessness, in not being aware of His divine
     nature and condescension, that He was the brightness of the
     FATHER'S glory, and the express image of His Person, GOD of
     GOD, made manifest in the flesh. And if then, much more now: much
     more utterly without excuse are those who refuse to know Him as He
     is, now that the COMFORTER has been so long time with the Church:
     that SPIRIT of wisdom, a part of whose especial office was to make
     Christians rightly receive the three great Evangelical mysteries:
     the Trinity, the Incarnation, and the Communion of Saints: according
     to the promise of our Saviour, "At that day ye shall know that I am
     in my FATHER, and ye in Me, and I in you."

     I say, the rebuke of our Saviour to St. Philip is a clear sign, that
     when Scripture speaks so highly of personal love and devotion to our
     Lord as being "the one thing needful," it means love and devotion to
     Him, not such as we may rashly imagine Him to be without warrant of
     His holy Word, as interpreted by His Church, but such as He really
     is. There could be no question about St. Philip's attachment to
     Him, and yet we see he incurred rebuke, simply for being so
     imperfect in his notion of his Lord. How would he have fared if he
     had been really and positively erroneous? if, while he trusted in
     the Holy JESUS, he had yet closed with rash speculations concerning
     Him: had made up his mind to consider Him as no more than a great
     Prophet, especially gifted with the inspiration of the HOLY GHOST?
     Or again, if he had chosen to regard Him as a created---though
     ever so glorious---angel? Doubtless, in that case, he would have
     been charged with something worse than mere thoughtless simplicity;
     his fault would then have been nearer to Pharisaical presumption,
     intruding men's opinions and fancies into the place of
     GOD'S Truth. And yet he might have been really attached to our
     Lord's Person, and might have depended on Him, and no other,
     for health and salvation.

     Now this point, that CHRIST is to be loved and served, not such as
     men choose to imagine Him, but such as He really and truly
     is---this point requires, if I mistake not, to be very seriously
     recalled to men's remembrance, at the present moment in the
     Christian Church. For the form which human presumption seems now
     inclined to take is nearly such as this following: (and, what is
     very remarkable, it is found among various classes of religionists,
     who think themselves, and are in many respects, diametrically
     opposed to each other. But this is, as it were, a point to which, at
     sundry distances, their errors appear to converge :) namely, That in
     the matter of acceceptance [sic] with God, sentiment, feeling,
     assurance, attachment, towards JESUS CHRIST, is all in all: that
     definite notions of His Person, Nature, and Office, may very well be
     dispensed with, provided only the heart feel warm towards Him, and
     inclined to rely upon Him entirely for salvation: that the high
     mysteries of the orthodox Catholic Faith, the Trinity, the
     Incarnation, and Communion with our Lord through His Sacraments, are
     either unnecessary to be distinctly believed, or that such belief
     will come of itself, if only the above-mentioned feeling of
     dependence on CHRIST be sincere. Is not this the real tendency of a
     great deal that is said, thought, and written, at the present
     moment, in what is called "the religious world?" Is not such the
     plain fact, whether for good or for evil? A few obvious remarks,
     then, on the tendency and probable result of these things, may, by
     GOD'S blessing, have their use, coming, as we have seen they
     do, in strict accord with the Church Services of the day.

     Now, it may be at once allowed, that nothing can be said too high,
     nothing higher than Scripture has a thousand times said, concerning
     the saving virtue and acceptableness of true love and faith in JESUS
     CHRIST OUR LORD; and that, consequently, those who dwell on it
     exclusively, even in the wrong sense just mentioned, will always, of
     course, appear to have a great deal of Scripture to plead for
     themselves. But yet the same Scripture, with a very little humble
     attention, will show where the mistake lies. Take, for example, such
     a verse as this, the conclusion of St. Paul's First Epistle to
     the Corinthians: "If any man love not the LORD JESUS CHRIST, let him
     be Anathema, Maranatha:" let him be excluded from the communion of
     the Faithful, in the most awful form of any, by which the wilful
     sinner was pronounced accursed, when the Lord comes to judgment.
     What more easy than for a Commentator, so inclines, to fasten on
     such a verse as this, and assume that one only thing, by the laws of
     the Gospel, should exclude a man from Communion, and expose him to
     the highest of Church censures, viz. want of sincere zeal, want of
     love to our blessed SAVIOUR? How plausibly might it be contended,
     that where such zeal and love is, we are not nicely to inquire into
     a man's creed; that we may kneel by his side, and worship with
     him, though our notions directly contradict his concerning the
     nature of the CHRIST, the SAVIOUR whom we worship, if only both
     agree to own CHRIST as a Saviour. One might go on for ever applying
     the text, and others like it, in that way; but, as if on purpose to
     bar for ever all such bold speculations, see how St. Paul has
     enabled us to check, as it were, this verse, by comparison of
     others, which show in what sense its terms are really to be
     understood.

     First, as to love of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the same phrase occurs
     again at the end of another Epistle, in a form of blessing,
     parallel, as it were, to the curse we are now considering. "Grace be
     with all those who love our Lord JESUS CHRIST in sincerity." What is
     the "sincerity," the qualification here introduced? In order to
     serve the purpose of that system which is now becoming so very
     prevalent, the word ought to mean, simply, "well-meaning;" "freedom
     from all guile and hypocrisy;" the same, in short, as "being in
     earnest." But the true import of the word is, in all probability,
     something very different from this. It occurs but once in the New
     Testament, at least at all in a kindred sense: viz. in Titus ii. 7.
     where St. Paul exhorts a newly ordained Bishop, first, "to shew
     forth himself in all things a pattern of good works," and
     afterwards, "to shew forth in doctrine uncorruptness, gravity,
     sincerity, and sound speech, that cannot be condemned." The
     sincerity, therefore, or soundness, or enduring purity, of which St.
     Paul is speaking, would so far appear, in all probability, to be a
     quality of the doctrine, not of the believer's mind; or rather,
     perhaps, of both together. "Grace be with all those who love our
     Lord JESUS CHRIST in incorruption; with that sound, enduring love,
     which, being grounded on the truth of His Nature, will be able to
     withstand all things, as uncorrupt and glorified bodies will
     withstand the fires of the last day: grace be with all those who
     love JESUS CHRIST as they will love Him in Heaven, i.e. as truly GOD
     of GOD, made Man for our salvation."

     Next, observe that this anathema is not the only one pronounced by
     St. Paul in the New Testament. There is one passage more, in which
     he distinctly threatens the same penalty: and, in all reason, the
     two must be compared together. Let it be well considered, then, by
     such as imagine that sincerity of heart is every thing, and doctrine
     nothing, or very little, what they can make of the awful anathema at
     the beginning of the Epistle to the Galatians: "Though we, or an
     angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than that which
     we have preached unto you, let him be accursed."

     The two verses, compared with each other, lead inevitably to the
     following result, startling as it may sound to those imbued with the
     notions of the day, that part of the measure of a Christian
     teacher's sincerity in the love of JESUS CHRIST, is his
     agreement in the substance of his doctrine with the system first
     preached by the Apostles. It is not his amiable meaning towards
     those around him, no, nor yet what may seem his devout meaning
     towards GOD, which will shelter him from the Apostolic censure, if
     he swerve from the platform of Apostolical doctrine. And it is clear
     that the verse speaks of the whole Creed as a whole, which the
     Galatians had received of St. Paul. It does not leave them at
     liberty to choose out which articles they would consider as
     important according to their notion and experience of practical
     good, edifying effect, arising out of one more than another. But it
     supposes them to have received a certain "form of sound words,"
     which no abstract reasoning or theory of their own---nay, more,
     no miracles or other marks of heavenly authority, would warrant
     their adding to, or diminishing.

     Further, it is plain from the general tenor of the Epistle, that one
     particular by which this anathema was at that time incurred by some,
     was affirming the necessity of the Jewish ceremonial law as part of
     the conditions of the Christian covenant. Now surely there is not a
     priori any shew of abstract impossibility in a person's holding
     that error, and yet seeming to himself and all others to love our
     LORD JESUS CHRIST. Surely, all that in mistaken kindness is now said
     by way of extenuating false doctrine with regard to the Person of
     our LORD and SAVIOUR, might have been advanced a fortiori, in bar of
     the anathema against the seducers of the Galatians, whose mistake at
     first sight only touched His office. It might have been said, "What
     hinders, but these or any men may be full of dutiful regard to our
     blessed LORD, although they be not fully aware of the repeal of
     those laws of His, which He promulgated from Mount Sinai to be a
     ritual for His chosen people: and although in consequence they are
     still for enforcing those laws on Gentile Christians as necessary
     for salvation?" We see at once by St. Paul's peremptory
     sentence, how fallacious all such pleading would have been: how
     impossible to be tolerated within the true Church, and how dangerous
     to the souls of those who persisted in it after such authoritative
     warning. We see that the Preachers of Circumcision in those times,
     although they might feel, and in many respects act, as if they loved
     our LORD JESUS CHRIST, were not to be accounted as "loving Him in
     sincerity" and uncorruptness. We see that sincerity, enduing purity
     of doctrine in certain great points, is a necessary test of that
     love for CHRIST which is required to secure human error from the
     anathema of the Church; a necessary qualification for receiving an
     Apostolical blessing.

     This view receives no slight illustration from certain cases in the
     history of heresy; cases in which the false doctrine has recommended
     itself in the first instance to unguarded minds by the show of
     extraordinary love and respect for our Divine Master, and has ended
     in direct treason and blasphemy against Him. A very remarkable one
     occurred in Asia Minor, in the earlier half of the third century.
     St. Paul himself had expressly warned the Pastors of that division
     of Christendom, that they might expect men to arise of their
     ownselves, who should speak perverse things to draw away disciples
     after them. This had begun to be accomplished in former generations
     by the swarming of Gnosticks and Ebionites in those quarters:
     heresies which appear at first glance shocking to all lovers of
     CHRIST. But at the time now referred to, a more plausible
     misinterpretation arose; more plausible as a show of reverence to
     our Saviour's Person: the author of which was one Noetus,
     either of Smyrna or of Ephesus. We are told of him by St.
     Hippolytus, a writer almost contemporary with him, that "he was
     mightily lifted up by his vanity, and seduced by a fancy prompted by
     an alien spirit, affirmed that the CHRIST Himself, was
     ;personally' the FATHER, and that the FATHER Himself was
     born, and suffered, and died. These things came to the knowledge of
     the holy Presbyters of that time; by whom he was summoned and
     interrogated before the Church. At first he disavowed his holding
     any such opinion: but afterwards he found some to lurk amongst, and
     having provided himself with associates in error, he tried to make
     his theory permanent, now reduced into a distinct form. Upon which
     the holy Presbyters again summoned and called him to account. But he
     withstood them, using these words: ;What evil then am I doing
     in that I give glory to CHRIST? What harm have I done? I glorify one
     GOD; I know one GOD, and no other beside Him; and that He was
     begotten and born into the world; that He suffered and died for us."
     Could any thing be more plausible, according to the notion that all
     is safe if only men are brought to put their trust in our
     Saviour's Person alone? Might it not as truly then have been
     urged, as any one now can urge it, that the distinction of Persons
     in the glorious Godhead is merely a mode of speech, a scholastic
     theory, and that all was right if men could agree to worship our
     Saviour? The elders, however, of happy memory, before whom Noetus
     was answering, were aware of no such defence. According to the
     simplicity of the Gospel which they had learned, probably with
     allusion to the very words of their creed, they reply,---"We also
     have one only GOD, whom we know and acknowledge in truth; we know
     CHRIST; we know the SON, and acknowledge Him to have suffered as in
     truth He did suffer; to have died as in truth He did die; who rose
     again the third day, and is on the right hand of the Father, and is
     coming to judge quick and dead: AND WE AFFIRM THOSE THINGS WHICH WE
     HAVE BEEN TAUGHT." "Then having convicted him, they cast him out of
     the Church."

     It really should seem as if, by especial Providence, this fragment
     of early Church History had been preserved, in order to shew
     Christians how to deal with those heretics, who make their appeal
     with perverse ingenuity to the good feelings of believers at the
     expense of their orthodox conviction. If there come any man to you
     talking affectionately of JESUS CHRIST as our Redeemer, but
     scornfully of the need of acknowledging Him as Very GOD of Very GOD:
     if the words which have been put into our mouths by the Holy
     Fathers, Creeds, and Councils, are treated as the mere inventions of
     Platonists or Schoolmen: we have a clear precedent for the kind of
     answer we should give: we have no need to canvass objections, or to
     draw subtle distinctions, we have only to repeat our Creed with
     those blessed elders, and say, "The things which we have learned,
     those we affirm." If they say, "What harm do we, giving CHRIST all
     the glory?" we will tell them "CHRIST has taught His Church by His
     Scriptures in what way He will be glorified; and it is not for us to
     tolerate other ways, however they may challenge our admiration for
     their ingenuity, or our kindness by the seeming sincerity of their
     inventors."

     But such a course is too harsh; too peremptory in its censure of
     persons, to whom we dare not deny a certain share of well-meaning.
     This is a natural feeling, as it is natural to shrink, in all cases,
     from inflicting pain. But if experience show that no apparent piety
     to our Saviour will secure persons from the deadliest errors, if
     they allow themselves to take liberties with the old standard of the
     Father,---what shall we say? will it not then appear, that the
     better we think of the motives of our erring brethren, the greater
     their apparent devoutness and sincerity, the more anxious must we be
     to speak out, and pull them back, if possible, as brands out of the
     burning? Now, then what says experience? Take one instance out of a
     thousand: one of the most important that could have been mentioned;
     an instance unquestionably and directly relevant, and probably most
     fatal in its effects on the Church.

     Of all the heresies of the Lower Empire, there is none which, at
     first, appears more venial, more on the side of loyal Christian
     love, than that of the Monophysites, at least after they had
     renounced the error of their first founder, Eutyches, touching the
     reality of our Lord's crucified body. It would seem as if
     nothing but excessive reverence towards the glorified Son of Man,
     would lead men to deny the continuance of His human Nature: as
     though of the two, very God and very Man, the weaker were now, as it
     were, lost or absorbed for ever in the more glorious. In such a
     sect, therefore, of all others, one would expect the most entire
     alienation from those who deny CHRIST'S Godhead altogether. But
     what is the fact? When, about the year 640, the Saracens first
     invaded Egypt, this very party, the Monophysites, were the most
     numerous in that country, their priesthood being especially strong.
     Most unfortunately, a violent political as well as religious feud
     prevailed between them and the orthodox, or Greek party, commonly
     called Melchites, or Royalists, from their loyalty to the
     Constantinopolitan emperor,---so that not even intermarriages
     were allowed. For various reasons they considered themselves greatly
     oppressed: but, after all allowance made for considerations of that
     kind, it must be owned a lamentable indication of the tendency of
     their doctrine, that they actually received the Mussulmans with open
     arms. Their Patriarch of Alexandria, a man whose name long stood
     very high among them for sanctity, came to a regular treaty with the
     Caliph's lieutenant; in which it appears to have been
     stipulated that he, the Patriarch, should be restored to the
     episcopal throne of Alexandria, the whole sect for their part
     co-operating with the infidel invaders. As account has been
     preserved of the interchange of compliments between the Saracen
     leader and the Patriarch, on the return of the latter to the city,
     from which he had been long exiled. Amrou received him with the
     remark, that in all the countries which the Caliph had conquered, he
     had not met with any person of presence more august, and more worthy
     of a man of GOD. And he actually intreated, and, as it seems,
     obtained, his prayers for victory and safety in an expedition which
     he was just undertaking into West Africa and Pentapolis. The prayers
     of a Christian Archbishops, presiding over the sect which had
     separated from the Church on pretence of extraordinary reverence for
     CHRIST'S Person, were asked, and granted, in behalf of the
     Mahometan Antichrist, just then on the point of wasting provinces
     which had been, from the beginning, the pride and glory of the
     Christian world.

     There is, then, nothing extravagant in the supposition that heresy,
     even in its most attractive form of unusual loyalty to Christ, and
     jealousy of His honour, may prove but a step towards some
     God-denying apostacy. Whether or no any movement of the kind be at
     the moment perceptible among us, it surely will be well to bear such
     examples in memory. It is well that those who, from amiable
     confidence in the right feeling of themselves and others towards Him
     who is our common hope, are apt to make light of differences in
     doctrine concerning Him: it is well, I say, that that they should be
     aware to what point, before now, men have been led by such
     presumptuous differences. May we not imagine, even at that time, the
     scruples of some more considerate Copt overcome by such arguments as
     are now not rarely alleged, when any Churchman is seen to shrink
     from symbolizing with the corrupters of the Father, and despisers of
     the Church? May we not, without any violent improbability, represent
     to ourselves the venerable Patriarch Benjamin reasoning as follows
     with such an unwilling disciple? "Why should you be so very loth to
     act with these our Arabian brethren, whom you cannot deny to be our
     political deliverers? True, they deny that our Saviour is the SON of
     GOD; they do not even allow Him to be the greatest of the Prophets:
     but remember what Holy Scripture says; ;Grace be with all those
     who love our LORD JESUS CHRIST;' and surely it is possible for
     a Mussulman to love JESUS of Nazareth: nay, he cannot help doing so,
     if he be at all consistent: he must love one whom his own Scripture
     acknowledge as one of the greatest and most beneficent of heavenly
     messengers. Be of good cheer then: we and these our new allies are
     in reality much more unanimous than we have been used to imagine, in
     what we fundamentally believe. In religion, properly so called, we
     do not really differ from them. We all acknowledge with one voice
     the great facts of the Bible. They add, indeed, those of the Koran:
     but that is not of so much consequence, it being still possible for
     us all, in one sense or other, to love JESUS CHRIST. Let us, then,
     leave of contending about scholastic subtilties, and let us rather
     unite all our energies against the one common enemy, the exclusive
     system the old Church, that Church which so unphilosophically
     insists on our adoring the same LORD, confessing the same Faith, and
     holding by the same Baptism. In this way, we shall be left most sure
     to make our own high doctrines concerning our Lord and his sole
     uncompounded Nature thoroughly known to our people; and we shall do
     incalculably more good than we need fear doing harm by this our
     partial and apparent compromise with what may be erroneous in
     Mahometanism." If reasoning like this ought to have availed in
     reconciling sincere Eutychians to the Mussulman connexion, then, and
     not else, it seems intelligible how those who profess to advocate a
     peculiarly pure and spiritual view of Christianity, should readily
     unite with the deniers of the LORD that bought them; and, in other
     respects, more or less directly compromise the system of orthodox
     belief, where they think there is, humanly speaking, a fair chance
     of doing more good in the end.

     On the whole, there is evidently no security, no rest for the sole
     of one's foot, except in the form of sound words; the one
     definite system of doctrine, sanctioned by the one Apsotolical and
     primitive Church. People say, it is hard to bring men to agreement
     in this: but so is perfection hard in every duty. And besides, let
     the question be asked in all seriousness, is it not much harder to
     ascertain their agreement in right feeling towards our Saviour? If
     the illustration were not too familiar, one might say, it is like
     trying the temperature of a room; one man feels hot, and another
     cold; but those who would be precise and accurate rather settle the
     point by a thermometer. In truth, it should seem perfectly
     impossible to know whether two men exactly concur in feeling. And
     why, then, should it be counted wrong or absurd for them to accept
     at the hands of GOD'S Church the same form of words wherein to
     own her system of doctrine, which is one and the same definite
     thing, and quite independent, surely, of the individual receiving
     it?

     Again: it may be said that so strict a demand of orthodoxy is
     scarcely consistent with the encouragement given in Scripture to the
     more implicit faith of persons probably quite ignorant of doctrinal
     statements: such, for example, as the woman with an issue of blood,
     who, when she touched the hem of our Lord's garment, was so far
     ignorant of His true Omniscient Nature, that she thought of being
     healed without His knowing anything of it. May it not, however, be
     reasonably said, that her pious and affectionate faith was, in fact,
     the very type of that which saves men in the devout use of the means
     of grace which CHRIST bestows on us? According to her knowledge, so
     she received Him: and must we not receive Him in like manner
     according to our knowledge, as GOD manifest in the flesh? She came
     near and touched the hem of His garment, although she could not have
     explained how the touch should do her any good: and must we not in
     like manner approach Him in the devout use of His Sacraments,
     however impossible it must always be for us to understand how they
     should be the means of grace? She indeed was ignorant of some
     things: but involuntary ignorance is one thing, profane
     contradiction, or conceited scepticism, another. She had, perhaps,
     what some might account low superstitious notions of the way to
     profit by our Saviour: and on the other hand, if they who so judge
     had stood by and seen St. Peter, when, in anger at the very thought
     of the crucifixion, he took our Lord and began to rebuke Him, and
     said, This shall not be unto thee; and we may suppose they would
     have said, He may be mistaken, but any how his fault is on the right
     side: he cannot endure any low notion of his Saviour; depend upon
     it, he is the last to deny Him. We know how that proved on
     experiment; and perhaps, comparing the two together, we shall not be
     wrong if we conclude that the only safe way is to take GOD'S
     will exactly as we find it in His word as interpreted by His Church,
     and not to perplex ourselves with fancies, philosophical or other.
     So may we hope by GOD'S grace to obtain larger and completer
     views of our whole condition and duty, and build higher and higher
     as feeling that our foundation is sure. So may we hope to escape
     that curse, the terrible accompaniment generally of the
     Church's anathema, of continuing for ever wavering and unsteady
     in all the great rules and principles: "ever learning, and never
     able to come to the knowledge of the truth."

     OXFORD.

     The Feast of the Annunciation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
