                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                  ARCHBISHOP USSHER ON PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD

                          (Against Romanism No. 2.)

                                 [Number 72]
     __________________________________________________________________

                                ADVERTISEMENT.

     ONE great unfairness practised by Roman controversialists, has been
     to adduce, in behalf of their own peculiarities, doctrines or
     customs of the Primitive Church, which, resembling them in
     appearance, are really of a different character. Thus because the
     early Fathers spoke of the Holy Communion in. such reverent and
     glowing terms, as became those who understood its real nature and
     virtue, they have tried to make it appear that they believed in
     their own theory of Transubstantiation. Whereas they spoke of it as
     a commemorative sacrifice, they have thence taken occasion to make
     it a real and proper sacrifice. The doctrine of ecclesiastical
     penances, they have converted into the theory of satisfactions to
     Almighty God for sins committed. The existence of Apostolical
     Tradition, in the early Church, in behalf of the doctrines of the
     Trinity, Incarnation, and the like, has been made a pretence for
     introducing so called Apostolical Traditions concerning various
     unfounded opinions in faith and practice.

     But in no instance is this fallacious procedure more strikingly seen
     than as regards their doctrine of Purgatory, which they defend by
     notions and usages in the early Church, quite foreign to the
     distressing tenet which we challenge them to prove. This is shown
     with great learning and ability by the celebrated Archbishop Ussher
     in his Controversy with a Jesuit. At a time like the present, when
     many persons are in doubt whether they are not driven to an
     alternative of either giving up the primitive Fathers or embracing
     Popery, it may be useful to reprint the chapter on this subject from
     Ussher's work in a separate form.
       _______________________________________________________________

                           OF PRAYER FOR THE DEAD.

                                INTRODUCTION.

     PRAYER for the dead, as it is used in the Church of Rome, doth
     necessarily suppose Purgatory; and therefore whatsoever hath been
     alleged out of the Scriptures and Fathers against the one, doth
     stand in full force against the other: so that here we need not
     actum agere, and make a new work of overthrowing that which hath
     been sufficiently beaten down already. But on the other side, the
     admittal of Purgatory doth not necessarily infer Prayer for the
     dead: nay, if we shall suppose, with our adversaries, that Purgatory
     is the prison from whence none shall come out until they have paid
     the utmost farthing, their own paying, and not other men's
     praying, must be the thing they are to trust unto, if ever they look
     to be delivered out of that jail. Our Romanists indeed do commonly
     take it for granted, that
     "Purgatory and Prayer for the dead be so closely linked together,
     that the one doth necessarily follow the other;"
     but in so doing they reckon without their host, and greatly mistake
     the matter. For howsoever they may deal with their own devices as
     they please, and link .their prayers with their Purgatory as closely
     as they list; yet shall they never be able to shew, that the
     Commemoration and Prayers for the dead, used by the ancient Church,
     had any relation with their Purgatory; and therefore, whatsoever
     they were, Popish prayers we; are sure they were not. I easily
     foresee, that the full opening of the judgment of the Fathers in
     this point will hardly stand with that brevity which intended to use
     in treating of these questions; the particulars be so many, that
     necessarily do incur into the handling of this argument. But I
     suppose the reader will be content rather to dispense with me in
     that behalf, than be sent away unsatisfied in a matter wherein the
     adversary beareth himself confident beyond measure, that the whole
     stream of antiquity runneth clearly upon his side.

     ÃY 1. OF THE PERSONS FOR WHOM AFTER DEATH PRAYERS WERE OFFERED IN
     THE EARLY CHURCH.

     ÃY 2. OF THE PRIMARY INTENTION OF PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD.

     ÃY 3. OF THE PEACE AND CONDITION OF SOULS DEPARTED.

     ÃY 4. OF THE OPINION OF THE HERETIC AERIUS TOUCHING PRAYERS FOR THE
     DEAD.

     ÃY 5. OF THE PROFIT OF PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD TO THE PERSONS PRAYED
     FOR.
       _______________________________________________________________

      ÃY 1. Of the Persons for whom after death Prayers were offered in
                              the early Church.

     THAT the truth, then, of things may the better appear, we are here
     prudently to distinguish the original institution of the Church from
     the private opinions of particular doctors, which waded further
     herein than the general intendment of the Church did give them
     warrant; and diligently to consider, that the memorials, oblations,
     and prayers made for the dead at the beginning, had reference to
     such as rested from their labours, and not unto any souls which were
     thought to be tormented in that Utopian purgatory, whereof there was
     no news stirring in those days. This may be gathered,

     First, by the practice of the ancient Christians, laid down by the
     author of the Commentaries upon Job, which are wrongly ascribed unto
     Origen, in this manner:
     "We observe the memorials of the saints, and devoutly keep the
     remembrance of our parents or friends which die in the faith; as
     well rejoicing for their refreshing, as requesting also for
     ourselves a godly consummation in the faith. Thus therefore do we
     celebrate the death, not the day of the birth: because they which
     die shall live for ever. And we celebrate it, calling together
     religious persons with the priests, the faithful with the clergy;
     inviting moreover the needy and the poor, feeding the orphans and
     widows, that our festivity may be for a memorial of rest to the
     souls departed, whose remembrance we celebrate, and to us may become
     a sweet savour in the sight of the eternal God."

     Secondly, by that which St. Cyprian writeth of Laurentius and
     Ignatius, whom he acknowledgeth to have received of the Lord palms
     and crowns for their famous martyrdom, and yet presently addeth:

     "We offer sacrifices always for them, when we celebrate the passions
     and days of the martyrs with an anniversary commemoration."

     Thirdly, by that which we read in the author of the Ecclesiastical
     Hierarchy, set out under the name of Dionysius the Areopagite: for
     where the party deceased is described by him to have departed out of
     this life,
     "replenished with divine joy, as now not fearing any change to
     worse,"
     being come unto the end of all his labours, and to have been both
     privately acknowledged by his friends, and publicly pronounced by
     the ministers of the Church, to be a happy man, and to be verily
     admitted into the
     "society of the saints that have been from the beginning of the
     world;"
     yet doth he declare, that the Bishop made prayer for him, (upon what
     ground, we shall afterward hear,) that
     "God would forgive him all the sins that he had committed through
     human infirmity, and bring him into the light and the land of the
     living, into the bosoms of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, into the place
     from whence pain and sorrow and sighing flieth."

     Fourthly, by the funeral ordinances of the Church related by St.
     Chrysostom, which were appointed to admonish the living that the
     parties deceased were in a state of joy, and not of grief:
     "For tell me," saith he, "what do the bright lamps mean? do we not
     accompany them therewith as champions? What mean the hymns?"
     "Consider what thou dost sing at that time. Return, my soul, unto
     thy rest; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. And again:
     I will fear no evil, because thou art with me. Again: Thou art my
     refuge from the affliction that compasseth me. Consider what these
     Psalms mean."

     Fifthly, by the forms of prayers that are found in the ancient
     liturgies. As in that of the Churches of Assyria attributed unto St.
     Basil:
     "Be mindful, O Lord, of them which are dead, and are departed out of
     this life," and of the orthodox Bishops, which from Peter and James
     the Apostles until this day, have clearly professed the right word
     of faith; and namely, of Ignatius, Dionysis, Julius, and the rest of
     the saints of worthy memory. "Be mindful, O Lord, of them also which
     have stood unto blood for religion, and by righteousness and
     holiness have fed thy holy flock."
     And in the Liturgy fathered upon the Apostles:
     "We offer unto thee, for all the saints which have pleased thee from
     the beginning of the world, patriarchs, prophets, just men, apostles
     martyrs, confessors, bishops, priests, deacons," &c.
     And in the Liturgies of the Churches of Egypt, which carry the title
     of St. Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, and Cyril of Alexandria:
     "Be mindful, O Lord, of thy saints; vouchsafe to remember all thy
     saints which have pleased thee from the beginning, our holy fathers,
     the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs, confessors, preachers,
     evangelists, and all the souls of the just which have died in the
     faith; and especially the holy, glorious, the evermore Virgin Mary,
     the Mother of God and St. John the forerunner, the Baptist and
     Martyr; St. Stephen, the first deacon and martyr; St. Mark the
     apostle, evangelist and martyr," &c.
     And in the Liturgy of the Church of Constantinople, ascribed to St.
     Chrysostom:
     "We offer unto thee this reasonable service for those who are at
     rest in the faith, our forefathers, fathers, patriarchs, prophets,
     and apostles, preachers, evangelists, martyrs, confessors, religious
     persons, and every spirit perfected in the faith, but especially for
     our most holy, immaculate, most blessed Lady, the Mother of God and
     aye Virgin Mary."
     Which kind of oblation for the saints, sounding somewhat harshly in
     the ears of the Latins, Leo Thuscus, in his translation, thought
     best to express it to their better liking, after this manner:
     "We offer unto thee this reasonable service for the faithfully
     deceased, for our fathers, and forefathers, the patriarchs,
     prophets, apostles, martyrs, confessors, and all the saints
     interceding" for them.
     As if the phrase of "offering for the martyrs," were not to be found
     in St. Chrysostom's own works; and more universally
     "for the just, both the fathers, and the patriarchs, the prophets,
     and apostles, and evangelists, and martyrs, and confessors, the
     bishops, and such as led a solitary life, and the whole order,"
     in the suffrages of the Church rehearsed by Epiphanius. Yea, and in
     the Western Church itself:
     "for the spirits of those that are at rest, Hilary, Athanasius,
     Martin, Ambrose, Augustine, Fulgentius, Leander, Isidorus," &c.
     as may be seen in the Muzarabical Office, used in Spain.

     Sixthly, this may be confirmed out of the funeral orations of St.
     Ambrose; in one whereof, touching the Emperor Valentinian, and his
     brother Gratian, thus he speaketh:---
     "Let us believe that Valentinian is ascended from the desert, that
     is to say, from this dry and unmanured (inculto) place, unto those
     flowery delights, where being conjoined with his brother, he
     enjoyeth the pleasure of everlasting life. Blessed are you both, if
     my orisons shall prevail anything, no day shall overslip you in
     silence; no oration (oratio) of mine shall pass you ever unhonoured;
     no night shall run by, wherein I will not bestow upon you some
     portion of my prayers. With all oblations will I frequent you."
     In another, he prayeth thus unto God
     "Give rest to thy perfect servant Theodosius, that rest which thou
     hast prepared for thy saints."
     And yet he had said before of him:
     "Theodosius, of honourable memory, being freed from doubtful fight,
     doth now enjoy everlasting light, and continual tranquillity; and
     for the things which he did in this body, he rejoiceth in the fruits
     of God's reward; because he loved the Lord his God, he hath
     obtained the society of the saints."
     And afterward also,
     "Theodosius remaineth in light, and glorieth in the company of the
     saints."
     In a third, he prayeth thus, for his brother Satyrus:
     "Almighty God, I now commend unto thee his harmless soul; to thee do
     I make my oblation; accept mercifully, and graciously, the office of
     a brother, the sacrifice of a priest:"
     although he had directly pronounced of him before, that
     "he had entered into the kingdom of heaven, because he had believed
     the word of God,"
     and excelled in many notable virtues.
     Lastly, in one of his epistles, he comforteth Faustinus, for the
     death of his sister, after this manner:
     "Do not the carcases of so many half-ruined cities, and the funerals
     of so much land exposed under one view, admonish thee that the
     departure of one woman, although a holy and admirable one, should be
     borne with great consolation? especially, seeing they are cast down
     and overthrown for ever; but she being taken from us but for a time,
     doth pass a better life there. I, therefore, think that she is not
     so much to be lamented as to be followed with prayers, and am of the
     mind, that she is not to be made sad with thy tears, but rather that
     her soul should be commended with oblations unto the Lord."
     Thus far St. Ambrose, unto whom we may adjoin Gregory Nazianzen
     also; who, in the funeral oration that he made upon his brother
     Caesarius, having acknowledged that he had
     "received those honours that did befit a new created soul, which the
     Spirit had reformed by water,"
     (for he had been but lately baptized, before his departure out of
     this life,) doth, notwithstanding, pray that the Lord will.be
     pleased to receive him.

     Divers instances of the like practice in the ages following, I have
     produced in another place; to which I will add some few more, to the
     end that the reader may, from thence, observe how long the primitive
     institution of the Church did hold up head among the tares that grew
     up with it, and in the end did quite choke and extinguish it. Our
     English Saxons had learned of Gregory, to pray for relief of those
     souls that were supposed to suffer pain in Purgatory; and yet the
     introducing of that novelty was not able to justle out the ancient
     usage of making prayers and oblations for them, which were not
     doubted to have been at rest in God's kingdom. And, therefore,
     the brethren of the Church of Hexham, in the anniversary
     commemoration of the obit of Oswald, King of Northumberland, used
     "to keep their vigils, for the health of his soul;"
     and having spent the night in praising of GOD with Psalms,
     "to offer for him, in the morning, the sacrifice of the sacred
     oblation,"
     as Bede writeth; who telleth us yet withal, that he "reigned with
     GOD, in heaven," and by his prayers procured many miracles to be
     wrought on earth. So likewise both the same Bede report, that when
     it was discovered, by two several visions, that Hilda, the Abbess of
     Streamsheale, or Whitby, in Yorkshire, was carried up by the angels
     into heaven, they, which heard thereof, presently caused prayers to
     be said for her soul. And Osberne relateth the like of Dunstan; that
     being at Bath, and beholding in such another vision, the soul of one
     that had been his scholar, at Glastonbury, to be carried up into
     "the palace of heaven," he
     "straightway commended the same into the hands of the divine piety,"
     and entreated the lords of the place, here he was, to do so
     likewise.

     Other narrations, of the same kind, may be found among them that
     have written of the saints' lives; and particularly in the tone
     published by Mosander, p. 69, touching the decease of Bathildis,
     Queen of France, and p. 25, concerning the departure of Godfrey,
     Earl of Cappenberg, who is said there to have appeared unto a
     certain abbess, called Gerberis, and to have acquainted her,
     "that he was now, without all delay, and without all danger of any
     more severe trial, gone unto the palace of the highest King; and as
     the son of the immortal King, was clothed with blessed immortality."
     And the monk, that writ the legend, addeth, that she presently,
     thereupon
     "caused the sacrifice of the Mass to be offered for him."
     Which, how fabulous soever it may be for the matter of the vision,
     yet doth it strongly prove, that within these five-hundred years'
     (for no longer since is it that this is accounted to have been
     done,) the use of offering for the souls of those that were believed
     to be in heaven, was still retained in the Church. The letters of
     Charles the Great, unto Offa, King of Mercia, are yet extant;
     wherein he wisheth, that "intercession" should be made "for the soul
     of" Pope Adrian, then lately deceased
     "not having any doubt at all," saith he, "that his blessed soul is
     at rest: but, that we may show faithfulness and love unto our most
     dear friend. Even as St. Augustine also giveth directions, that
     intercessions ought to be made for all men of ecclesiastical piety;
     affirming, that to intercede for a good man, doth profit him that
     doeth it."

     Where the two ends of this kind of intercession are to be observed;
     the one, to show their love to their friend; the other, to get
     profit to themselves thereby, rather than to the party deceased.

     Lastly, Pope Innocent the Third, or the Second rather, being
     inquired of by the Bishop of Cremona, concerning the state of a
     certain priest, that died without baptism, resolveth: him out of St.
     Augustine, and St. Ambrose, that
     "because he continued in the faith of the holy mother of the Church,
     and the confession of the name of Christ, he was assoiled from
     original sin, and had attained the joy of the heavenly country."
     Upon which ground, at last, he maketh this conclusion;
     "Ceasing, therefore, all questions, hold the sentences of the
     learned Fathers; and command continual prayers, and sacrifices, to
     be offered unto GOD, in thy Church for the foresaid priest."
       _______________________________________________________________

           ÃY 2. On the primary intention of Prayers for the Dead.

     Now, having thus declared, unto what kind of persons the
     Commemorations ordained by the ancient Church did extend, the next
     thing that cometh to consideration is, what we are to conceive of
     the primary intention of those prayers, that were appointed to be
     made therein. And here we are to understand, that first, prayers of
     praise and thanksgiving were presented unto GOD, for the blessed
     estate that the party deceased was now entered upon: whereunto were
     afterwards added, prayers of deprecation and petition, that GOD
     would be pleased to forgive him his sins, to keep him from hell, and
     to place him in the kingdom of heaven. Which kind of intercessions,
     however at first they were well meant, as we shall hear, yet, in
     process of time, they proved an occasion of confirming men in divers
     errors; especially when they began once to be applied, not only to
     the good, but to evil livers also, unto whom, by the first
     institution, they never were intended.

     The term of [eucharisterios euche], a thanksgiving prayer, I borrow
     from the writer of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; who, in the
     description of the funeral observances, used of old in the Church,
     informeth us, first, that the friends of the dead
     "accounted him to be, as he was, blessed, because that, according to
     his wish, he had obtained a victorious end," and thereupon, "sent
     forth hymns of thanksgiving to the Author of that victory; desiring
     withal that they, themselves, might come unto the like end."
     And then that the Bishop likewise offered up a prayer of
     thanksgiving unto GOD, when the dead was afterward brought unto him,
     to receive, as it were, at his hands a sacred coronation. Thus at
     the funeral of Fabiola, the praising of GOD by singing of Psalms and
     resounding of Hallelujah, is specially mentioned by St. Jerome; and
     the general practice and intention of the Church therein is
     expressed and earnestly urged by St. Chrysostom in this manner:
     "Do not we praise GOD and give thanks unto him, for that he hath now
     crowned him that is departed, for that he hath freed him from his
     labours, for that quitting him from fear, he keepeth him with
     himself? Are not the hymns for this end Is not the singing of Psalms
     for this purpose? All these be tokens of rejoicing."
     Whereupon he thus presseth them that used immoderate mourning for
     the dead:
     "Thou sayest, Return, O my soul, unto thy rest, for the Lord hath
     dealt bountifully with thee; and dost thou weep? is not this a stage
     play? is it not mere simulation? For if thou dost indeed believe the
     things that thou sayest, thou lamentest idly; but if thou playest,
     and dissemblest, and thinkest these things to be fables, why dost
     thou then sing? why dost thou suffer those things that are done?
     Wherefore dost thou not drive away them that sing?"
     And in the end he concludeth somewhat prophetically, that he
     "very much feared lest by this means some grievous disease should
     creep in upon the Church."

     Whether the doctrine now maintained in the Church of Rome, that the
     children of GOD, presently after their departure out of this life,
     are cast into a lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, be not a
     spice of this disease, and whether their practice in chanting of
     Psalms, appointed for the expression of joy and thankfulness, over
     them whom they esteem to be tormented in so lamentable a fashion, be
     not a part of that scene and pageant at which St. Chrysostom dost so
     take on, I leave it unto others to judge. That his fear was not
     altogether vain, the event itself doth show. For howsoever in his
     days the fire of the Romish purgatory was not yet kindled, yet were
     there certain sticks then a-gathering, which ministered fuel
     afterwards unto that flame. Good St. Augustine, who was then alive,
     and lived three and twenty years after St. Chrysostom's death,
     declared himself to be of this mind; that the oblations and alms
     usually offered in the Church
     "for all the dead that received baptism, were thanksgivings for such
     as were very good, propitiations for such as were not very bad; but
     as for such as were very evil, although they were no helps of the
     dead, yet were they some kind of consolations of the living."
     Which, although it were but a private exposition of the Church's
     meaning in her prayers and oblations for the dead, and the opinion
     of a doctor too that did not hold purgatory to be any article of his
     creed, yet did the Romanists in times following greedily take hold
     thereof, and make it the main foundation upon which they laid the
     hay and stubble of their devised Purgatory.

     A private exposition I call this; not only because it is not to be
     found in the writings of the former Fathers, but also because it
     suiteth not well with the general practice of the Church, which it
     intendeth to interpret. It may indeed fit in some sort that part of
     the Church service, wherein there was made a several commemoration,
     first of the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and martyrs, after one
     manner; and then of the other dead, after another; which together
     with the conceit, that "an injury was offered to a martyr, by
     praying for him," was it that first occasioned St. Augustine to
     think of the former distinction. But in the
     "supplications for the spirits of the dead, which the Church, under
     a general commemoration, was accustomed to make for all that were
     deceased in the Christian and Catholic communion,"
     to imagine that one and the same act of praying should be a petition
     for some, and for others a thanksgiving only, is somewhat too harsh
     an interpretation: especially where we find it propounded by way of
     petition, and the intention thereof directly expressed, as in the
     Greek Liturgy attributed to St. James, the brother of our Lord:
     "Be mindful, O Lord GOD, of the spirits and of all flesh, of such as
     we have remembered, and of such as we have not remembered, being of
     right belief, from Abel the Just, until this present day. Do thou
     cause them to rest in the land of the living, in thy kingdom, in the
     delight of paradise, in the bosoms of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
     our holy fathers; whence grief, and sorrow, and sighing, are fled;
     where the light of thy countenance doth visit them, and shine for
     ever."
     And in the offices compiled by Alcuinus:
     "O Lord, holy Father, Almighty and everlasting GOD, we humbly make
     request unto thee for the spirits of thy servants and handmaids,
     which from the beginning of this world thou hast called unto thee;
     that thou wouldest vouchsafe, O Lord, to give unto them a lightsome
     place, a place of refreshing and ease, and that they may pass by the
     gates of hell and the ways of darkness, and may abide in the
     mansions of the saints, and in the holy light which thou didst
     promise of old unto Abraham and his seed."
     So the "commemoration of the faithful departed," retained as yet in
     the Roman missal, is begun with this orison:
     "Eternal rest grant unto them, O Lord, and let everlasting light
     shine unto them."
     Whereunto we may add these two prayers, to omit a great number more
     of the like kind, used of old in the same Church:
     "Receive, O holy Trinity, this oblation, which we offer unto thee
     for all that are departed in the confession of thy name; that thou
     reaching unto them the right hand of thy help, they may have the
     rest of everlasting life; and being separated from the punishment of
     the wicked, they may always persevere in the joy of thy praise." And
     "this oblation, which we humbly offer unto thee for the
     commemoration of the souls that sleep in peace, we beseech thee, O
     Lord, receive graciously; and of thy goodness, grant that both the
     affection of this piety may profit us, and obtain for them
     everlasting bliss."
     Where you may observe, that the souls unto which "everlasting bliss"
     was wished for, were yet acknowledged to rest "in peace," and,
     consequently, not to be disquieted with any purgatory torment. Even
     as in the canon of the mass itself, the priest, in the commemoration
     for the dead, prayeth thus:
     "Remember, O Lord, thy servants and handmaids, which have gone
     before us with the ensign of faith, and sleep in the sleep of peace.
     To them, O Lord, and to an that are at rest in Christ, we beseech
     thee that thou wouldst grant a place of refreshing, light, and
     peace."
     Nay, the Armenians, in their Liturgy, entreat GOD to "give eternal
     peace," not only in general "unto all that have gone before us in
     the faith of Christ;" but also in particular to the "patriarchs,
     apostles, prophets, and martyrs." Which maketh directly for the
     opinion of those, against whom Nicolas Cabasilas both dispute, who
     held that these "commemorations" contained "a supplication for the
     saints unto GOD," and not a "thanksgiving" only. As also do those
     forms of prayer, which were used in the Roman liturgy in the days of
     Pope Innocent the Third:
     "Let such an oblation profit such or such a saint unto glory."
     And especially that for St. Leo, which is found in the elder copies
     of the Gregorian Sacramentary:
     "Grant unto us, O Lord, that this oblation may profit the soul of
     thy servant Leo."
     For which the latter books have chopped in this prayer:
     "Grant unto us, O Lord, that by the intercession of thy servant Leo,
     this oblation may profit us."
     Concerning which alteration, when the Archbishop of Lyons propounded
     such another question unto Pope Innocent, as our challenger at the
     beginning did unto us,
     "Who it was that did change it, or when it was changed, or why?" the
     Pope returneth him for answer.
     "That who did change it, or when it was changed, he was ignorant of:
     yet he knew upon what occasion it was changed: because that where
     the authority of the Holy Scripture doth say, that he doeth injury
     unto a martyr, who prayeth for a martyr,"
     (which is a new text of Holy Scripture, of the Pope's own
     canonization,)
     "the same by the like reason is to be held of the other saints."
     The gloss upon this decretal, layeth down the reason of this
     mutation a little more roundly:
     "Of old they prayed for him, and now at this day he prayeth for us;
     and so was the change made."
     And Alphonsus Mendoza telleth us, that the old prayer was
     "deservedly" disused, and this other substituted in the room
     thereof:
     "Grant unto us, we beseech thee, O Lord, that by the intercession of
     thy servant Leo, this oblation may profit us."
     Which prayer, indeed, was to be found heretofore in modernioribus
     sacramentariis, as Pope Innocent speaketh, and in the Roman missals
     that were published before the Council of Trent, as, namely, in that
     which was printed at Paris, Anno 1529; but in the newly reformed
     missal, wherewith, it seemeth, Mendoza was not so well acquainted as
     with his scholastical controversies, it is put out again, and
     another prayer for Leo put in; that by the celebration of those
     "offices of atonement a blessed retribution might accompany him."

     Neither is there any more wrong done unto St. Leo, in praying for
     him after this manner, than unto all the rest of his fellows in that
     other prayer of the Roman Liturgy:
     "We have received, O Lord, the divine mysteries; which as they do
     profit thy saints unto glory, so we do beseech thee that they may
     profit us for our healing:"
     and nothing so much as is done unto all the faithful deceased, when,
     in their masses for the dead, they say daily,
     "Lord Jesus CHRIST, King of Glory, deliver the souls of all the
     faithful that are departed from the pains of hell, and from the deep
     lake; deliver them from the mouth of the lion, that hell do not
     swallow them up, that they fall not into darkness."
     So that, whatsoever commodious expositions our adversaries can bring
     for the justifying of the Roman service, the same may we make use of
     to show, that the ancient Church might pray for the dead, and yet in
     so doing have no relation at all unto Purgatory; yea, and pray for
     the martyrs and other saints that were in the state of bliss,
     without offering unto them any injury thereby.

     For the clearing of the meaning of those prayers which are made for
     Leo and the other saints, to the two expositions brought in by Pope
     Innocent, Cardinal Bellarmine addeth this for the third:
     "that peradventure therein the glory of the body is petitioned for,
     which they shall have in the day of the resurrection. For although,"
     saith he, "they shall certainly obtain that glory, and it be due
     unto their merits; yet it is not absurd to desire and ask this for
     them."

     Where, laying aside those unsavoury terms of debt and merits,
     whereof we shall have occasion to treat in their proper place, the
     answer is otherwise true in part, but not full enough to give
     satisfaction unto that which was objected. For the primary intention
     of the Church indeed, in her prayers for the dead, had reference
     unto the day of the resurrection; which also in divers places we
     find to have been expressly prayed for. As in the Egyptian Liturgy,
     attributed unto St. Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria:
     "Raise up their bodies in the day which thou hast appointed,
     according to thy promises, which are true and cannot lie; grant unto
     them, according to thy promises, that which eye hath not seen, and
     ear hath not heard, and which hath not ascended into the heart of
     man, which thou hast prepared, O Lord, for them that love thy holy
     name, that thy servants may not remain in death, but may get out
     from thence, although slothfulness and negligence have followed
     them."
     And in that which is used by the Christians of St. Thomas, as they
     are commonly called, in the East Indies:
     "Let the Holy Ghost give resurrection to your dead at the last day,
     and make them worthy of the incorruptible kingdom."

     Such is the prayer of St. Ambrose, for Gratian and Valentinian the
     emperors:
     "I do beseech thee, most high GOD, that thou wouldst raise up again
     those dear young men with a speedy resurrection, that thou mayest
     recompense this untimely course of this present life, with a timely
     resurrection."
     And that in Alcuinus:
     "Let their souls sustain no hurt; but when that great day of the
     resurrection and remuneration shall come, vouchsafe to raise them
     up, O Lord, together with thy saints and thine elect."
     And that in Grimoldus's Sacramentary:
     "Almighty and everlasting God, vouchsafe to place the body and the
     soul and the spirit of thy servant N., in the bosoms of Abraham,
     Isaac, and Jacob, that when the day of thy acknowledgment shall
     come, thou mayest command them to be raised up among thy saints and
     thine elect."
     And that which the Syrians do use:
     "Cause, Lord GOD, their souls and their spirits and their bodies to
     rest; and sprinkle the dew of mercy upon their bones."

     But yet the Cardinal's answer, that the glory of the body may
     be prayed for, which the saints shall have at the day of the
     resurrection, cometh somewhat short of that which the Church used to
     request in the behalf of St. Leo: for in that prayer express mention
     is made of his soul, and so it is wished that profit may redound by
     the present oblation. And, therefore, this defect must be supplied
     out of his answer unto that other prayer, which is made for the
     souls of the faithful departed, that they may be delivered out of
     the mouth of the lion, and that hell may not swallow them up. To
     this he saith, that,
     "the Church doth pray for these souls, that they may not be
     condemned unto the everlasting pains of hell; not as if it were not
     certain, that they should not be condemned unto those pains, but
     because it is GOD'S pleasure that we should pray, even for
     those things which we are certain to receive."

     The same answer did Alphonsus de Castro give before him, that
     "very often those things are prayed for which are certainly known
     shall come to pass as they are prayed for; and that of this there be
     very many testimonies."
     And Johannes Medina, that
     "GOD delighteth to be prayed unto for those things which otherwise
     he purposed to do. For GOD had decreed" saith he, "after the sin of
     Adam to take our flesh, and he decreed the time wherein he meant to
     come; and yet the prayers of the saints, that prayed for his
     incarnation and for his coming, were acceptable unto him. God hath
     also decreed to grant pardon unto every repentant sinner; and yet
     the prayer is grateful unto him, wherein either the penitent doth
     pray for himself, or another for him, that GOD would be pleased to
     accept his repentance. GOD hath decreed also and promised not to
     forsake his Church, and to be present with councils lawfully
     assembled; yet the prayer notwithstanding is grateful unto GOD, and
     the hymns, whereby his presence and favour and grace are implored
     both for the council and the Church."

     And whereas it might be objected, that howsoever the Church may
     sometimes pray for those things which she shall certainly receive,
     yet she doth not pray for those things which she hath already
     received; and this she hath received, that those souls shall not be
     damned, seeing they have received their sentence, and are most
     secure from damnation; the Cardinal replieth, that this objection
     may easily be avoided:
     "For although those souls," saith he, "have received already their
     first sentence in the particular judgment, and by that sentence are
     freed from hell, yet doth there yet remain the general judgment, in
     which they are to receive the second sentence. Wherefore the Church,
     praying that those souls in the last judgment may not fall into
     darkness, nor be swallowed up in hell, doth not pray for the thing
     which the soul hath, but which it shall receive."

     Thus, these men, labouring to show how the prayers for the dead used
     in their Church may stand with their conceits of Purgatory, do
     thereby inform us how the Prayers for the dead used by the ancient
     Church may stand well enough without the supposal of any purgatory
     at all. For if we pray for those things which we are most sure will
     come to pass, and the Church, by the adversary's own
     confession, did pray accordingly that the souls of the faithful
     might escape the pains of hell at the general judgment,
     notwithstanding they had certainly been freed from them already by
     the sentence of the particular judgment; by the same reason, when
     the Church in times past besought GOD to "remember all those that
     slept in the hope of the resurrection of everlasting life," which is
     the form of prayer used in the Greek Liturgies, and to give unto
     them rest, and to bring them unto the place where the light of His
     countenance should shine upon them for evermore, why should not we
     think that it desired these things should be granted unto them by
     the last sentence at the day of the resurrection, notwithstanding
     they were formerly adjudged unto them by the particular sentence at
     the time of their dissolution?

     For, as
     "that which shall befall unto all at the day of judgment is
     accomplished in every one at the day of his death;"
     so, on the other side, whatsoever befalleth the soul of every one at
     the day of his death, the same is fully accomplished upon the whole
     man at the day of the general Judgment. Whereupon we find that the
     Scriptures everywhere do point out that great day unto us, as the
     time wherein mercy and forgiveness, rest and refreshing, joy and
     gladness, redemption and salvation, reward and crowns, shall be
     bestowed upon all GOD'S children. As in 2 Tim. i. 16. 18. "The Lord
     give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus: the Lord grant unto him
     that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day." 1 Cor. i. 8. "Who
     shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
     day of our Lord JESUS CHRIST." Acts iii. 19. "Repent ye therefore,
     and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times
     of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord." 2 Thess. i.
     6, 7. "It is a righteous thing with GOD to recompense unto you which
     are troubled rest with us, when the Lord JESUS shall be revealed
     from heaven with his mighty angels." Philip. ii. 16. "That I may
     rejoice in the day of CHRIST, that I have not run in vain, neither
     laboured in vain." 1 Thess. ii. 19. "For what is our hope, or joy,
     or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord
     JESUS CHRIST at his coming?" 1 Pet. i. 5. "Who are kept by the power
     of GOD through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the
     last time." 1 Cor. v. .5. "That the spirit may be saved in the day
     of the LORD JESUS." Ephes. iv. 30. "Grieve not the holy Spirit of
     GOD, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption." Luke xxi.
     28. "When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift
     up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh." 2 Tim. iv. 8.
     "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
     the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day;" and Luke
     xiv. 14. "Thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the
     just."

     And that the Church, in her offices for the dead, had special
     respect unto this time of the resurrection, appeareth plainly, both
     by the portions of Scripture appointed to be read therein, and by
     divers particulars in the prayers themselves, that manifestly
     discover this intention . For there "the ministers" as the writer of
     the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy reporteth,
     "read those undoubted promises which are recorded in the divine
     Scripture of our divine resurrection, and then devoutly sang such of
     the sacred Psalms were of the same subject and argument."
     And so accordingly in the Roman Missal, the lessons ordained to be
     read for that time are taken from 1 Cor. xv. "Behold, I tell you a
     mystery; we shall all rise again." &c. John v. "The hour cometh
     wherein all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they
     that have done good shall come forth unto the resurrection of life,"
     c. 1 Thess. iv. "Brethren, we would not have you ignorant concerning
     them that sleep, that ye sorrow not, as others which have no hope."
     John xi. "I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in
     me, although he were dead, shall live." 2 Maccab. xii. "Judas caused
     a sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the dead? justly and
     religiously thinking of the resurrection." John vi. "This is the
     will of my Father that sent me, that every one that seeth the Son
     and believeth in him, may have life everlasting: and I will raise
     him up at the last day." And, "he that eateth my flesh, and drinketh
     my blood, hath life everlasting: and I will raise him up at the last
     day." And, lastly, Apocal. xiv. "I heard a voice from heaven, saying
     unto me, Write, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from
     henceforth now, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their
     labours; for their works follow them." Wherewith the sequence also
     doth agree, beginning,

     "Dies irae, dies illa
     Solvet seclum in favilla
     Teste David cum Sibylla:"

     and ending

     "Lacrymosa dies illa,
     Qua resurget ex favilla
     Judicandus homo reus;
     Huic ergo parce, Deus.
     Pie Jesu Domine,
     Dona eis requiem."

     Tertullian, in his book de Monogamia, which he wrote after he had
     been infected with the heresy of the Montanists, speaking of a
     prayer of a widow for the soul of her deceased husband, saith, that
     "she requesteth refreshing for him, and a portion in the first
     resurrection."
     Which seemeth to have some twang of the error of the Millenaries
     (whereunto not Tertullian only with his prophet Montanus, but Nepos
     also, and Lactantius, and divers other doctors of the Church did
     fall), who, misunderstanding the prophecy in the 20th of the
     Revelation, imagined that there should be a first resurrection of
     the just, that should reign here a thousand years upon earth; and
     after that a second resurrection of the wicked at the day of the
     general judgment.
     "They that come not to the first resurrection, but are reserved to
     the second, shall be burned until they fulfil the times betwixt the
     first and the second resurrection: or if they have not fulfilled
     them, they shall remain longer in punishment. And therefore let us
     pray that we may obtain to have our part in the first resurrection,"
     saith St. Ambrose. Hence, in a certain Gothic Missal, I meet with
     two several exhortations made unto the people to pray after this
     form: the one that GOD would
     "vouchsafe to place in the bosom of Abraham the souls of those that
     be at rest, and admit them unto the part of the first resurrection."
     the other, which I find elsewhere also repeated in particular, that
     he would
     "place in rest the spirits of their friends which were gone before
     them in the Lord's peace, and raise them up in the part of the
     first resurrection."
     And, to come nearer home, Asserius Menevensis, writing of the death
     and burial of Ethelred, King of the West Saxons, and Burghred, King
     of the Mercians, saith that they
     "expect the coming of the LORD and the first resurrection with the
     just."
     The like doth Abbo Floriacensis also write of our Cuthbert. Which,
     how it may be excused otherwise, than by saying that at the general
     resurrection the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then the
     wicked shall be raised after them, and by referring the first
     resurrection unto the resurrection of the first, which shall be at
     that day, I cannot well resolve.

     For certain it is, that the first resurrection, spoken of in the
     20th chapter of the Revelation of St. John, is the resurrection of
     the soul from the death of sin and error in this world, as the
     second is the resurrection of the body out of the dust of the earth
     in the world to come; both which he distinctly laid down by our
     Saviour, in the 5th chapter of the Gospel of St. John; the first in
     the 25th verse, "The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall
     hear the voice of the Son of GOD, and they that hear shall live:"
     the second, in the 28th and 29th, "Marvel not at this; for the hour
     is coming, in which all that are in the grave shall hear his voice,
     and shall come forth: they that have done good, unto the
     resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
     resurrection of damnation."

     And to this general resurrection, and to the judgment of the last
     day, had the Church relation in her prayers; some patterns whereof
     it will not be amiss to exhibit here, in these examples following:
     "Although the condition of death brought in upon mankind doth make
     our hearts and minds heavy; yet, by the gift of thy clemency, we are
     raised up with the hope of future immortality; and being mindful of
     eternal salvation, are not afraid to sustain the loss of this light.
     For by the benefit of thy grace, life is not taken away to the
     faithful, but changed; and the souls being freed from the prison of
     the body, abhor things mortal when they attain unto things eternal.
     Wherefore we beseech thee that thy servant N., being placed in the
     tabernacles of the blessed, may rejoice that he hath escaped the
     straits of the flesh and in the desire of glorification expect with
     confidence the day of judgment."
     "Through JESUS CHRIST our Lord, whose holy passion we celebrate
     without doubt for immortal and well resting souls; for them
     especially upon whom thou hast bestowed the grace of that second
     birth; who, by the example of the same JESUS CHRIST our Lord, have
     begun to be secure of the resurrection; For thou, who hast made the
     things that were not, art able to repair the things that were; and
     hast given unto us evidences of the resurrection to come, not only
     by the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, but also by the
     resurrection of the same thy only begotten Son our Redeemer."
     "O God, who art the Creator and Maker of all things, and who art the
     bliss of the saints, grant unto us who make request unto thee, that
     the spirit of our brother, who is loosed from the knot of his body,
     may be presented in the blessed resurrection of thy saints."
     "O almighty and merciful GOD, we do entreat thy clemency, forasmuch
     by thy judgment we are born and made and end, that thou wilt receive
     into everlasting rest the soul of our brother, whom thou of thy
     piety hast commanded to
       _______________________________________________________________






       _______________________________________________________________

     "Being to render an account of every idle word, shall we desire the
     day of judgment, wherein that unwearied fire must be passed by us,
     in which those grievous punishments for expiating the soul from sins
     must be endured?" For, "to such as have been baptized with the Holy
     Ghost, it remaineth, that they should be consummated with the fire
     of judgment."

     In St. Ambrose also there are some passages to be found which seem
     to make directly for either of these points; as these for the
     former:

     "The soul is loosed from the body, and yet after the end of this
     life it is held as yet in suspense, with the uncertainty of the
     future judgment: so that there is no end where there is thought to
     be an end."

     "We read in the books of Esdras, that when the day of judgment shall
     come, the earth shall restore the bodies of the deceased, and the
     dust shall restore the relics of the dead which do rest in the
     graves; and the habitacles shall restore the souls which were
     committed to them; and the Most High shall be revealed upon the seat
     of judgment."

     Also that Scripture
     "nameth those habitacles of the souls promtuaries," or secret
     receptacles; "and meeting with the complaint of man, that the just
     which have gone before may seem to be defrauded, until the day of
     judgment, which is a very long time, of the reward due unto them,
     saith wonderfully, that the day of judgment is like unto a crown,
     wherein as there is no slackness of the last, so there is no
     swiftness of the first. For the day of crowning is expected by all;
     that within that day both they who are overcome may be ashamed, and
     they who do overcome may obtain the palm of victory."

     "Therefore while the fulness of time is expected, the souls expect
     their due reward. Pain is provided for some of them, for some glory;
     and yet, in the mean time, neither are those without trouble, nor
     these without fruit."

     And these for the latter:

     "With fire shall the sons of Levi be purged, with fire Ezekiel, with
     fire Daniel. But these, although they shall be tried with fire, yet
     shall say, we have passed through fire and water. Others shall
     remain in the fire."

     "And if the Lord shall save his servants, we shall be saved by
     faith, yet saved as it were by fire. Although we shall not be burned
     up, yet shall we be burned."

     "After the end of the world, when the angels shall be sent to
     separate the good and the bad, this baptism shall be; when iniquity
     shall be burnt up by the furnace of fire, that in the kingdom of God
     the righteous may shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father.
     And if any one be as Peter or as John, he is baptized with this
     fire." Seeing therefore, "he that is purged here, hath need to be
     purged again there, let him purge us there also, when the Lord may
     say, Enter into my rest: that every one of us being burned with that
     flaming sword, not burned up, when he is entered into that pleasure
     of paradise, may give thanks unto his Lord, saying, Thou hast
     brought us into a place of refreshment."

     Hereunto we may adjoin that observation of Suarez the Jesuit:
     "They who think that the souls of men are not judged at their death,
     nor do receive reward or punishment, but are reserved in hidden
     receptacles unto the general judgment, do consequently say, that as
     men do not receive their last reward or punishment, so neither are
     they also purged, until the general resurrection and judgment do
     come, from whence they might say with reasonable good consequence,
     that men are to be purged with the fire of conflagration."

     And with as good consequence also may we add, that prayers were not
     to le made for the delivery of the souls of the dead from any
     purgatory pains, supposed to be suffered by them betwixt the time of
     their death, and their resurrection, which be the only prayers that
     are now in question.
     "In the resurrection, when our works, like unto clusters of grapes,
     shall be cast into the probatory fire, as it were into the
     wine-press, every man's husbandry shall be made manifest,"
     saith Gregorius Cerameus, sometime Archbishop of Tauromeniun in
     Sicilia. And
     "No man as yet is entered either into the torments of hell, or into
     the kingdom of heaven, until the time of the resurrection of the
     body."
     saith Anastasius Sinaita. Upon whom Gretser bestoweth this marginal
     annotation; that this is the
     "error of certain of the ancient and latter Grecians."
     And we find it to be held indeed both by some of the ancient, (as
     namely in Caius, who lived at Rome when Zephyrinus was Bishop there,
     and is accounted to be the author of the treatise falsely fathered
     upon Josephus, [peri tes tou pantos aitias], a large fragment
     whereof hath been lately published by Hoeschelius, in his notes upon
     Photius's Bibliotheca,) and by the latter Grecians, in whose
     name Marcus Eugenicus, Archbishop of Ephesus, doth make this
     protestation against such of his countrymen, as yielded to the
     definition of the Florentine Council:
     "We say, that neither the saints do receive the kingdom prepared for
     them, and those secret good things, neither the sinners do as yet
     fall into hell; but that either of them do remain in expectation of
     their proper lot; and that this appertaineth unto the time that is
     to come after the resurrection and the judgment. But these men, with
     the Latins, would have these to receive presently after death the
     things they have deserved; but unto those of the middle sort, that
     is, to such as die in penance, they assign a purgatory fire, which
     they feign to be distinct from that of hell, that thereby, say they,
     being purged in their souls after death, they likewise maybe
     received into the kingdom of heaven together with the righteous."

     2. And, therefore, as the Latins in their prayers for the dead have
     respect for the delivery of souls out of purgatory, so the Grecians
     in theirs have relation to that other state, which is to determine
     with the resurrection. As in that prayer of their Euchologe for
     example:
     "The body is buried in the earth, but the soul goeth in unknown
     places, waiting for the future resurrection of the dead; in which, O
     gracious Saviour, make bright thy servant, place him together with
     the saints, and refresh him in the bosom of Abraham:"
     the condition of which "unknown places," they do thus further
     explicate in another prayer:---Forasmuch as by thy divine will
     thou hast appointed
     "the soul to remove thither, where it received the first being,
     until the common resurrection, and the body to be resolved into that
     of which it was composed; therefore we beseech thee, the Father
     without beginning, and thine only begotten Son, and thy most holy
     and consubstantial and quickening Spirit, that thou wilt not permit
     thine own workmanship to be swallowed up in destruction, but that
     the body may be dissolved into that of which it was composed, and
     the soul placed in the quire of the righteous."

     That "barbarous impostor," as Molanus rightly styleth him, who
     counterfeited a letter as written by St. Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem,
     unto St. Augustine, touching the miracles of St. Jerome, taketh upon
     him to lay down the precise time of the first arising of this
     opinion amongst the Grecians in this manner:
     "After the death of most glorious Jerome, a certain heresy or sect
     arose amongst the Grecians, and came to the Latins also, which went
     about with their wicked reasons to prove, that the souls of the
     blessed, until the day of the general judgment, wherein they were to
     be joined again unto their bodies, are deprived of the sight and
     knowledge of God, in which the whole blessedness of the saints doth
     consist; and that the souls of the damned, in like manner, until
     that day are tormented with no pains. Whose reason was this: that as
     the soul did merit or sin with the body, so with the body was it to
     receive rewards or pains. Those wicked sectaries also did maintain,
     that there was no place of purgatory, wherein the souls which had
     not done full penance for their sins in this world might be purged.
     Which pestilent sect getting head, so great sorrow fell upon us,
     that we were even weary of our life."

     Then he telleth a wise tale, how St. Jerome, being at that time with
     God, for the confutation of this new-sprung heresy, raised up three
     men from the dead, after that he had first
     "led their souls into paradise, purgatory, and hell, to the end they
     might make known unto all men the things that were done there;"
     but had not the wit to consider, that St. Cyril himself had need to
     be raised up to make the fourth man among them. For how otherwise
     should he, who died thirty years before St. Jerome, as is known to
     every one that knoweth the history of those times, have heard and
     written the news which those three good fellows, that were raised by
     St. Jerome after his death, did relate concerning heaven, hell, and
     purgatory? Yet is it nothing so strange to me, I confess, that such
     idle dreams as these should be devised in the times of darkness, to
     delude the world withal, as that now in the broad daylight
     Binsfeldius and Suarez, and other Romish merchants, should adventure
     to bring forth such rotten stuff as this, with hope to gain any
     credit of antiquity thereby, unto the new-erected staple of Popish
     Purgatory.

     The Dominican Friars, in a certain treatise written by them at
     Constantinople in the year 125, assign somewhat a lower beginning
     unto this error of the Grecians; affirming that they
     "followed therein a certain inventor of this heresy, named Andrew,
     Archbishop sometime of Casarea in Cappadocia who said, that the
     souls did wait for their bodies, that together with them, with which
     they had committed good or evil, they might likewise receive the
     recompense of their deeds."
     But that which Andrew saith herein he saith not out of his own heal,
     and therefore is wrongfully charged to be the first inventor of it;
     but out of the judgment of many godly Fathers that went before him.
     "It hath been said," saith he, "by many of the saints, that all
     virtuous men," after this life, "do receive places fit for them;
     whence they may certainly make conjecture, on the glory that shall
     befall unto them."
     Where Peltanus bestoweth such another marginal note upon him, as
     Gretser his fellow Jesuit did upon Anastasius:
     "This opinion is now expressly condemned and rejected by the
     Church."
     And yet doth Alphonso de Castro acknowledge that
     "the patrons thereof were famous men, renowned as well for holiness
     as for knowledge;"
     but telleth us withal, that;
     "no man ought to marvel that such great men should fall into so
     pestilent an error, because as the Apostle St. James saith, he that
     offendeth not in word is a perfect man."

     3. Another particular opinion, which we must sever from the general
     intention of the Church in her oblations and prayers for the dead,
     is that which is noted by Theophylact, upon the speech of our
     Saviour, Luke xii. 5., in which he wished us to observe, that he did
     not say,
     "Fear him, who after he hath killed, casteth into hell," but, "hath
     power to cast" into hell. "For the sinners which die," saith he,
     "are not always cast into hell; but it remaineth in the power of
     God, to pardon them also. And this I say, for the oblations, and
     doles which are made for the dead, which do not a little avail even
     them that die in grievous sins. He doth not, therefore, generally,
     after he hath killed, cast into hell, but hath power to cast.
     Wherefore, let us not cease by alms, and intercessions, to appease
     him who hath power to cast, but doth not always use this power, but
     is able to pardon also."
     Thus far Theophylact, whom our adversaries do blindly bring in for
     the countenancing of their use of praying, and offering for the
     dead; not considering, that the prayers, and oblations, which he
     would uphold, do reach even unto such as "die in grievous sins,"
     (which the Romanists acknowledge to receive no relief at all, by any
     thing that they can do,) and are intended for the keeping of souls
     from being cast into hell, and not for fetching them out when they
     have been cast into Purgatory; a place that never came within the
     compass of Theophylact's belief. His testimony will fit a great
     deal better the prayer of St. Dunstan; who, as the tale goeth,
     having understood that the soul of King Edwin was to be carried into
     hell, never gave over praying, until he had gotten him rid of that
     danger, and transferred him unto the coast of penitent souls; where
     he well deserved, doubtless, to undergo that penance which Hugh,
     Bishop of Coventry and Chester, on his death-bed imposed upon
     himself; even to lie in the dungeon of Purgatory, without bail or
     mainprise, until the general jail delivery of the last day.

     4. Another private conceit, entertained by divers, as well of the
     elder as of middle times, in their devotion for the dead, was, that
     an augmentation of glory might thereby be procured for the saints,
     and either a total deliverance, or a diminution of torments at
     leastwise, obtained for the wicked.
     "If the barbarians," saith St. Chrysostom, "do bury with their dead
     the things that belong unto them, it is much more reason that thou
     shouldst send with the deceased the things that are his; not that
     they may be made ashes as they were, but, that they may add greater
     glory unto him; and if he be departed hence, a sinner, that they may
     loose his sins; but if righteous, that an addition may be made to
     his reward and retribution."
     Yea, in the very latter days, Ivo Carnotensis, writing unto Maud,
     Queen of England, concerning the prayers that were to be made for
     the King, her brother's soul, saith, that
     "it doth not seem idle if we make intercessions for those who
     already enjoy rest, that their rest may be increased."
     Whereupon, Pope Innocent the Third doth bring this for one of the
     answers wherewith he laboureth to salve the prayers which were used
     in the Church of Rome, that
     "such or such an oblation might profit such or such a saint unto
     glory;" that "many repute it no indignity, that the glory of the
     saints should be augmented until the day of judgment; and,
     therefore, in the mean time, the Church may wish the increase of
     their glorification."
     So likewise for the mitigation of the pains of them whose souls were
     doubted to be in torment, this form of prayer was of old used in the
     same Church, as in Grimoldus' Sacramentary may be seen, and retained
     in the Roman Missal itself, until in the late Reformation thereof it
     was removed.

     "O Almighty and merciful God, incline, we beseech thee, thy holy
     ears unto our poor prayers, which we do humbly pour forth before the
     sight of thy Majesty, for the soul of thy servant X., that forasmuch
     as we are distrustful of the quality of his life, by the abundance
     of thy pity we may be comforted; and if his soul cannot obtain full
     pardon, yet at least in the midst of the torments themselves, which
     peradventure it suffereth, out of the abundance of thy compassion it
     may feel refreshment."
     Which prayer whither it tendeth may appear partly by that which
     Prudentius writeth of the play-days, which he supposeth the souls in
     hell sometimes do obtain:
     Sunt et spiritibus sÃSepe nocentibus
     Poe;narum celebres sub Styge feriÃS, &c.
     Marcent suppliciis Tartara mitibus,
     Exultatque sui carceris otio
     Umbrarum populus, liber ab ignibus;
     Nec fervent solito flumina sulphure---
     partly by the doubtful conceits of God's merciful dealing with the
     wicked, in the world to come, which are found in others, but
     especially by these passages that we meet withal in the sermons of
     St. Chrysostom:

     "This man hath spent his whole life in vain, neither hath lived one
     day to himself, but to voluptuousness, to luxury, to covetousness,
     to sin, to the devil. Tell me, therefore, shall we not mourn for
     him? shall we not endeavour to pull him out of these dangers? For
     there be means, if we will, whereby his punishment may be made light
     unto him. If, then, we do make continual prayers for him, if we
     bestow alms, although he be unworthy, God will respect us." For
     "many have received benefit by the alms that have been given by
     others for them; and found thereby, although not a perfect, yet some
     consolation."
     "This, therefore, is done, that although we ourselves be not
     virtuous, we may be careful to get virtuous companions, and friends,
     and wife, and son, as looking to reap some fruit even by them also;
     reaping, indeed, but little, yet reaping some fruit
     notwithstanding."
     "Let us not, therefore, simply weep for the dead, but for such as
     are dead in their sins; these be worthy of lamentations and
     bewailings and tears. For what hope is there, tell me, for men to
     depart with their sins, where they cannot put off their sins? For as
     long as they were here, there was, peradventure, great expectation
     that they would be altered, that they would be bettered: but being
     gone unto hell, where there is no gaining any thing by repentance,
     (for in hell, saith he, who shall confess unto thee?) how are they
     not worthy of lamentations?"
     "Let us, therefore, weep for such, let us succour them to our power,
     let us find out some help for them, little indeed, but yet such as
     may relieve them. How, and after what manner? both praying
     ourselves, and entreating others to make prayers for them, and
     giving continually unto the poor, for them; for this thing bringeth
     some consolation."

     5. The like doctrine is delivered by Andrew, Archbishop of Crete, in
     his sermon of the Life of Man, and of the Dead; and by John
     Damascen, or whosoever else was author of the book ascribed unto
     him, concerning them that are departed in the faith; where three
     notable tales are told of the benefit that even infidels, and
     idolaters themselves, should receive by such prayers as these. One
     touching the soul of the Emperor Trajan, delivered from hell by the
     prayers of Pope Gregory; of the truth whereof lest any man should
     make question, he affirmeth very roundly that no less than
     "the whole east and west will witness that this is true and
     uncontrollable."
     And, indeed, in the east this fable seemeth first to have arisen,
     where it obtained such credit that the Grecians to this day do still
     use this form of prayer:
     "As thou didst loose Trajan from punishment, by the earnest
     intercession of thy servant Gregory, the dialogue writer, hear us
     likewise who pray unto thee."
     And, therefore, to them doth Hugo Etherianus thus appeal for
     justifying the truth of this narration:
     "Do not, I pray you, say in your hearts, that this is false, or
     feigned. Enquire, if you please, of the Grecians; the whole Greek
     Church surely doth testify these things."

     He might, if he had pleased, being an Italian himself, have enquired
     nearer home of the Romans, among whom this feat was reported to have
     been acted, rather than among the Grecians, who were strangers to
     the business. But the Romans, as we understand by Johannes Diaconus,
     in the Life of St. Gregory, found no such matter among their
     records; and when they had notice given them thereof out of the
     legends of the Church of England, (for from thence received they the
     news of this and some other such strange acts, reported to have been
     done by St. Gregory among themselves,) they were not very hasty to
     believe it; because they could hardly be persuaded that St. Gregory,
     who had taught them that
     "infidels and wicked men, departed out of this life, were no more to
     be prayed for than the devil and his angels, which were appointed
     unto everlasting punishment,"
     should in his practice be found to be so much different from his
     judgment.

     The second tale toucheth upon the very times of the Apostles,
     wherein the Apostless Thecla is said to have prayed for Falconilla,
     (the daughter of TryphÃSna, whom St. Paul saluteth, Rom. xvi. 12.)
     "a Gentile and an idolatress, altogether profane, and a servitor of
     another God," to this effect: "O God, Son of the true God, grant
     unto TryphÃSna, according to thy will, that her daughter may live
     with thee, time without end."
     Or, as Basil, Bishop of Seleucia, doth express it:
     "Grant unto thy servant TryphÃSna, that her desire may be fulfilled
     concerning her daughter; her desire therein being this, that her
     soul may be numbered among the souls of those that have already
     believed in thee, and may enjoy the life and pleasure that is in
     paradise."

     The third tale he produceth out of Palladius's historical book
     written unto Lausus, (although neither in the Greek set out by
     Meursius and Fronto Ducaeus, nor in the three several Latin editions
     of that history published before, there be any such thing to be
     found,) touching a dead man's skull, that should have uttered
     this speech unto Macarius, the great Egyptian anchoret:
     "When thou dost offer up thy prayers for the dead, then do we feel
     some little consolation."
     A brainless answer you may well conceive it to be, that must be
     thought to have proceeded from a dry skull lying by the highway
     side; but as brainless as it is, it hath not a little troubled the
     quick heads of our Romish divines, and put many an odd crotchet into
     their nimble brains. Renatus Laurentius telleth us, that
     "without all doubt it was an angel that did speak in this skull."
     And "I say," quoth Alphonsus Mendoza, "that this head which lay in
     the way was not the head of one that was damned, but of a just man
     remaining in purgatory; for Damascen doth not say in that sermon
     that it was the head of a Gentile, as it there may be seen."
     And true it is, indeed, he neither saith that it was so, neither
     that it was not so; but the Grecians generally relate the matter
     thus: that Macarius
     "did hear this from the skull of one that had been a priest of
     idols, which he found lying in the wilderness, that by his prayers
     such as were with him in punishment received a little ease of their
     torment, whensoever it fell out that he made the same for them."
     And among the Latins, Thomas Aquinas and other of the schoolmen take
     this for granted, because they found in the Lives of the Fathers,
     that the speech which the dead skull used was this:
     "I was a priest of the Gentiles;"
     so John, the Roman sub-deacon, translateth it; or, as Rufinus is
     supposed to have rendered it,
     "I was the chief of the priests of the idols, which dwelt in this
     place, and thou art Abbot Macarius, that art filled with the spirit
     of God. At whatsoever hour, therefore, thou takest pity of them that
     are in torments, and prayest for them, they then feel some
     consolation."
     Well, saith Mendoza then,
     "if St. Thomas, relating this history out of the Lives of the
     Fathers, doth say that this was the head of a Gentile, he himself is
     bound to untie this knot."
     And so he doth, resolving the matter thus: that the damned get no
     true ease by the prayers made for them, but such a phantastical kind
     of joy only, as the devils are said to have when they have seduced
     and deceived any man.
     "But peradventure," saith Cardinal Bellarmine for the upshot
     "the things which are brought touching that skull might better be
     rejected as false and apocryphal."
     And Stephen Durant, more peremptorily:
     "The things which are told of Trajan and Falconilla, delivered out
     of hell by the prayers of St. Gregory and Thecla, and of the dry
     skull spoken to by Macarius, be feigned and commentitious."

     Which last answer, though it be the surest of all the rest, yet it
     is not to be doubted for all that, but that the general credit which
     these fables obtained, together with the countenance which the
     opinion of the Origenists did receive from Didymus, Evagrius,
     Gregory Nyssen, (if he be not corrupted,) and other doctors,
     inclined the minds of men very much to apply the common use of
     praying for the dead unto this wrong end of hoping to relieve the
     damned thereby. St. Augustine doth show, that in his time not only
     some, but exceeding many also, did out of a humane affection take
     compassion of the eternal pains of the damned, and would not believe
     that they should never have an end.

     And notwithstanding this error was publicly condemned afterwards in
     the Origenists by the fifth general council held at Constantinople,
     yet by idle and voluptuous persons was it greedily embraced, as
     Climacus complaineth: and
     "even now also," saith St. Gregory, "there be some who therefore
     negect to put an end unto their sins, because they imagine that the
     judgments which are to come upon them shall some time have an end."
     Yea, of late days this opinion was maintained by the Porretanians,
     as Thomas calleth them, and some of the Canonists, (the one
     following therein Gilbert Porreta, Bishop of Poictiers, in his book
     of theological questions, the other John Semeca in his gloss upon
     Gratian,) that by the prayers and suffrages of the living the pains
     of some of the damned were continually diminished, in such manner as
     infinite proportionable parts may be taken from a line, without ever
     coming unto an end of the division; which was in effect to take from
     them at the last all pain of sense or sense of pain. For, as Thomas
     observeth it rightly, and Durand after him,
     "in the division of a line at last we must come unto that which is
     not sensible, considering that a sensible body cannot be divided
     infinitely. And so it would follow that after many suffrages the
     pain remaining should not be sensible, and consequently should be no
     pain at all."

     Neither is to be forgotten, that the invention of All-Souls'
     Day, (of which you may read, if you please, Polydore Virgil, in his
     sixth book of the Inventors of Things, and the ninth chapter,) that
     solemn day, I say, wherein our Romanists most devoutly perform all
     their superstitious observances for the dead, was occasioned at the
     first by the apprehension of this same erroneous conceit, that the
     souls of the damned might not only be eased, but fully also
     delivered by the alms and prayers of the living. The whole narration
     of the business is thus laid down by Sigebertus Gemblacensis in his
     Chronicle at the year of our Lord 998.

     "This time," saith he, "a certain religious man returning from
     Jerusalem, being entertained for awhile in Sicily by the courtesy of
     a certain anchoret, learned from him among other matters, that there
     were places near unto them that used to cast up burning flames,
     which by the inhabitants were called the Pots of Vulcan, wherein the
     souls of the reprobates, according to the quality of their deserts,
     did suffer divers punishments, the devils being there deputed for
     the execution thereof; whose voices, angers, and terrors, and
     sometimes howlings also, he said he often heard, as, lamenting that
     the souls of the damned were taken out of their hands by the alms
     and prayers of the faithful and more at this time by the prayers of
     the Monks of Cluny, who prayed without ceasing for the rest of those
     that were deceased. The Abbot Odilo having understood this by him,
     appointed throughout all the monasteries under his subjection, that
     as upon the first day of November the solemnity of all the saints is
     observed, so upon the day following the memorial of all that rested
     in Christ should be celebrated. Which rite passing into many other
     churches, made the memory of the faithful deceased to be
     solemnized."

     For the elect, this form of prayer was wont to be used in the Romish
     Church:

     "O GOD, unto whom alone is known the number of the elect that are to
     be placed in the supernal bliss, grant, we beseech thee, that the
     book of blessed predestination may retain the names of all those
     whom we have undertaken to recommend in our prayer, or of all the
     faithful that are written therein."
     And to pray, that the names of all those that are written in the
     book of GOD'S election should still be retained therein, may be
     somewhat tolerable; considering as the divines of that side have
     informed us, that those things may be prayed for which we know most
     certainly will come to pass: but hardly, I think, shall you find in
     any ritual a form of prayer answerable to this of the Monks of Cluny
     for the reprobate; unless it be that whereby St. Francis is said to
     have obtained that Friar Elias should be made ex prÃSscito
     prÃSdestinatus,
     "an elect of a reprobate."
     Yet it seemeth that some were not very well pleased that what was
     done so seldom by St. Francis, the angel of the Friars, and that for
     a reprobate yet living, should be so usually practised by the
     followers of St. Odilo, the archangel of the monks, for reprobates
     that were dead: and therefore, in the common editions of Sigebert's
     Chronicle, they have clean struck out the word damnatorum, and
     instead of reproborum chopped in defunctorum. Which deprivation may
     be detected, as well by the sincere edition of Sigebert, published
     by Aubertus MirÃSus out of the manuscript of Gemblac Abbey, which is
     thought to be the original copy of Sigebert himself, as by the
     comparing of him with Petrus Damiani in the life of Odilo, whence
     this whole narration was by him borrowed. For there also do we read,
     that in those flaming places
     "the souls of the reprobate, according to the quality of their
     deserts, did suffer diverse torments:"
     and that the devils did complain,
     "that by the alms and prayers" of Odilo and others "the souls of the
     damned were taken out of their hands."
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 4. Of the opinion of the heretic Aerius touching Prayers for the
                                    Dead.

     BY these things we may see what we are to judge of that which our
     adversaries press so much against us out of Epiphanius; that he
     "nameth an obscure fellow, one Aerius, to be the first author of
     this heresy, that Prayer and Sacrifice profit not the departed in
     Christ."
     For neither doth Epiphanius name this to be an heresy, neither doth
     it appear that himself did hold that prayers and oblations bring
     such profit to the dead as these men dream they do. He is much
     deceived who thinketh every thing that Epiphanius findeth fault
     withal in heretics is esteemed by him to be an heresy; seeing heresy
     cannot be but in matters of faith: and the course which Epiphanius
     taketh in that work, is not only to declare in what special points
     of faith heretics did dissent from the catholic doctrine, but in
     what particular observances also they refused to follow the received
     customs and ordinances of the Church. Therefore at the end of the
     whole work he setteth down a brief, first of the faith, and then of
     the ordinances and observances of the Church; and among the
     particulars of the latter kind he rehearseth this:
     "For the dead they make commemorations by name, performing," or
     "when they do perform, their prayers and divine service and
     dispensation of the mysteries:"
     and disputing against Aerius touching the point itself, he doth not
     at all charge him with forsaking the doctrine of the Scriptures, or
     the faith of the Catholic Church, concerning the state of those that
     are departed out of this life, but with rejecting the order observed
     by the Church in her commemorations of the dead; which being an
     ancient institution, brought in upon wonderful good considerations,
     as he maintaineth, should not by this humorous heretic have been
     thus condemned.

     "The Church," saith he, "doth necessarily perform this, having
     received it by tradition from the Fathers; and who may dissolve the
     ordinance of his mother, or the law of his father?" And again: "Our
     mother the Church hath ordinances settled in her which are
     inviolable, and may not be broken. Seeing then there are ordinances
     established in the Church, and they are well, and all things are
     admirably done, this seducer is again refuted."

     For the further opening hereof it will not be amiss to consider both
     of the objection of Aerius, and of the answer of Epiphanius. Thus
     did Aerius argue against the practice of the Church:
     "For what reason do ye commemorate after death the names of those
     that are departed? He that is alive prayeth or maketh dispensation"
     of the mysteries: "what shall the dead be profited hereby? And if
     the prayer of those here do altogether profit them that be there,
     then let nobody be godly, let no man do good, but let him procure
     some friends, by what means it pleaseth him, either persuading them
     by money, or entreating friends at his death; and let them pray for
     him that he may suffer nothing there, and that those inexpiable sins
     which he hath committed may not be required at his hands."

     This was Aerius's argumentation, which would have been of force
     indeed if the whole Church had held, as many did, that the judgment
     after death was suspended until the general resurrection, and that
     in the meantime the sins of the dead might be taken away by the
     suffrages of the living. But he should have considered, as Stephanus
     Gobarus, who was as great an heretic as himself, did, that the
     doctors were not agreed upon the point; some of them maintaining
     "that the soul of every one that departed out of this life received
     very great profit by the prayers and oblations and alms that were
     performed for him;" and others, "on the contrary side, that it was
     not so;"
     and that it was a foolish part in him to confound the private
     opinion of some with the common faith of the universal Church. That
     he reproved this particular error, which seemeth to have gotten head
     in his time, as being most plausible to the multitude, and very
     pleasing unto the looser sort of Christians, therein he did well:
     but that thereupon he condemned the general practice of the Church,
     which had no dependence upon that erroneous conceit, therein he did
     like unto himself, headily and perversely. For the Church, in her
     commemorations and prayers for the dead, had no relation at all unto
     those that had led their lives lewdly and dissolutely, as appeareth
     plainly, both by the author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and by
     divers other evidences before alleged; but unto those that led their
     lives in such a godly manner as gave pregnant hope unto the living
     that their souls were at rest with GOD: and to such as these alone
     did it wish the accomplishment of that which remained of their
     redemption; to wit, their public justification and solemn acquittal
     at the last day, and their perfect consummation of bliss, both in
     body and soul, in the kingdom of heaven for ever after. Not that the
     event of these things was conceived to be any ways doubtful, (for we
     have been told that things may be prayed for, the event whereof is
     known to be most certain;) but because the commemoration thereof was
     thought to serve for special use, not only in regard of the
     manifestation of the affection of the living toward the dead, (he
     that prayed, as Dionysius noteth,
     "desiring other men's gifts as if they were his own graces,")
     but also in respect of the consolation and instruction which the
     living might receive thereby, as Epiphanius, in his answer to
     Aerius, doth more particularly declare.

     The objection of Aerius was this: the commemorations and prayers
     used in the Church being no profit to the dead, therefore as an
     unprofitable thing they are to be rejected. To this doth Epiphanius
     thus frame his answer:
     "As for the reciting of the names of those that are deceased, what
     can be better than this? what more commodious and more admirable?
     that such as are present do believe that they who are departed do
     live, and are not extinguished, but are still being and living with
     the Lord; and that this most pious preaching might be declared, that
     they who pray for their brethren have hope of them, as being in a
     peregrination."
     Which is as much in effect as if he had denied Aerius's
     consequence, and answered him, that although the dead were not
     profited by this action, yet it did not therefore follow that it
     should be condemned as altogether unprofitable, because it had a
     singular use otherwise; namely, to testify the faith and the hope of
     the living concerning the dead: the faith, in "declaring them to be
     alive," (for so doth Dionysius also expound the Church's intention
     in her public nomination of the dead,)
     "and as divinity teacheth, not mortified, but translated from death
     unto a most divine life;"
     the hope, in that they signified hereby that they accounted their
     brethren to have departed from them no otherwise than as if they had
     been in a journey, with expectation to meet them afterward; and by
     this means made a difference betwixt themselves and others which had
     no hope. Then doth Epiphanius proceed further in answering the same
     objection, after this manner:
     "The prayer also which is made for them doth profit, although it do
     not cut off all their sins; yet forasmuch as whilst we are in this
     world, we oftentimes slip both unwillingly and with our will, it
     serveth to signify that which is more perfect. For we make a
     memorial both for the just and for sinners; (for sinners, entreating
     the mercy of GOD; for the just, both the fathers, and patriarchs,
     the prophets, and apostles, and evangelists, and martyrs, and
     confessors, bishops also and anchorites, and the whole order,) that
     we may sever our Lord JESUS CHRIST from the rank of all other men by
     the honour that we do unto him, and that we may yield worship unto
     him."
     Which, as far as I apprehend him, is no more than if he had thus
     replied unto Aerius: Although the prayer that is made for the dead
     do not cut off all their sins, which is the only thing that thou
     goest about to prove, yet doth it profit notwithstanding for another
     purpose; namely, to signify the supereminent perfection of our
     Saviour CHRIST above the rest of the sons of men, who are subject to
     manifold slips and falls as long as they live in this world.

     For as well the righteous with their involuntary slips, as sinners
     with their voluntary falls, do come within the compass of these
     commemorations; wherein prayers are made both for sinners that
     repent, and for righteous persons that have no such need of
     repentance: for sinners, that being by their repentance recovered
     out of the snare of the devil, they may find mercy of the Lord at
     the last day, and be freed from the fire prepared for the devil and
     his angels; for the righteous, that they may be recompensed in the
     resurrection of the just, and received into the kingdom prepared for
     them from the foundation of the world. Which kind of prayer being
     made for the best men that ever lived, even the patriarchs,
     prophets, apostles, evangelists, and martyrs themselves, CHRIST only
     excepted, showeth, that the profit which the Church intended should
     be reaped therefrom, was not so much the taking away the sins of the
     parties that were prayed for, as the honouring of their Lord above
     them; it being hereby declared,
     "that our Lord is not to be compared unto any man, though man live
     in righteousness a thousand times and more. For how should that be
     possible, considering that the one is GOD, the other man?"
     as the praying to the one, and for the other, doth discover;
     "and the one is in heaven, the other in earth, by the reason of the
     remains of the body yet resting in the earth,"
     until the day of the resurrection, unto which all these prayers had
     special reference. This do I conceive to be the right meaning of
     Epiphanius's answer, as suiting best both with the general intention
     of the Church, which he taketh upon him to vindicate from the
     misconstruction of Aerius, and with the application thereof unto his
     objection, and with the known doctrine of Epiphanius, delivered by
     him elsewhere in these terms:
     "After death there is no help to be gotten, either by godliness or
     by repentance. For Lazarus doth not go there unto the rich man, nor
     the rich man unto Lazarus; neither doth Abraham send any of his
     spoils, that the poor may be afterward made rich thereby; neither
     doth the rich man obtain that wihch he ask;eth, although he entreat
     merciful Abraham with instant supplication. For the garners are
     sealed up, and the time is fulfilled, and the combat is finished,
     and the lists are voided, and the garlands are given, and such as
     have fought are at rest, and such as have not obtained are gone ,
     and such as have not fought cannot now be present in tin.e, and such
     as have been overthrown in the lists are cast out, and all things
     are clearly finished, after that we are once departed from hence."

     And for the general intention of the Church, beside what already
     hath been at large declared of the times past, let us a little
     compare the ancient practice of Praying for the dead maintained by
     Epiphanius, with the footsteps which, remain thereof in the
     Euchologue used by the Grecians at this very day. For

     First, that the parties prayed for are not supposed to be in any
     place of torment, appeareth by that speech which they apply to the
     party deceased, even in the midst of the prayers which they make for
     the forgiveness of his sins and the resting of his soul;
     "Blessed is the way wherein thou art going to-day, brother; for to
     thee is prepared a place of rest."
     And by the prayer following:
     "He is from hence departed breathless, thither where there is the
     reward of his works, thither where there is the joy of all the
     saints, with whom rest thou this deceased person, O GOD, of thy
     mercy and loving kindness."
     Secondly, that they make these prayers as well for the righteous as
     for sinners, this orison, among others, doth demonstrate:
     "The faithful which have left this life holily, and removed to thee
     their Lord, receive benignly, giving them rest out of thy tender
     mercy."

     Thirdly, that in these prayers they aim at those ends expressed by
     Epiphanius, as well the testifying their belief of the peregrination
     of their brethren and their living with the Lord, as the putting a
     difference betwixt CHRIST our Saviour and all other men how blessed
     soever, (in respect the one is GOD, the other but men; the one after
     his glorious resurrection remaineth now mortal in heaven, the other
     continue yet in a state of dissolution, with their bodies resting in
     the earth in expectation of the resurrection; the purity and
     perfection of the one is most absolute, the manifold failings of the
     very best of the other such that they stand in need of mercy and
     pardon;) this prayer following may witness:
     "Receive, O Lord, our prayers and supplications, and give rest unto
     all our fathers, and mothers, and brethren, and sisters, and
     children, and all our other kindred and alliance; and unto all souls
     that rest before us in hope of the everlasting resurrection. And
     place their spirits and their bodies in the book of life, in the
     bosoms of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the region of the
     living, in the kingdom of heaven, in the paradise of delight, by thy
     bright angels bringing all into thy holy mansions. Raise also our
     bodies together with theirs in the day which thou hast appointed,
     according to thy holy and sure promises. It is not a death then, O
     Lord, unto thy servants, when we flit from the body and go home to
     thee our GOD, but a translation from a sorrowful state unto a better
     and more delightful, and a refreshment and joy. And if we have
     sinned in any thing against thee, be gracious both unto us and unto
     them. Forasmuch as no man is clean from pollution before thee, no,
     though his life were but of one day, thou alone excepted who didst
     appear upon earth without sin, JESUS CHRIST our Lord, by whom we all
     hope to obtain mercy and pardon of our sins: therefore, as a good
     and merciful God, release and forgive both us and them pardon
     offences as well voluntary as involuntary, of knowledge and of
     ignorance, both manifest and hidden, in deed, in thought, in word,
     in all our conversations and motions. And to those that are gone
     before us grant freedom and release, to us that remain bless,
     granting a good and a peaceable end both to us and to all thy
     people."
     Whereunto this other short prayer also for one that is deceased may
     be added:
     "None, no, not one man hath been without sin but thou alone, O
     Immortal. Therefore, as a GOD full of compassion, place thy servant
     in light with the quires of thine angels; by thy tender mercy
     passing over his iniquities, and granting him the resurrection."

     Lastly, that these prayers have principal relation to the judgment
     of the great day, and do respect the escaping of the unquenchable
     fire of Gehenna, not the temporal flames of any imaginary purgatory,
     is plain, both by these kinds of prosopopoe;ias, which they
     attribute to the deceased:

     "Supplicate with tears unto Christ, who is to judge my poor soul,
     that he would deliver me from that fire which is unquenchable."
     "I beseech all my acquaintance and my friends, make mention of me in
     the day of Judgment, that I may find mercy at that dreadful
     tribunal."
     "Bemired with sins and naked of good deeds, I that am worms' meat,
     cry in spirit, Cast not me, wretch, away from thy face; place me not
     on thy left hand, who with thy hands didst fashion me; but give rest
     unto him whom thou hast taken away by thy commands, O Lord, for thy
     great mercy's sake."
     And by these prayers, which are accordingly tendered for him by the
     living:
     "When in unspeakable glory thou dost come dreadfully to judge the
     whole world, vouchsafe, O Redeemer, that this thy faithful servant,
     whom thou hast taken from the earth, may in the clouds meet thee
     cheerfully."
     "They who have been dead from the beginning, with terrible and
     fearful trembling standing at thy tribunal, await thy just censure,
     O Saviour, and receive GOD'S righteous judgment. At that time, O
     Lord and Saviour, spare thy servant, who in faith is gone unto thee,
     and vouchsafe unto him thine everlasting joy and bliss."
     "None shall fly there the dreadful tribunal of thy judgment. All
     kings and princes with servants stand together, and hear the
     dreadful voice of the Judge condemning the people which have sinned
     into hell, from which, O CHRIST, deliver thy servant."
     "At that time, O CHRIST, spare him whom thou hast translated hence."
     "O Lord our only King, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, thine heavenly
     kingdom, to thy servant, whom thou hast now translated hence, and
     then preserve him uncondemned when every mortal wight shall stand
     before thee the Judge to receive their judgment."

     We are to consider then, that the prayers and oblations, for
     rejecting whereof Aerius was reproved, were not such as are used in
     the Church of Rome at this day, but such as were used by the ancient
     Church at that time, and for the most part retained by the Greek
     Church at this present. And therefore as we, in condemning of the
     one, have nothing to do with Aerius or his cause, so the Romanists,
     who dislike the other as much as ever Aerius did, must be content to
     let us alone, and take the charge of Aerianism home unto themselves.
     Popish prayers and oblations for the dead, we know, do wholly depend
     upon the belief of Purgatory: if those of the ancient Church did so
     too, how cometh it to pass that Epiphanius doth not directly answer
     Aerius, as a papist would do now that they brought singular profit
     to the dead by delivering their tormented souls out of the flames of
     Purgatory; but forgetting as much as once to make mention of
     Purgatory, (the sole foundation of these suffrages for the dead, in
     our adversary's judgment,) doth troubel himself and his cause with
     bringing in such far-fetched reasons as these: that they who
     performed this duty did intend to signify thereby that their
     brethren departed were not perished, but remained still alive with
     the Lord; and to put a diference betwixt the high perfection of our
     Saviour Christ, and the general frailty of the best of all his
     servants? Take away popish Purgatory on the other side, (which in
     the days of Aerius and Epiphanius needed not to be taken away,
     because it was not as yet hatched,) and all the reasons produced by
     Epiphanius will not withhold our Romanists from absolutely
     subscribing to the opinion of Aerius; this being a case with them
     resolved, that
     "if Purgatory be not admitted after death, Prayer for the dead must
     be unprofitable."
     But though Thomas Aquinas and his abettors determined so, we must
     not, therefore, think that Epiphanius was of the same mind, who
     lived in a time wherein Prayers were usually made for them that
     never were dreamed to have been in Purgatory, and yieldeth those
     reasons of that usage, which overthrew the former consequence of
     Thomas, every whit as much as the supposition of Aerius.

     For Aerius and Thomas both agree in this, that prayer for the dead
     would be altogether unprofitable, if the dead themselves received
     not special benefit thereby. This doth Epiphanius, defending the
     ancient use of these Prayers in the Church, show to be untrue, by
     producing other profits that redound from thence unto the living;
     partly by the public signification of their faith, hope and charity
     toward the deceased; partly by the honour that they did unto the
     Lord Jesus, in exempting him from he common condition of the rest of
     mankind. And to make it appear that these things were mainly
     intended by the Church in her memorial for the dead, and not the
     cutting off of the sins which they carried with them out of this
     life, or the releasing of them out of any torment, he allegeth, as
     we have heard, that not only the meaner sort of Christians, but also
     the best of them, without exception, even the prophets and apostles,
     and martyrs themselves, were comprehended therein. From whence, by
     our adversary's good leave, we will make bold to frame this
     syllogism:

     They who reject that kind of praying and offering for the dead which
     was practised by the Church in the days of Aerius, are in that point
     flat Aerians.

     But the Romanists do reject that kind of praying and offering for
     the dead which was practised by the Church in the days of Aerius.

     Therefore the Romanists are in this point flat Aerians.

     The assumption or second part of this argument, (for the first, we
     think, nobody will deny,) is thus proved:

     They who are of the judgment that prayers and oblations should not
     be made for such as are believed to be in bliss do reject that kind
     of praying and offering for the dead which was practised by the
     ancient Church.

     But the Romanists are of this judgment.

     Therefore they reject that kind of praying and offering for the dead
     which was practised by the ancient Church.

     The truth of the first of these propositions doth appear by the
     testimony of Epiphanius, compared with those many other evidences
     whereby we have formerly proved, that it was the custom of the
     ancient Church to make prayers and oblations for them of whose
     resting in peace and bliss there was no doubt at all conceived. The
     verity of the second is manifested by the confession of the
     Romanists themselves, who reckon this for one of their "Catholic
     verities," that suffrages should not be offered for the dead that
     reign with Christ; and, therefore, that an ancient "form of praying
     for the apostles, martyrs, and the rest of the saints, is by disuse
     deservedly abolished," saith Alphonsus Mendoza. Nay, to offer
     sacrifices and prayers to GOD for those that are in bliss, is
     "plainly absurd and impious," in the judgment o the Jesuit Azorius;
     who was not aware that thereby he did outstrip Aerius in condemning
     the practice of the ancient Church, as far as the censuring it only
     to be "unprofitable," (for what shall the dead be profited thereby?
     was the furthest that Aerius durst to go) cometh short of rejecting
     it as "absurd and impious." And, therefore, our adversaries may do
     well to purge themselves first from the blot of Arianism which
     sticketh so fast unto them, before they be so ready to cast the
     aspersion thereof upon others.
       _______________________________________________________________

       ÃY5. Of the profit of Prayers for the Dead to the Persons prayed
                                     for.

     IN the mean time, the reader who desireth to be rightly informed in
     the judgment of Antiquity, touching this point, is to remember that
     these two questions must necessarily be distinguished in this
     enquiry: whether prayers and oblations were to le made for the dead?
     and, whether the dead did receive any peculiar profit thereby? In
     the latter of these we shall find great difference among the
     doctors; in the former very little, or none at all. For
     "howsoever all did not agree about the state of the souls," saith
     Cassander, an indifferent Papist, "which might receive profit by
     these things, yet all did judge this duty as a testimony of their
     love towards the dead, and a profession of their faith, touching the
     soul's immortality, and the future resurrection, to be
     acceptable unto God and profitable to the Church."
     Therefore for condemning the general practice of the Church herein,
     which aimed at those good ends before expressed, Aerius was
     condemned; but for denying that the dead received profit thereby,
     either for the pardon of the sins which before were unremitted, or
     for the cutting off, or mitigation of any torments that they did
     endure in the other world, the Church did never condemn him; for
     that ras no new thing invented by him. Diverse worthy men, before
     and after him, declared themselves to be of the same mind, and were
     never, for all that, charged with the least suspicion of heresy.

     "The narration of Lazarus and the rich man," saith the author of the
     Questions and Answers, in the works of Justin Martyr, "presenteth
     this doctrine unto us, that after the departure of the soul out of
     the body, men cannot by any providence or care, obtain any profit."

     "Then," saith Gregory Nazianzen, "in vain shall any one go about to
     relieve those that lament. Here men may have a remedy, but
     afterwards there is nothing but bonds," or "all things are fast
     bound." For, "after death, the punishment of sin is remediless,"
     saith Theodoret; and, "the dead," saith Diodorus Tarsensis, "have no
     hope of any succour from man."

     And therefore St. Jerome doth conclude, that
     "while we are in this present world we may be able to help one
     another either by our prayers, or by our counsels; but when we shall
     come before the judgment-seat of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel,
     nor Noah, can entreat for any one, but every one must bear his own
     burden."

     Other doctors were of another judgment, that the dead received
     special profit by the prayers and oblations of the living, either
     for the remission of their sins or the easing of their punishment.
     But whether this were restrained to smaller offences only, or such
     as lived and died in great sins might be made partakers of the same
     benefit; and whether these men's torments might be lessened
     only thereby, or in tract of time quite extinguished, they did not
     agree upon. Stephanus Gobarus, whom before I alleged, made a
     collection of the different sentences of the Fathers, whereof some
     contained the received doctrine of the Church, others the
     unallowable opinions of certain of the ancient that varied
     therefrom. Of this latter kind he maketh this sentence to be one:
     "That such sinners as be delivered unto punishment are purged from
     their sins, and after their purging are freed from their punishment;
     albeit, not all who are delivered unto punishment be thus purged and
     freed, but some only;" whereas "the true sentence of the Church was,
     that none at all was freed from punishment."
     If that were the true sentence of the Church, that none of those who
     suffered punishment in the other world were ever freed from the
     same, then the applying of prayers to the helping of men's souls out
     of any such, punishments must be referred to the erroneous
     apprehension of some particular men, and not to the general
     intention of the ancient Church; from which in this point, as in
     many others beside, the latter Church of Rome hath swerved and quite
     gone astray. The ancient writer of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
     handling this matter of praying for the dead profess sedly, doth by
     way of objection move this doubt:
     "To what purpose should the Bishop entreat the divine Goodness to
     grant remission of sins unto the dead, and a like glorious
     inheritance with those that have followed God?"
     seeing by such prayers he can be brought to no other rest but that
     which is fitting for him, and answerable unto the life which he hath
     here led. If our Romish divinity had been then acknowledged by the
     Church, there had been no place left to such questions and doubts as
     these. The matter might easily have been answered, that though a man
     did die in a state of grace, yet was he not presently to be admitted
     unto the place of rest, but must first be reckoned withal, both for
     the committal of those smaller faults unto which, through human
     frailty, he was daily subject, and for the not performance of full
     penance and satisfaction for the greater sins, into which in this
     life he had fallen: and Purgatory being the place wherein he must be
     cleansed from the one, and make up the just payment of the other,
     these prayers were directed unto God for the delivery of the poor
     soul, which was not now in case to help itself out of that place of
     torment.

     But this author, taking upon him the person of St. Paul's
     scholar, and professing to deliver herein
     "that tradition which he had received from his divine Master,"
     saith no such thing, but giveth in this for his answer:
     "The divine Bishop, as the Scriptures witness, is the interpreter of
     the divine judgments; for he is the angel of the Lord God Almighty.
     He hath learned, therefore, out of the oracles delivered by God,
     that a most glorious and divine life is by his just judgment
     worthily awarded to them that have lived holily, his divine goodness
     and kindness passing over those blots which by human frailty he had
     contracted; for as much as no man, as the Scriptures speak, is free
     from pollution. The Bishop, therefore, knowing these things to be
     promised by the true oracles, prayeth that they may accordingly come
     to pass, and those sacred rewards may be bestowed upon them that
     have lived holily."

     The Bishop at that time belike did not know so much as our popish
     Bishops do now, that God's servants must dearly smart in Purgatory
     for the sins wherewith they were overtaken through human infirmity;
     he believed that God of his merciful goodness would pass by those
     slips, and that such after-reckonings as these should give no
     stoppage to the present bestowing of those holy rewards upon the
     children of the promise.
     "Therefore the divine Bishop," saith our author, "asketh those
     things which were promised by God, and are grateful to him, and
     without doubt will be granted; thereby as well manifesting his own
     good disposition unto God, who is a lover of the good, as declaring
     like an interpreter unto them that be present the gifts that shall
     befall to such as are holy."
     He further also addeth, that
     "The Bishops have a separating power, as the interpreters of Gods
     judgments,"
     according to that commission of Christ, Whose sins ye remit, they
     are remitted unto them; and whose ye shall retain, they are
     retained: and whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth, shall be bound
     in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose upon earth, shall be
     loosed in heaven. Now, as in the use of the keys the schoolmen
     following St. Jerome do account the minister to be the interpreter
     only of God's judgment, by declaring what is done by him in the
     binding or loosing of men's sins; so doth this author here give
     them power only to
     "separate those that are already judged of God," and, by way of
     "declaration and convoy to bring in those that are beloved of God,
     and to exclude such as are ungodly."
     And if the power which the ministers have received by the aforesaid
     commission do extend itself to any further real operation upon the
     living, Pope Gelasius will deny that it may be stretched in like
     manner unto the dead; because that Christ saith, Whatsoever thou
     shalt bind upon earth.
     "He saith, upon earth; for he that dieth bound is nowhere said to be
     loosed."
     And
     "that which a man remaining in his body hath not received, being
     unclothed of his flesh he cannot obtain,"
     saith Leo. Whether the dead received profit by the prayers of the
     living, was still a question in the Church. Maximus, in his Greek
     Scholies upon the writer of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, wisheth us
     to
     "mark, that even before" that writer's "time this doubt was
     questioned."

     Among the questions wherein Dulcitius desired to be resolved by St.
     Augustine, we find this to be one:

     "Whether the offering that is made for the dead did avail their
     souls any thing ?" Many "did say to this, that if herein any good
     were to be done after death, how much rather should the soul itself
     obtain ease for itself by its own confessing of her sins there, than
     that for the ease thereof an oblation should be procured by other
     men."

     The like also is noted by Cyril, or rather John, Bishop of
     Jerusalem, that he
     "knew many who said thus: What profit doth the soul get that goeth
     out of this world, either with sins or not with sins if you make
     mention of it in prayer?"

     And by Anastasius Sinaita, or NicÃSnus:
     "Some do doubt, saying that the dead are not profited by the
     oblations that are made for them."
     And long after them by Petrus Cluniacensis, in his treatise against
     the followers of Peter Bruse, in France:
     "That the good deeds of the living may profit the dead, both these
     heretics do deny, and some Catholics also do seem to doubt."
     Nay, in the West, not the profit only, but the lawfulness also of
     these doings for the dead was called in question; as partly may be
     collected by Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz's consulting with Pope
     Gregory, about 730 years after the birth of our Saviour,
     "whether it were lawful to offer oblations for the dead,"
     (which he should have no reason to do if no question had been made
     thereof among the Germans); and is plainly delivered by Hugo
     Etherianus, about 1170 years after Christ, in these words:

     "I know that many are deformed with vain opinions, thinking that the
     dead are not to be prayed for, because that neither Christ, nor the
     Apostles that succeeded him have intimated these things in the
     Scriptures. But they are ignorant that there be many things, and
     those exceeding necessary, frequented by the Holy Church, the
     tradition whereof is not had in the Scriptures; and yet they pertain
     nevertheless to the worship of God, and obtain great strength."
     Whereby it may appear that this practice wanted not opposition even
     then, when in the Papacy it was advanced unto its greatest height.
       _______________________________________________________________

                                   REMARKS

     So far Archbishop Ussher. The objects of making the above extract
     from his learned work have been as follows: first, in order to
     present before the reader a clear and conclusive argument against
     the Romanists, whose tenet of Purgatory seems therein to be fairly
     encountered and exposed. This, be it observed, is proposed as the
     chief object of this series of Tracts; viz. to erect safe and
     substantial bulwarks for the Anglican believer against the Church of
     Rome, to draw clear and intelligible lines, which may allow him
     securely to expatiate in the rich pastures of Catholicism, without
     the reasonable dread, that he, as an individual, may fall into that
     great snare which has bewildered the whole Latin Church, the snare
     of Popery. And it is conceived that the foregoing citation from
     Ussher proves thus much at least, that Romanism is not the pure
     creed of antiquity, that the tenet of Purgatory in particular is but
     the gradual creation of centuries, and has no claim on our
     consideration.

     In all controversy it is a great point to keep on the offensive, and
     it is well we should be seriously aware of this, and use our
     advantage. Romanists have been entangling us too long in questions
     which our deficient knowledge of antiquity has kept us from
     retorting on themselves. The true answer to their accusations is to
     adduce, as we may well do, counter charges: which are not only more
     effective, both from their nature and their number, than any which
     they can bring against us, but especially from the circumstance that
     they profess in all matters of faith to be infallible.

     A second motive for the foregoing republication has been a hope to
     obviate a danger to which controversialists will be exposed, who
     have not mastered the facts of the case. It is shown in the above
     pages, that it does not follow, that, though Prayers for the dead
     were an Apostolical institution, (granting it,) that therefore
     Purgatory was; whereas unlearned persons, when assailed by
     Romanists, may be, and doubtless have been, overcome and converted
     by arguments which reach far short of the Roman doctrine in dispute.

     It may serve as a suitable ending to this Paper, to present the
     reader with an account of the circumstances under which the
     Commemoration for the Dead was omitted from our own Liturgy. Some
     information on the general subject of the Primitive Commemoration
     will be found in No. 63 of these Tracts.

     In 1548, the second year of King Edward, it was determined by the
     King in Council to draw up a public liturgy. "This Service Book,"
     says Collier, (History, vol. ii. page 252,) "when confirmed in
     Parliament, it was supposed would effect a more general compliance.
     For then the pretences of defective authority in a Privy Council,
     would be all out of doors. To this purpose the Committee of Bishops
     and Divines . . . were ordered to attend the king on the first of
     September." . . . "This Committee of Bishops and Divines," he
     proceeds, "set down this (as is very well observed) for a general
     rule, not to change any thing for the sake of novelty. In this
     performance they resolved to govern themselves by the word of God
     and the precedent of the Primitive Church.....Their business was
     only to brighten what had been rusted by time, to discharge the
     innovations of latter ages, and bring things up to the primitive
     standard. To this purpose, it was very prudently agreed to make use
     of none but English help. When Calvin heard of the farther advances
     of Reformation, he offered Cranmer his assistance, but was happily
     refused by the Archbishop. It is true he gave Martin Bucer and Peter
     Martyr, two eminent divines, an invitation to our Universities; but
     the Liturgy, as Heylin proves, was finished before their arrival."

     The compilation which was the subject of these deliberations is
     called the First Book of King Edward, and in it the Burial Service
     proceeded as follows, to use the words of the same author.

     "In the office for the Burial of the Dead, when the priest throws
     earth upon the corpse, he says,

     ;I commend thy soul to GOD the Father Almighty, and thy body to
     the ground,' &c.

     ;And the next prayer begins thus:

     ;We commend into thy hands of Mercy, most merciful Father, the
     soul of this our brother departed: . . . that when the judgment
     shall come which Thou hast committed to Thy well beloved Son, both
     this our brother and we may be found acceptable in Thy sight, and we
     may receive Thy blessing,' &c.

     "The next prayer stands thus:

     ;Almighty GOD, we give Thee hearty thanks for this Thy servant,
     whom Thou hast delivered from the miseries of this wretched world,
     from the body of death and all temptation; and as we trust, hast
     brought his soul, which he committed into Thy holy hands, into sure
     consolation and rest. Grant, we beseech Thee, that at the day of
     judgment, his soul and all the souls of Thy elect, departed out of
     this life, may with us and we with them fully receive Thy promise,
     and be made perfect altogether, through the glorious resurrection of
     thy Son, JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

     "After the second Lesson, 'Lord have mercy upon us,' &c. and the
     Lord's Prayer, the Priest says,

     ;Enter not, O Lord, into judgment with Thy servant:
     ;Ans. For in Thy sight no living creature shall be justified.
     ;Pr. From the gates of hell,
     ;Ans. Deliver their souls, O Lord.
     ;Pr. I believe to see the goodness of the Lord,
     ;Ans. In the land of the living.
     ;Pr. O Lord, graciously hear my prayer,
     ;Ans. And let my cry come unto Thee.'

     "Then follows this prayer:
     ;O Lord, with whom do live the spirits of them that be dead,
     and in whom the souls of them that be elected after they be
     delivered from the burden of the flesh, be in joy and felicity:
     grant unto this Thy servant that the sins which he committed in this
     world be not imputed unto him, but that he, escaping the gates of
     hell, and pains of eternal darkness, may ever dwell in the regions
     of light, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the place where is no
     weeping, sorrow, nor heaviness; and when that dreadful day of the
     resurrection shall come, make him to rise also with the just and
     righteous, and receive this body again to glory, then made pure and
     incorruptible. Set him on the right hand of Thy Son JESUS CHRIST,
     among Thy holy and elect, that there he may hear with them these
     most sweet and comfortable words, Come to me, ye blessed.' &c....

     "At the Burial of the Dead, there is an order for the Communion, I
     shall only mention what is particular to the occasion. First, the
     42nd Psalm is said by way of introduction. The Collect is now used
     at burials: it begins thus ;O merciful GOD, the Father,'
     &c. The epistle is taken out of 1 Thess. [iv. ?] l 3, and the gospel
     is John vi. 37---40. Receiving the holy Eucharist is not without
     precedent in the Primitive Church, as appears by Canon 44th of the
     Council of Carthage.... Upon this Canon the learned Bishop Beveridge
     cites a passage of St. Austin, to prove the custom of recommending
     the dead to GOD ALMIGHTY upon such occasions."

     So much for King Edward's first Book; now let us pass to the
     transactions of 1551.

     "Much greater alterations," says Collier, "were now coming forward.
     The Common Prayer Book was to be revised; Calvin, Bucer, and Peter
     Martyr, by making exceptions against the Service established, had
     their share in bringing on this change. Calvin, who thought himself
     wiser than the Ancient Church, and fit to dictate religion to all
     countries in Christendom, had taken no small pains in this matter,"
     . . . and, "being apprehensive he might not pass altogether for an
     oracle with the Council and Bishops, [he] tried his interest in
     other places, and pushed his design by his agents in the court, the
     country, and the Universities. Bucer was a strong second to Calvin,
     and what efforts he made has been seen already. Peter Martyr agreed
     to Bucer's amendments, as appears by his letter in which there
     are some remarkable passages. For the purpose, ;he gives God
     thanks, for making himself and Bucer instrumental in putting the
     Bishops in mind of the exceptionable places in the Common Prayer.
     The Archbishop Cranmer told him they had met about this business,
     and concluded on a great many alterations, but what those
     corrections were, Cranmer did not acquaint him, neither durst he
     take the freedom to inquire. But that which pleases me not a
     little,' continues Martyr, ;Sir John Cheek acquaints me,
     that if the Bishops refuse to consent to the altering what is
     necessary, the King is resolved to do it himself, and recommend that
     affair at the next Session of Parliament.' These foreign
     divines had gained the esteem of some of the English Bishops so far,
     that in last year's Convocation, there was a contest in the
     upper house concerning some controverted passages in the Common
     Prayer Book."

     As to the subject before us, Collier observes; "The custom" [of
     praying for the dead] "seems to have gone upon this principle, that
     supreme happiness is not to be expected till the resurrection; and
     that in the interval between death and the end of the world is a
     state of imperfect bliss. The Church might, therefore, believe her
     prayers for good people departed might improve their condition, and
     raise the satisfactions of this period." Bucer's objections to
     the usage were, according to Collier, as follows: "He urges this
     text of St. John, 'He that hears my word, and believes on Him that
     sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
     condemnation.' He likewise cites a passage from the Romans,
     where it is said, 'Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.... He argues
     from it thus, that nothing can be done in faith, without an express
     warrant from Scripture, or that stands upon a conclusion evidently
     inferred from some inspired text; but Prayer for the Dead stands
     upon neither of these grounds, and therefore ought to be
     waved......There is another text urged in favour of Bucer's
     opinion, ;Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord from
     henceforth; yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their
     labours, and their works do follow them.' ....

     "To proceed, the Common Prayer Book was brought to a review, and
     altered to the same form in which it stands at present, some little
     variations for clearing ambiguities excepted. . . The Prayers for
     persons deceased, in the Communion Service and the Office of Burial,
     are expunged."

     Such is the history of the present state of opinion in the English
     Church touching Prayers for the Dead. The chief reason against the
     usage is given by implication, in the third part of the Homily on
     Prayer, which proceeds on the ground that such Prayers are
     essentially connected with belief in Purgatory. This argument is
     well commented on by a recent writer in the following passage:---

     "In primitive times," says Mr. Palmer, "these Commemorations" [in
     the Holy Communion] "were accompanied by Prayers for the departed.
     When the custom of praying for the dead began in the Christian
     Church, has never been ascertained. We find traces of the practice
     in the second century, and either then, or shortly after, it appears
     to have been customary in all parts of the Church. The first person
     who objected to such prayers was Aerius, who lived in the fourth
     century, but his arguments were answered by various writers, and did
     not produce any effect in altering the immemorial practice of
     praying for those that rest. Accordingly, from that time all the
     Liturgies in the world contained such prayers. These facts being
     certain, it becomes a matter of some interest and importance to
     ascertain the reasons which Justified the omission of these Prayers
     in the Liturgy of the English Church for the first time in the reign
     of King Edward VI. Some persons will perhaps say that this sort of
     prayer is unscriptural; that it infers either the Romish doctrine of
     Purgatory, or something else which is contrary to the revealed will
     of God, or the nature of things. But when we reflect that the great
     divines of the English Church have not taken this ground, and that
     the Church of England herself has never formally condemned Prayers
     for the Dead, but only omitted them in her Liturgy, we may perhaps
     think that there are some other reasons to justify that omission.

     "The true justification of the Church of England is to be found in
     her zeal for the purity of the Christian faith, and for the welfare
     of all her members. It is too well known that the erroneous doctrine
     of Purgatory had crept into the Western Church, and n as held by
     many of the clergy and people. Prayers for the departed were
     represented as an absolute proof that the Church had always held the
     doctrine of Purgatory. The deceitfulness of this argument can only
     be estimated by the fact, that many persons at this day, who deny
     the doctrine of Purgatory, assert positively that the custom of
     praying for the departed infers a belief in Purgatory. If persons of
     education are deceived by this argument, which has been a hundred
     times refuted, how is it possible that the uneducated classes could
     ever have got rid of the persuasion that their Church held the
     doctrine of Purgatory, if prayers for the departed had been
     continued in the Liturgy? Would not this custom, in fact, have
     rooted the error of Purgatory in their minds? If then the Church of
     England omitted public Prayer for the departed Saints, it was to
     remove the errors and superstitions of the people, and to preserve
     the purity of the Christian faith....

     "It was therefore relinquished, and the happy consequence was, that
     all the people gradually became free of the error of Purgatory.
     Thenceforward the Catholic doctrine prevailed in England, that the
     righteous after death are immediately translated to a region of
     peace, refreshment, and joy; while the wicked are consigned to the
     place of torment from whence there is no escape. And, when the
     doctrine of Purgatory had been extirpated, the English Church
     restored the Commemoration of Saints departed in the Liturgy;" [viz.
     at the end of the Prayer for the Church Militant;] "which had been
     omitted for many years, from the same cautious and pious regard to
     the souls of her children."

     OXFORD,

     The Feast of the Epiphany
     .
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
