                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                               SUNDAY LESSONS.

                         THE PRINCIPLE OF SELECTION.

                                 [Number 13]
     __________________________________________________________________

     AMONG projected alterations in the Liturgy, not the least popular
     seems to be a very considerable change in the selection of the
     Sunday Lessons. People do not see, first of all, why such and such
     chapters are chosen out of the Old Testament, in preference to
     others which they think more edifying. Secondly they see no reason
     why the Church should not assign Proper Lessons to every Sunday from
     the New Testament as well as from the Old.

     One who hopes that he should not be found froward, were a change to
     be made by competent Spiritual Authority, begs leave, nevertheless,
     to submit to all considerate lovers of the Prayer Book, the
     following remarks on the two points specified above.

     I. Before people find fault with the selection of particular
     chapters, they ought to be tolerably certain that they understand
     the principle, on which the Lessons in general were selected. It is
     to be regretted, that we have remaining little, if any, historical
     evidence touching the views of the Compilers of the Liturgy, in that
     portion of their task. What we do know, amounts to this:---

     In King Edward's Prayer-Books no distinction was made, as to
     appointing lessons, between Sundays and -other days of the week. The
     chapter of the Old Testament set down for the day of the month was
     read in course for the Sunday Lesson; as is the case still in regard
     of the New Testament. With a view to this, probably the well-known
     notice was prepared, which now stands prefixed to the Second Book of
     Homilies, but in Strype's opinion belongs rather to the First
     Book. "Where, (i. e. whereas it may so chance, some one or other
     chapter of the Old Testament to fall in order to be read upon the
     Sundays or Holidays, which were better to be changed with some other
     of the New Testament for more edification, it shall be well done to
     spend your time to consider well of such chapters before-hand." This
     came out first, as it seems, in 1560; and about the same time a
     Commission was given to Archbishop Parker, Bishop Grindal, and
     others; " to peruse the order of the Lessons, throughout the whole
     year, and to cause new calenders to be printed." In pursuance of
     which the present Table of Sunday Lessons was prepared, and came out
     the same year. We may then consider it as Archbishop Parker's;
     and surely not one among the Reformers might be more thoroughly
     depended on for a sound practical view of things. Farther than this,
     we have no direct information. We must be guided there fore,
     entirely by the internal evidence of the Lessons themselves.

     The series begins from Septuagesima Sunday, because it was the
     custom of the early Church to read the Book of Genesis in Lent. Let
     us examine them in their order, ending with the 6th Sunday after
     Epiphany in the following year. We shall find, if I mistake not,
     that the selection may be accounted for on this supposition, viz.
     That the arrangers desired to exhibit GOD'S former dealings
     with His chosen people collectively and the return made by them to
     GOD, in such manner as might best illustrate His dealing with each
     individual, chosen now to be in His Church, and the snares and
     temptations most apt to beset us as Christians.

     Certainly, there does exist a very wonderful analogy between these
     two cases, that of the Jewish nation delineated in the Bible, and
     that of a baptized Christian, as known by daily experience: an
     analogy most striking in itself, most clearly pointed out more than
     once in the New Testament, and very serviceable, if rightly
     understood in many great points of faith and practice. This analogy
     arises out of the fact, that Christians severally are, what the Jews
     collectively-were, partakers of an especial Covenant.

     It is to be supposed, that the Great Enemy has his peculiar way of
     dealing with souls placed in such a relation, as with parents,
     children, subjects, and others, according to their several
     relations. To exhibit such his purpose and proceedings, and to
     exemplify also the counteracting methods of providence, seems to be
     one especial purpose of the historical portions of the Old
     Testament: in which the prophetical are here included.

     To give an instance of what is here meant. One of the most
     prevailing temptations to unbelief and careless practice is the
     daily experience we have, of Christians behaving so very differently
     from what one should expect, ý priori, in GOD'S elect. It does
     not seem as if, left to ourselves, we should have any adequate idea
     of the kind of hypocrisy described by Bishop Butler, in his Sermon
     on Self-deceit, and elsewhere; I mean the temper which leads men to
     act towards GOD ALMIGHTY, (whom, in theory and understanding? they
     own,) as if it were in their power to deceive Him. To explain this
     for the benefit of those most in danger, seems one great purpose of
     the Old Testament: to explain it I say, for the benefit of unworthy
     Christians, who may discern themselves, by anticipation, in the
     faithless demeanour of the Jews.

     It is conceivable that a series of extracts might be made, to
     illustrate this matter more particularly, i. e. on a principle of
     admonition. Would not such a series coincide, very nearly, with the
     Sunday Lessons?

     Thus, the first and second chapters of Genesis, represent man as at
     first placed in covenant with his Maker; the third, sixth, and ninth
     represent his fall, and the wonderful mixture of judgment and mercy
     which prepared him for the recovery, which GOD had in store for him,
     by virtue of a New Covenant. Then, (Gen. xii.) follows the first
     definite step towards the establishment of that New Covenant: the
     call of Abraham to be the select pattern and spiritual progenitor of
     all who shall ever be saved by it. And here again judgment is shown
     mingled with mercy, and thorough probation accompanying both, by the
     two selected chapters of Abraham's history; the fall of Sodom,
     and the sacrifice of Isaac. Then begins the account of Jacob and his
     family, the other great section of the Patriarchal History;
     displaying on the one hand, the great danger of taking liberties
     with moral duty, under the notion of being favourites with GOD; (for
     the subsequent misfortunes of Jacob's family are clearly
     traceable to that first want of faith;) on the other hand, the
     mysterious ways of Providence, turning those misfortunes and errors
     into means for the great purpose of preparing a covenanted nation to
     take the place of the covenanted family.

     With Exodus begins the history of that nation, which may perhaps not
     improperly be styled the appropriate type of each backsliding
     Christian, as Abraham we know was the type of the faithful. The
     chapters selected shew, first, GOD preparing the way for their
     election; then their reluctant acceptance of the favour; next, the
     actual process of their deliverance; the whole being so arranged,
     that this latter shall correspond with the season of Easter; which
     is indeed (so to speak) the point of sight of the whole Christian
     Calendar, as the passover is of the Jewish.

     But to proceed:---the Lessons from Easter to Whit-Sunday (taking
     into account the great days of Easter-week and Ascension,) are so
     many specimens of the transgressions of the elect people, and of the
     methods taken to chastise or reclaim them. The case of Balaam, most
     evidently needs not to be excepted from this account; for never was
     a clearer analogy than between him and the Jewish people: they
     murmuring and rebelling with the Shechinah before their eyes; he
     coveting the reward of iniquity, perhaps plotting seduction in his
     heart, while he heard the words of GOD, and saw the vision of the
     ALMIGHTY. NO analogy can be more exact; except it be that between
     the same miserable man, and a Christian baptised, sinning against
     faith and knowledge.

     The Lessons for Trinity-Sunday as was natural, interrupt for one
     week the progress of the history, for the purpose of reviewing the
     whole course. The mind is carried back, first, to GOD'S
     original intent in creating man after his own image; next, to the
     appointed condition or mean, by which that image is to be regained;
     viz. the imitation of Abraham's faith. In effect, they rehearse
     to us both Covenants; that of Paradise, and that of the Gospel.

     Resuming our view of the covenanted people, we contemplate them
     first victorious, peaceful and comparatively innocent, renewing
     their engagements with their Maker in the days of Joshua in the days
     of the Judges backsliding and factious, but not yet deliberately
     unbelieving; next, trained by Eli's sons to irreverence for
     holy things; and, not ill-prepared to apostatize, by choosing a king
     on principles of accommodation and worldly policy.

     The gradual degeneracy and downfal of that unhappy king (the emblem
     of the Jews of his time, as Balaam had been of a former generation,)
     and the substitution of one of better mind, are continued through a
     chain of Lessons, to the excision, long after his death, of almost
     all that remained of his family.

     But, in the mean. time, a new source of sin and misery had arisen in
     the family of David himself. His personal sins, indeed, were fast
     followed by sincere repentance, and therefore obtained speedy
     pardon; but because they were the sins of one with whom peculiar
     covenant had been made, they drew down the severest temporal
     judgments; the sword never departed from his house; and, by the
     dissensions which arose in his time a way was prepared for the
     schism and two-fold apostacy, first heretical and afterwards
     infidel, of the greater part of the chosen people. These, with
     GOD'S endeavours to reclaim them by the warnings of Elijah and
     Elisha, and by the sword of Jehu are traced in the chapters taken
     from the Books of Kings, from the first curse of Jeroboam's
     schismatical altar, till the final reprobation and captivity of the
     ten tribes. In the course of which history, especial emphasis is
     laid, first on the misfortunes incurred by the nameless prophet from
     Judah, by king Jehoshaphat and others, for their licentious
     communication with the heretical and idolatrous tribes, secondly, on
     the extension of GOD'S favour to the Gentiles, in two instances
     for ever memorable; which extension, we may believe, was virtually a
     signal warning to his then elect people.

     At length we arrive at the last sad scene of the history; the
     downfal of the Church of Judah also. We behold a temporary amendment
     in the days of Hezekiah, occasioned by the combination of miraculous
     mercy to herself, with judgment on Samaria in her sight. But we
     presently read of her thorough relapse; of her resistance to the
     example and efforts of good Josiah; of her sensuality? and
     oppression her neglect and contempt of warnings, all accompanied
     with high pretences to civilization, and a certain kind of
     orthodoxy. All these, her dealings with GOD, are delineated at large
     by Jeremiah. In the Lessons from Ezekiel we have revealed more of
     GOD'S dealings with her. He peremptorily orders his message to
     be delivered, whether men will hear, or whether they will forbear,
     He denounces the false prophets, preaching peace where there was no
     peace; and discovers their secret and vulgar artifices. He answers
     pretences from feigned conformity, from reliance on the remnant of
     good in the land; and again, from an affected perplexity at the
     supposed inequality of his proceedings. He recapitulates, by special
     message, all their past conduct, as His chosen people: a summary,
     answering with marvellous exactness to the sad experience of the
     Christian world. When all these had failed, He utters, in two
     fearful parables, a final sentence of direct reprobation. All this
     we have set before us from Ezekiel. The Lessons from Daniel serve to
     show that the chosen people were not yet abandoned; they keep alive
     hope, and exemplify faith, triumphing in the worst of times; which
     is also the drift of the prophecy selected from Joel. Then Micah is
     introduced, like Samuel and Ezekiel, recapitulating the whole course
     of the probation of the elect; and Habakkuk, extending the judgment
     to their oppressors, and reasserting the condition required on their
     part to make their election not a curse but a blessing. "The just by
     his faith shall live." Finally, the readings from the Proverbs of
     Solomon bring the warning home, so to speak, to every man's own
     door. Taken in connexion with all that had gone before, they turn
     GOD'S miraculous proceeding, with the Jews into an available
     sanction of righteousness, for the meanest man's use on the
     slightest occasion.

     And now, the year drawing to a close, and the mysterious time of
     Christmas approaching, our Mother, with true parental anxiety, takes
     up, as it were, the thread of her instructions anew at that point of
     the fortunes of Israel, to which the circumstance of civilized and
     Christian Europe, especially those of our own country, during the
     comparatively few years which have passed since the arrangement of
     the Prayer-Book, may reasonably be thought to correspond most
     nearly, the Church reverts to the time of Hezekiah, and selects the
     prophecy of Isaiah as the fittest to prepare the minds for
     CHRIST'S two Advents. By the confession of some who are most
     apt to find fault, her selection here has been most appropriate.
     Witness the sins reproved in the Jews; their formality, pride,
     oppression, drunkenness, presumption, sophistical self-deceit; their
     impatience of primitive truth, and reliance upon mere worldly
     expedients. Witness again the wonderful mixture of triumph and
     desolation, judgments and mercies foretold; such as might seem
     impossible to be accomplished together, at one and the same time,
     among one and the same people. Yet we seem to behold both
     accomplished; the one is the tendencies of the Gospel, and what it
     performs for the faithful privately; the other, in men's
     ordinary way of receiving it, and what may be called its public
     failure. The very denunciations against idolatry by some, perhaps,
     accounted an outward sin, how well do they apply to the various
     apostasies, which men contrive for themselves now, and say, to one
     after another, Deliver me, for thou art my GOD! The summaries of
     past national mercies, how truly do they represent what is now done
     for each redeemed and sanctified soul! And as to the anticipation of
     mercies and judgment to come, they do not only correspond to the
     revelations of the New Testament, but we have the express authority
     of our LORD and St. Paul for believing, that, of both, language was
     purposely used, (in the purpose, I mean, of the HOLY SPIRIT,) which
     literally refers to the life and death everlasting, the sanctions of
     GOD'S covenant with every Christian singly.

     This hasty and brief sketch may serve to point out the thread of
     warning, which, it is conceived, runs through the Sunday Lessons,
     and renders it very improper to deal with them as if they had been
     taken at random, or might fitly be changed at will, for others
     supposed in themselves more edifying.

     Whether Archbishop Parker and his coadjutors had this connexion in
     view, as it is not, perhaps, possible to ascertain, so neither is it
     very material. Perhaps the fact of its spontaneous evolution (if
     such an expression may be allowed,) would make it appear so much the
     more delicate, and tampering with it so much the more perilous. For,
     on that supposition, it must be more than humanly interwoven with
     the very staple of the Scripture History. But, supposing it
     designed, it may have been suggested by the tenour of the Invitatory
     Psalm, commonly called, Venite exultemus; which Psalm had been used
     daily in the Church quite down from primitive times. Many persons,
     probably, have asked themselves, why that Psalm in particular should
     be preferred above the many of the same general tenour, for
     unremitting use in the Church daily. The answer probably may be
     found in the grave monitory warnings at the end: which, by the case
     of the Jews in the wilderness, describe so forcibly the position and
     peculiar danger of a chosen people. That one Psalm may, on
     reflection, give the key to the arrangement of the Lessons;
     allowing, of course, for the interruption sometimes caused by the
     special matter of some great Christian Festival. In general,
     however, the course of the Lessons will be found adapting itself,
     with exquisite felicity, to the course of the Festivals also.

     Occasionally, the Archbishop's choice may have been influenced,
     (in subordination, however, to the great principle,) by the
     connexion of the portion of history with some offence which required
     warning, but, from the weakness of human nature, was very likely to
     pass unnoticed. The thirty-fourth of Genesis, and the fifth of
     Jeremiah, are instances. When men shrink from reading those
     chapters, they bear witness instinctively to the wisdom and kindness
     of the Church in ordering them to be read.

     Whatever may be one's private opinion, it is not necessary here
     to maintain, that the general principle suggested above was the very
     best on which selection might proceed, or that the very aptest
     chapters of all have been selected in each instance. But clearly, if
     such a principle be at all recognised, it ought to be most carefully
     kept in view, whatever insertions or omissions are proposed. Many
     persons seem to think, that questions of this sort are settled, if
     on merely comparing the present Lesson with the proposed substitute,
     it appear that the one, taken singly, is more edifying than the
     other. But this will not hold, if it be a mistake altogether to take
     any one singly and apart. The quantity of edification may be greater
     on the whole by completing the proposed narrative or argument,
     though on this or that particular day the impression made may be
     less. To neglect this consideration partakes of the same error, as
     if renounced, or other chapters must be found, completing his idea
     as accurately as these do: which latter, it is imagined, would prove
     a difficult task.

     2. The other matter proposed for enquiry is less important, and may
     be dismissed in a few words. Why, it is asked, should there not be
     Lessons from the New Testament proper for every Sunday in the year,
     as well as for a few great days? In answer to which it may be
     observed, first, that there are, generally, two such Lessons, always
     one, read in the Communion Service. Only that which is called The
     Second Lesson, varies with the day of the month. Of the reasons
     which, in point of fact, led to the continuance of this latter
     arrangement, I am not aware that any record remains. But it appears
     to be accompanied with two incidental advantages, which some may
     think considerable enough to render alteration unadvisable, without
     very clear proof of greater benefit likely to arise from it.

     One of these advantages is, the standing memorial thus afforded to
     the people, that there was once such a thing as a Daily Service;
     that such is the system and wish of our Church, and the theory on
     which the Prayer-Book is constructed. It is an intelligible hint,
     that a Churchman's devotion was not meant to be all narrowed
     into the Sunday. The Services of that holy day were but to be a
     continuance and an expansion of those due on the other days; not a
     totally distinct thing. This we are weekly reminded of, by the very
     place in the Calendar, where we must look for the Second Sunday
     Lesson. The value of the hint people of course will estimate more or
     less highly, according to their sense of a Daily Service, and of the
     responsibility which Churchmen have incurred by letting it drop so
     very quietly in almost every parish of the kingdom.

     The other advantage of these varying Second Lessons, (and it will be
     found in practice a very considerable one,) is this; that it
     presents the Old and New Scriptures in endless variety of mutual
     combinations, the more striking because they are unforeseen, and in
     a certain sense casual. The thought is happily expressed by Herbert,
     thus addressing Holy Scripture:---

     "O that I knew how all thy lights combine,
     And the configurations of their glory;
     Seeing not only how each verse doth shine,
     But all the constellations of the story!"

     Very much help, both for pastors and people, both for giving and
     receiving instruction, may be gathered, (if the writer deceive
     himself not concerning the results of his own experience,) by
     attending to this hint yearly, as the varying Psalms and Second
     Lessons come successively into conjunction with the unvarying First
     Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels. To note and collect the scattered
     lights will be found in itself a most engaging and interesting task,
     and it will serve in no slight degree to impress considerate minds,
     from time to time, more deeply with the fulness, the harmony, the
     condescension, of the Word of Life.

     These reasons are respectfully addressed to those, who, in their
     anxiety for immediate visible edification, appear somehow to over
     look the fact, that "the Church Lessons are a series arranged
     according to certain general principles. Scruples, and feelings of
     different kinds, occurring to this or that person as to the use of
     particular passages, must be met, of course, on their own grounds;
     except so far as they ought to be silenced by the overpowering
     advantage, which may appear to arise by adhering to the general
     principle of selection.

     At any rate, it is much to be wished, that very free talking, and
     very cheap publishing, in behalf of such changes, were carefully
     avoided. Is there not something even cruel, in raising scruples and
     niceties, and unpleasant associations of various kinds, among those
     who as yet happily have never dreamed of criticising the Bible? If
     change is wanted, let proper reasons be quietly submitted to
     competent authorities. But let us not appeal lightly, and at random,
     to the sense of an irreverent presumptuous age, on one of the most
     sacred of all subjects.
