

                             Project Canterbury
                            Tracts for the Times

                                   No. 76
                           Catena Patrum. No. II.

              Testimony of Writers in the Later English Church
                 to the Doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration.
     __________________________________________________________________

     CONSIDERING the confidence and zeal with which modern and
     unscriptural views on the subject of Christian Baptism are put forth
     at the present time, it will not be unseasonable to present the
     reader with some testimonies from the writings of Anglican Divines
     in behalf of the doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration. By this
     doctrine is meant, first, that the Sacrament of Baptism is not a
     mere sign or promise, but actually a means of grace, an instrument,
     by which, when rightly received, the soul is admitted to the
     benefits of CHRIST's Atonement, such as the forgiveness of sin,
     original and actual, reconciliation to GOD, a new nature, adoption,
     citizenship in CHRIST's kingdom, and the inheritance of heaven,--in
     a word, Regeneration. And next, Baptism is considered to be rightly
     received, when there is no positive obstacle or hindrance to the
     reception in the recipient, such as impenitence or unbelief would be
     in the case of an adult; so that infants are necessarily right
     recipients of it, as not being yet capable of actual sin. So much as
     these two positions is certainly held by every one of the authors of
     the following passages, though it is impossible to bring out their
     full meaning in such brief extracts, however carefully selected.

     There is a variety of questions connected with the subject beyond
     the two positions above set down, on which the writers under review
     differ more or less from each other, but not so as in the slightest
     degree to interfere with their clear and deliberate maintenance of
     these. Such, for instance, as the following:--Whether grace be given
     in and through the water, or only contemporaneously with it. Again,
     whether Baptism, strictly speaking, conveys the blessings annexed to
     it, or simply admits into a state gifted with those blessings, as
     being the initiatory rite of the covenant of mercy. Or, again,
     whether or not Baptism, besides washing away past sin, admits into a
     state in which, for sins henceforth committed, Repentance stands in
     place of a Sacrament, so as to ensure forgiveness without specific
     ordinance; or whether the Holy Eucharist is that ordinance; or
     whether the full and explicit absolution of sin after Baptism is
     altogether put off till the day of judgment. Or, again, there may be
     difference of opinion as to the state of infants dying unbaptized.
     Or, again, whether Regeneration is an instantaneous work completed
     in Baptism, or admits of degrees and growth. Or, again, whether or
     not the Holy Spirit can utterly desert a soul once inhabited by Him,
     except to quit it for ever. Or, whether the change in the soul made
     by Baptism is indelible, for good or for evil; or may be undone, as
     if it had never been. Or, how far the enjoyment of the grace
     attached to it is suspended on the condition of our doing our part
     in the covenant. All these are questions, far from unimportant, but
     which do not at present come into consideration; the one point,
     maintained in the following extracts, being, that infants are by and
     at baptism unconditionally translated from a state of wrath into a
     state of grace and acceptance for CHRIST's sake.

                           List of Authors cited.

   1. Jewell.
   2. [1]Hooker.
   3. Andrews.
   4. Donne.
   5. Field.
   6. Jackson.
   7. Laud.
   8. Bramhall.
   9. Hammond.
   10. Taylor.
   11. [2]Heylin.
   12. Allestrie.
   13. Barrow.
   14. Thorndike.
   15. Pearson.
   16. Bull.
   17. [3]Comber.
   18. Ken.
   19. Patrick.
   20. Beveridge.
   21. Sharp. 22. Scott.
   23. Jenkin.
   24. Sherlock.
   25. Wall.
   26. Potter.
   27. Nelson.
   28. Waterland.
   29. Kettlewell.
   30. Hickes.
   31. Johnson.
   32. Leslie.
   33. Wilson.
   34. Bingham.
   35. Skelton.
   36. Horne.
   37. Jones.
   38. Heber.
   39. Jebb.
   40. Van Mildert.
   41. Mant.

     NB. It would be easy to extend this list, were it necessary: vid.
     Cosin's Devotions, Stanhope's Boyle Lectures, &c.
     __________________________________________________________________

                  JEWELL, BISHOP.--Treatise on Sacraments.

     "They (the sacraments) are not bare signs; it were blasphemy so to
     say. The grace of GOD doth always work with His sacraments; but we
     are taught not to seek that grace in the sign, but to assure
     ourselves by receiving the sign, that it is given us by the thing
     signified. We are not washed from our sins by the water, we are not
     fed to eternal life by the bread and wine, but by the precious blood
     of our Saviour CHRIST, that lieth hid in these sacraments." p. 263.

     For this cause are infants baptized, because they are born in sin,
     and cannot become spiritual but by this new birth of the water and
     the Spirit. They are the heirs of the promise; the covenant of GOD's
     favour is made unto them. GOD said to Abraham, "I will establish my
     covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee." "Therefore,"
     saith the Apostle, "If the root be holy, so are the branches." And
     again, "The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
     unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband; else were your
     children unclean; but now are they holy." When the disciples rebuked
     those that brought little children to CHRIST, that he might touch
     them, he said, "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and
     forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of GOD." And again,
     "Their angels always behold the face of my Father which is in
     heaven." p. 265.

     "The water wherein we are baptized doth not cleanse the soul;" but,
     "the blood of JESUS CHRIST his Son doth cleanse us from all sin."
     Not the water, but the blood of CHRIST reconcileth us unto GOD,
     strengtheneth our conscience, and worketh our redemption. We must
     seek salvation in CHRIST alone, and not in any outward thing. Hereof
     saith Cyprian, "Remissio peccatorum, sive per baptismum, sive per
     alia sacramenta donetur, proprie spiritus sancti est. Verborum
     solemnitas," &c. "The remission of sins, whether it be given by
     baptism, or by any other sacraments, does properly appertain to the
     Holy Ghost. The solemnity of the words, and the invocation of GOD'S
     holy Name, and the outward signs appointed to the ministry of the
     priest by the institution of the Apostles, work the visible outward
     sacrament. But touching the substance thereof, it is the Holy Ghost
     that worketh it." St. Ambrose also saith, "Vidisti fontem, vidisti
     sacerdotem," &c. "Thou hast seen the water, thou hast seen the
     priest, thou hast seen those things which thou mightest see with the
     eyes of thy body, and with such sight as man hath: but those things
     which work and do the deed of salvation, which no eye can see, thou
     hast not seen."

     "Such a change is made in the sacrament of baptism. Through the
     power of GOD'S working the water is turned into blood. They that be
     washed in it receive the remission of sins; their robes are made
     clean in the blood of the Lamb. The water itself is nothing; but by
     the working of GOD'S Spirit, the death and merits of our Lord and
     Saviour CHRIST, are thereby assured unto us.

     "A figure hereof was given at the Red Sea. The children of Israel
     passed through in safety; but Pharaoh and his whole army were
     drowned. Another figure hereof was given in the ark. The whole world
     was drowned, but Noah and his family were saved alive. Even so in
     the fountain of baptism, our spiritual Pharaoh, the devil, is
     choked: his army, that is, our sins are drowned, and we are saved.
     The wicked of the world are swallowed in concupiscence and vanities,
     and we abide safe in the ark: GOD hath chosen us to be a peculiar
     people to Himself; we walk not after the flesh, but after the
     Spirit, therefore we are in CHRIST JESUS, and there is now no
     condemnation unto us.

     "Now touching the minister of this sacrament, whether he be a good
     man or an evil man, GODly or GODless, an heretic or a Catholic, an
     idolater or a true worshipper of GOD: the effect is all one, the
     value or worthiness of the sacrament dependeth not of man, but of
     GOD. Man pronounceth the word, but GOD settleth our hearts with
     grace; man toucheth or washeth us with water, but GOD maketh us
     clean by the cross of CHRIST. It is not the minister, but CHRIST
     Himself which is the Lamb of GOD that taketh away the sins of the
     world." p. 266.

                Ibid.--Reply to M. Harding's Censure, p. 249.

     And forasmuch as these two sacraments, being both of force like,
     these men [the Romanists] to advance their fantasies in the one, by
     comparison so much abase the other: and specially for the better
     opening of Chrysostom's mind, I think it good, briefly and by the
     way, somewhat to touch what the old Catholic Fathers have written of
     GOD'S invisible working in the Sacrament of Baptism. Dionysius
     generally of all mysteries writeth thus: "Angeli Deum," &c. "The
     angels being creatures spiritual, so far forth as it is lawful for
     them, behold GOD, and his godly power, But we are led as we may, by
     sensible outward tokens," (which he calleth images) "unto the
     contemplation of heavenly things." The Fathers, in the Council of
     Nice, say thus: "Baptism must be considered, not with our bodily
     eyes, but with the eyes of our mind. Thou seest the water; think
     thou of the power of GOD, that in the water is hidden. Think thou
     that the water is full of heavenly fire, and of the sanctification
     of the Holy Ghost." Chrysostom, speaking likewise of baptism, saith
     thus: "Ego non aspectu judico ea, quas videntur, sed mentis oculis,"
     Sec. "The things that I see, I judge not by sight, but by the eyes
     of my mind. The heathen, when he heareth the water of baptism,
     taketh it only for plain water: but I see not simply, or barely,
     that I see; I see the cleansing of the soul by the Spirit of GOD."
     So likewise saith Nazianzenus: "Mysterium (baptismi) majus est, quam
     ea quas videntur:" "The mystery of baptism is greater than it
     appeareth to the eye." So St. Ambrose: "Aliud est, quod visibiliter
     agitur; aliud quod invisibiliter celebratur:" "In baptism there is
     one thing done visibly to the eye; another thing is wrought
     invisibly to the mind."

     Again he saith, "Believe not only the bodily eyes (in this sacrament
     of baptism): the thing that is not seen, is better seen: the thing
     that thou seest is corruptible; the thing that thou secst not is for
     ever." To be short, in consideration of these invisible effects,
     Tertullian saith, "The Holy Ghost cometh down and halloweth the
     water." St. Basil saith, "The kingdom of heaven is there set open."
     Chrysostom saith, "GOD himself in baptism, by his invisible power,
     holdeth thy head." St. Ambrose saith, "The water hath the grace of
     CHRIST; in it is the presence of the Trinity." St. Bernard saith,
     "Let us be washed in his blood."

     "By the authorities of thus many ancient Fathers, it is plain, that
     in the sacrament of baptism, by the sensible sign of water, the
     invisible grace of GOD is given unto us."

    HOOKER, PRESBYTER AND DOCTOR.--On Ecclesiastical Polity. Book v. 60.

     Unless as the Spirit is a necessary inward cause, so water were a
     necessary outward mean, to our regeneration, what construction
     should we give unto those words wherein we are said to be new born,
     and that ex udatoV, even of water? Why are we taught, that with
     water GOD doth purify and cleanse His Church? Wherefore do the
     Apostles of CHRIST term baptism a bath of regeneration? What purpose
     had they in giving men advice to receive outward baptism, and in
     persuading them it did avail to remission of sins? If outward
     baptism were a cause in itself possessed of that power, either
     natural or supernatural, without the present operation whereof no
     such effect could possibly grow, it must then follow, that seeing
     effects do never prevent the necessary causes out of which they
     spring, no man could ever receive grace before baptism: which being
     apparently both known, and also confessed to be otherwise, in many
     particulars, although in the rest we make not baptism a cause of
     grace; yet the grace which is given them with their baptism, doth so
     far forth depend on the very outward sacrament, that GOD will have
     it embraced, not only as a sign or token what we receive, but also
     as an instrument or means whereby we receive grace, because baptism
     is a sacrament which GOD hath instituted in His Church, to the end
     that they which receive the same might thereby be incorporated into
     CHRIST; and so through His most precious merit obtain, as well that
     saving grace of imputation which taketh away all former guiltiness,
     as also that infused divine virtue of the Holy Ghost which giveth to
     the powers of the soul their first disposition towards future
     newness of life. There are that elevate too much the ordinary and
     immediate means of life, relying wholly upon the bare conceit of
     that eternal election, which notwithstanding includeth a
     subordination of means, without which we are not actually brought to
     enjoy what GOD secretly did intend; and therefore, to build upon
     GOD'S election, if we keep not ourselves to the ways which He hath
     appointed for men to walk in, is but a self.deceiving vanity. When
     the Apostle saw men called to the participation of Jesus CHRIST,
     after the Gospel of GOD embraced, and the sacrament of life
     received, he feareth not then to put them in the number of elect
     saints; he then accounteth them delivered from death, and clean
     purged from all sin. Till then, notwithstanding their preordination
     unto life, which none could know of, saving GOD, what were they, in
     the Apostle's own account, but children of wrath, as well as others,
     plain aliens, altogether without hope, strangers, utterly without
     GOD in this present world? So that by sacraments, and other sensible
     tokens of grace, we may boldly gather, that He whose mercy
     vouchsafeth now to bestow the means, hath also sithence intended us
     that whereunto they lead. But let us never think it safe to presume
     of our own last, and by bare conjectural collections of his first
     intent and purpose, the means failing that should come between.
     Predestination bringeth not to life without the grace of eternal
     vocation, wherein our baptism is implied. For as we are not
     naturally men without birth, so neither are we Christian men in the
     eye of the Church of GOD but by new birth; nor according to the
     manifest ordinary course of divine dispensation new born, but by
     that baptism which both declareth and maketh us Christians.

     In which respect, we justly hold it to be the door of our actual
     entrance into GOD'S house, the first apparent beginning of life, a
     seal perhaps to the grace of election before received; but to our
     sanctification here, a step that hath not any before it.

                                  Ibid. 64.

     Were St. Augustine now living, there are which would tell him for
     his better instruction, that to say of a child, it is elect, and to
     say, it doth believe, are all one; for which cause, sith no man is
     able precisely to affirm the one of any infant in particular, it
     followeth that precisely and absolutely we ought not to say the
     other. Which precise and absolute terms are needless in this case.
     We speak of infants as the rule of piety alloweth both to speak and
     think. They that can take to themselves in ordinary talk, a
     charitable kind of liberty to name men of their own sort GOD'S dear
     children, (notwithstanding the large reign of hypocrisy,) should
     not, methinks, be so strict and rigorous against the Church, for
     presuming as it doth of a Christian innocent. For when we know how
     CHRIST in general hath said, of such is the kingdom of heaven, which
     kingdom is the inheritance of GOD'S elect; and do withal behold how
     His providence hath called them unto the first beginnings of eternal
     life, and presented them at the well-spring of new birth, wherein
     original sin is purged, besides which sin there is no hindrance of
     their salvation known to us, as themselves will grant; hard it were
     that having so many fair inducements whereupon to ground, we should
     not be thought to utter, at the least, a truth as probable and
     allowable in terming any such particular infant an elect babe, as in
     presuming the like of others whose safety, nevertheless, we are not
     absolutely able to warrant.

         ANDREWS, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--On the Holy Ghost. Serm. viii.

     Now CHRIST is baptized. And no sooner is He so, but He falls to His
     prayers, Indigentia mater orationis, (we say) want begets prayer:
     therefore, yet there wants somewhat--a part, and that a chief part
     of baptism is still behind.

     There goes more to baptism, if it be as it should be, than baptismus
     fluminis, yea, (I may boldly say,) there goes more to it, if it be
     as it should, than baptismus sanguinis. CHRIST "came in water and
     blood, not in water only, but in water and blood:" that is not
     enough, except the "Spirit also bear witness." So baptismus flaminis
     is to come too. There is to be a Trinity beneath,--1. water, 2.
     blood, and 3. the Spirit, to answer to that above: but (the Spirit's
     baptism coming too) in the mouth of all three, all is made sure, all
     established thoroughly. This is it, He prays for, as man.

     For the baptism of blood that was due to every one of us, (and each
     of us to have been baptized in his own blood, to have had three such
     immersions,) that hath CHRIST quit us of. When he was asked by the
     prophet, "How his robes came so red?" He says, "He had been in the
     wine press;" but there He had been, and that "He had trod alone, and
     not one of the people with Him;" none but He there; in that, spare
     us in that. But the other two parts He sets down precisely to
     Nicodemus (and in him, to us all,)--1. water, 2. and the Holy
     Ghost.... St. Paul tells us (Col. ii.) that besides the
     circumcision, that was the manufacture, there was another made
     without hands. There is so in baptism, besides the hand seen, that
     casts on the water, the virtue of the Holy Ghost is there, working,
     without hands, what here was wrought.

     And for this CHRIST prays; that then it might, might then, and might
     ever, be joined to that of the water. Not in his baptism only, but
     in the people's; and (as he afterwards enlarges His prayer) in all
     others that "should ever after believe in His name:" that what in
     His (here) was, in all theirs might be; what in this first, in all
     following; what in CHRIST'S, in all Christians; heaven might open,
     the Holy Ghost come down, the Father be pleased to say over the same
     words, toties quoties, so oft as any Christian man's child is
     brought to his baptism. CHRIST hath prayed, now,

     See the force of His prayer. Before it heaven was mured up, no dove
     to be seen, no voice to be heard, Altum silentium. But straight upon
     it (as if they had but waited the last word of His prayer) all of
     them follow immediately.

     Heaven opens, first. For, if when the lower heaven was shut three
     years, Elias was able with his prayer to open it, (it is our Saviour
     in the next chapter following,) and bring down rain; the prayer of
     CHRIST (who is more of might than many such as Elias) shall it not
     be much more of force, to enter the Heaven of heavens, the highest
     of them all, and to bring down thence the waters "above the
     heavens," even the heavenly graces of the Holy Spirit?

     For so, when our Saviour cried, (John vii.) "If any thirst," &c.
     "This (saith St. John) He spake of the Spirit." For the Spirit and
     His graces are the very supercelestial water; one drop whereof,
     infused into the waters of Jordan, will give them an admirable power
     to pierce even into the innermost parts of the soul: and to baptize
     it, (that is) not only to take out the stains of it, and make it
     clean; but further, give it a tincture, lustre, or gloss; for so is
     baptism properly of baptw, taken from the dyer's fat, and is a dying
     or giving a fresh colour, and not a bare washing only.

     Always, the opening of heaven, opens unto us, that no baptism
     without heaven open: and so, that baptism is de caelo non ab
     hominibus, from heaven, not of men. So was it here; so is it to be
     holden for ever. 2. And from heaven; not clanculum (as Prometheus is
     said to get his fire), but anewcqhnai, orderly, by a fair door set
     open, in the view of much people; for all that were present saw the
     impression in the sky. Which door was not mured up again; for we
     find it still open, (Apoc. iiii.) and we find that keys were made,
     and given of it, after this. 3. And all this, that there might not
     only be a passage for these down, but for us up. For heaven gate, ab
     hoc exemplo, doth ever open at baptism; in sign, he that new cometh
     from the fount hath then right of entrance in thither. Then (I say)
     when by baptism he is cleansed; for before, Nihil inquinatum,
     nothing defiled can enter there.

                   DONNE, PRESBYTER.--Serm. xxxi. p. 309.

     The water of Baptism, is the water that runs through all the
     Fathers; all the Fathers that had occasion to dive or dip in these
     waters (to say anything of them) make these first waters, in the
     creation, the figure of baptism. Therefore Tertullian makes the
     water, Primam sedem Spiritus Sancti, the progress, and the settled
     house, the voyage, and the harbour, the circumference, and the
     centre of the Holy Ghost. And therefore St. Hierome calls these
     waters, Matrem mundi, the Mother of the world; and this in the
     figure of baptism. The waters brought forth the whole world, were
     delivered of the whole world, as a mother is delivered of a child;
     and this, in figura baptismi, to foreshew that the waters also
     should bring forth the Church; that the Church of GOD should be born
     of the Sacrament of Baptism. So says Damascen, and he establishes it
     with better authority than his own. The divine Basil said, (saith
     he) "The Spirit of GOD wrought upon the waters in the creation,
     because he meant to do so after, in the regeneration of man. And
     therefore, Pristinam sedem recognoscens conquiescit, till the Holy
     Ghost have moved upon our children in baptism, let us not think all
     done that belongs to those children; and when the Holy Ghost hath
     moved upon those waters, so in baptism, let us not doubt of His
     power and effect upon all those children that die so. We know no
     means how those waters could have produced a minnow, a shrimp,
     without the Spirit of GOD had moved upon them; and by this motion of
     the Spirit of GOD, we know they produce whales, and leviathans. We
     know no ordinary means of any saving grace for a child but baptism;
     neither are we to doubt of the fulness of salvation, in them that
     have received it. And for ourselves, mergimur et emergimus, in
     baptism we are sunk under water, and then raised above the water
     again; which was the manner of baptizing in the Christian Church, by
     immersion, and not by aspersion, till of late times: Affectus et
     amores, (says he,) our corrupt affections, and our inordinate love
     of this world is that, that is to be drowned in us; Amor
     securitatis, a love of peace, and holy assurance, and acquiescence
     in GOD's ordinance, is that that lifts us above water.

     Therefore that Father puts all upon the due consideration of our
     baptism: and as St. Jerome says, Certainly he that thinks upon the
     last Judgment advisedly, cannot sin thus; so he that says with St.
     Augustine, Let me make every day to GOD, this confession: Domine,
     &c. O Lord my GOD, O holy, holy, holy Lord my GOD; I consider that I
     was baptized in thy name, and what thou promised me, and what I
     promised thee then, and can I sin this sin? can this sin stand with
     those conditions, those stipulations which passed between us then?
     The Spirit of GOD is motion, the Spirit of GOD is rest too; and in
     due consideration of baptism, a true Christian is moved, and settled
     too; moved to a sense of the breach of his conditions, settled in
     the sense of the mercy of his GOD, in the merits of his CHRIST, upon
     his GODly sorrow. So these waters are the waters of baptism.

            FIELD, PRESBYTER.--Of the Church, book i. chap. xii.

     This was the fault of sundry in the Primitive Church; and which was
     yet more to be condemned, many did therefore defer and put off their
     baptism, that so whatsoever evil things they did in the mean time,
     might in that laver of new birth be washed away, thereby taking
     greater liberty to offend, for that they had so present means of
     full remission, and perfect reconciliation; so making that which was
     ordained against sin, and for the weakening and overthrow of it, to
     be an encouragement thereunto, and to give life and strength unto
     it.

   JACKSON, PRESBYTER AND DOCTOR.--On CHRIST's exercise of his everlasting
                   Priesthood, ch. i. (vol. iii. p. 271.)

     It is no part of our Church's doctrine or meaning, that the washing,
     or sprinkling infants' bodies with consecrated water, should take
     away sins by its own immediate virtue. To affirm thus much implies,
     as I conceive, a contradiction to that apostolical doctrine. "The
     like figure whereunto even Baptism doth also now save us (not the
     putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
     conscience toward GOD) by the resurrection of Jesus CHRIST, who is
     gone into heaven," &c. 1 Pet. iii. 21. The meaning of our Church
     intends no further than thus: That if this sacrament of Baptism be
     duly administered, the blood, or bloody sacrifice of CHRIST, or
     (which is all one) the influence of His Spirit doth always
     accompany, or is concurrent to this solemn act. But whether this
     influence of His Spirit or virtual presence of His body and blood be
     either immediately or only terminated to the soul and spirit of the
     party baptized, or have some virtual influence upon the water of
     Baptism as a mean to convey the Grace of Regeneration unto the soul
     of the party baptized, whilst the water is poured upon him, is too
     nice and curious a question, in this age, for sober Christians to
     debate or contend about. It may suffice to believe that this
     sacramental pledge hath a virtual presence of CHRIST's Blood, or
     some real influence from his Body, concomitant, though not
     consubstantiated to it, which is prefigured or signified by the
     washing or sprinkling the body with water.

     But it will be, or rather is objected, but only by private or some
     saucy spirits, That if the doctrine of our Church were true and
     sound, then all that be rightly baptized should be undoubtedly
     saved, being once washed or cleansed from their sins. The objection
     were of some force, if the Church of England did hold or maintain
     such doctrine or tenets as they do which make or favour it; to wit,
     That the sins of the elect only are remitted by Baptism, or by
     Sacrament of CHRIST's Body and Blood; or, that sins once remitted
     cannot be remitted afresh; or, that the party which is once pardoned
     for his sins, before committed, cannot afterwards be condemned. The
     orthodoxal truth is, That albeit the original sin of children truly
     baptized in the name of CHRIST, or the actual sins of young or elder
     men so baptized, and the sins of their forefathers (so far as it
     concerns men of riper years to repent them of both) be so truly
     remitted in Baptism, that neither young men nor old may be baptized
     again; yet the stipulation of a good conscience, wherein the
     internal Baptism (as St. Peter tells) doth consist, may and ought,
     by the law of GOD and of CHRIST's Church, to be reiterated.

     And this stipulation of every Christian, male or female, though
     baptized after they have passed their nonage for civil contracts,
     ought to be resumed or reacknowledged as often as they intend to
     receive the sacramental pledges of CHRIST's Body and Blood, either
     privately or in the public congregation. But for all such as have
     been baptized in their infancy, the personal resumption or
     ratification of that vow, which their fathers and mothers in GOD did
     make for them at the sacred laver, is to be exacted of them, ore
     tenus, in some public congregation, before they can be lawfully
     admitted to be public communicants of CHRIST's Body and Blood.

                          Ibid.--Ch. lv. (p. 298.)

     If either the actual sins of all men, or the sins of the elect in
     special, had been so remitted by CHRIST's death, as some conceive
     they were, that is, absolutely pardoned before they were committed,
     there had been no end or use of CHRIST's Resurrection in respect of
     us; no need of Baptism: yet was Baptism, from the hour of His
     resurrection, necessary unto all that did believe in His death and
     resurrection. The urgent and indispensable necessity of Baptism,
     especially in respect of actual believers, is not anywhere more
     emphatically intimated than in St. Peter's answer to the Jews, whose
     hearts were pierced with sorrow that they had been the causes of
     CHRIST's death. They in this stound or sting of conscience demand,
     "Men and brethren, what shall we do? And Peter answered them,
     Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
     CHRIST for the remission of sins. And they that gladly received the
     word were baptized the same day." Acts ii. 37, 38. 41. These men had
     been deeply tainted with sin, not original only, but with sins
     actual of the worst kind; guilty they were, in a high degrees of the
     death of the Son of GOD, yet had they as well their actual as their
     original sins remitted by baptism. It is then unsound and imperfect
     doctrine, that sin original only is taken away or remitted by
     Baptism; for whatsoever sins are remitted or taken away by CHRIST's
     death, the same sins are in the same manner remitted and taken away
     by Baptism into His death; actual sins are remitted, in such as are
     guilty of actual sins when they are baptized, though only sin
     original be actually remitted in those which are not guilty of
     actual sins, as in infants. Now man's sins are actually remitted
     before he be actually guilty of them.

     The question is, how either sin original is remitted, or how any
     work of Satan is dissolved by Baptism; and this question, in the
     general, is rightly resolved, by saying, "They are remitted by
     faith." But this general resolution sufficeth not, unless we know
     the object of our faith in this particular. Now the particular
     object of our faith, of that faith by which sins (whether by Baptism
     or otherwise) are remitted, is not our general belief in CHRIST;
     even our belief in CHRIST dying for us in particular, will not
     suffice, unless it include our belief of the everlasting virtue of
     His bloody sacrifice, and of His everlasting priesthood for
     purifying and cleansing our souls. No sins be truly remitted unless
     they be remitted by the office or exercise of His priesthood; and
     whilst so remitted they are not remitted by any other sacrifice than
     by the sole virtue of His body and blood, which He "once offered for
     all," for the sins of all. It is not the virtue or efficacy of the
     consecrated water in which we were washed, but the virtue of His
     blood which was once shed for us, and which, by Baptism, is
     sprinkled upon us, or communicated unto us, which immediately
     cleanseth us from all our sins. From this everlasting virtue of this
     His bloody sacrifice, faith, by the ministry of Baptism, is
     immediately gotten in such as had it not before. And in such as have
     faith before they be baptized, the guilt of actual sins is remitted
     by the exercise or act of faith, as it apprehends the everlasting
     efficacy of this sacrifice, and by the prayer of faith, and
     supplication unto our High Priest. Faith, then, is as the mouth or
     appetite by which we receive this food of life, and is a good sign
     of health; but it is the food itself received, which must continue
     health and strengthen spiritual life in us; and the food of life is
     no other than CHRIST's body and blood; and it is our High Priest
     himself which must give us this food.

     Baptism, saith St. Peter (1 Pet. iii. 20.), doth save us. What
     Baptism doth save us? not the putting away the filth of the flesh,
     (yet this is the immediate effect of the water in Baptism,) but the
     answer (or stipulation) of a good conscience towards GOD! But how
     doth this kind of Baptism, or this concomitant of Baptism save us?
     The Apostle, in the same place, tells us, "by the resurrection of
     Jesus CHRIST." "The answer or stipulation of a good conscience,"
     includes an illumination of our spirits by the Spirit of GOD; a
     qualification by which we are made sons of light, being before the
     sons of darkness. But, that by this qualification we become the sons
     of light; that this qualification is, by Baptism, wrought in us;
     that by this qualification, however wrought in us, we are saved from
     our sins; all this is immediately from the "virtue of CHRIST's
     Resurrection." That is, as you have heard before, he was consecrated
     by the sufferings of death to be an everlasting Priest, and by his
     resurrection from death, his body and blood became an everlasting
     propitiation for sins, an inexhaustible fountain of grace by which
     we are purified from the dead works of sin.

   Ibid.--Of CHRIST's session at the right hand of GOD. ch. xvii. p. 170.

     [St. Paul] saith, "that all that are baptized are dead to sin;" that
     is, first, they are "dead unto it by solemn vow or profession."
     Secondly, they are said to be "dead unto sin, or sin to be dead in
     them," inasmuch as they in Baptism receive an antidote from GOD by
     which the rage and poison of it might easily be assuaged or
     expelled, so they would not either receive that grace or means which
     GOD in Baptism exhibits unto them in vain, or use it amiss. So we
     may say that any popular disease is quelled or taken away, after a
     sovereign remedy be found against it, which never fails; so men will
     seek for it, reasonably apply for it, and observe that diet which
     the physician, upon the taking of it, prescribes unto them. Some in
     our times there be (and more, I think, than have been in all the
     former) which deny all baptismal grace. Others there be which grant
     some grace to be conferred by Baptism, even unto infants; but yet
     these restrain it only to infants elect. And this they take to be
     the meaning of our Church's Catechism, wherein children arc taught
     to believe [That as CHRIST, the second person in the Trinity, did
     redeem them and all mankind; so the Holy Ghost (the third person)
     doth sanctify them and all the elect people of GOD.]

     But can any man be persuaded that it was any part of our Church's
     meaning, to teach children when they first make profession of their
     faith, to believe, that they are of the number of the elect; that
     is, of "such as cannot finally perish?" This were to teach them
     their faith backwards, and to seek the kingdom of heaven not
     ascendendo, by ascending, but descendendo, by descending from it.
     For higher than thus St. Paul himself, in his greatest perfection,
     could not possibly reach; no, nor the blessed angels, which have
     kept their first station almost these 6000 years. Yet certain it is,
     that our Church would have every one, at the very first profession
     of his faith, to believe that he is one of the elect people of GOD.

         LAUD, ARCHBISHOP AND MARTYR. Conference with Fisher, ยง 15.

     First, that Baptism is necessary to the salvation of infants (in the
     ordinary way of the Church, without binding GOD to the use and means
     of that sacrament, to which he hath bound us) is expressed in St.
     John iii. "Except a man be born of water," &c. So, no baptism, no
     entrance. Nor can infants creep in any other ordinary way. And this
     is the received opinion of all the ancient Church of CHRIST.

     And, secondly, That infants ought to be baptized, is first plain by
     evident and direct consequence out of Scripture. For if there be no
     salvation for infants in the ordinary way of the Church but by
     Baptism, and this appear in Scripture, as it doth, then out of all
     doubt, the consequence is most evident out of that Scripture, that
     infants are to be baptized, that their salvation may be certain. For
     they which cannot help themselves, must not be left only to
     extraordinary helps, of which we have no assurance, and for which we
     have no warrant at all in Scripture, while we, in the mean time,
     neglect the ordinary way and means commanded by CHRIST. Secondly, it
     is very near an expression in Scripture itself. For when St. Peter
     had ended that great Sermon of his, Acts ii., he applies two
     comforts unto them, verse 38, "Amend your life," &c. And then, v.
     39, he infers, "For the promise is made," &c. The promise; what
     promise? What? why the promise of sanctification by the Holy Ghost.
     By what means; Why, by Baptism. For it is expressly, "Be baptized,
     and ye shall receive." And as expressly, "This promise is made to
     you and to your children."

   BRAMHALL, ARCHBISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Of persons dying without Baptism,
                                   p. 979.

     The discourse which happened the other day, about your little
     daughter, I had quite forgotten till you were pleased to mention it
     again last night. If any thing did fall from me, which gave offence
     to any there present, I am right sorrowful, but I hope there did
     not; as, on the other side, if any occasion of offence had been
     given to me, I should readily have sacrificed it to that reverend
     respect, which is due to the place your table, anciently accounted a
     sacred thing, and to the lord of it, yourself. This morning, lying
     musing in my bed, it produced some trouble to me, to consider how
     passionately we are all wedded to our own parties, and how apt we
     are all to censure the opinions of others before we understand them,
     while our want of charity is a greater error in ourselves, and more
     displeasing to Almighty GOD, than any of those supposed assertions
     which we condemn in others; especially when they come to be rightly
     understood. And to show this particular breach is not so wide, nor
     the more moderate of either party so disagreeing, as is imagined, I
     digested these sudden meditations, drawn wholly, in a manner, from
     the grounds of the Roman schools; and so soon as I was risen, I
     committed them to writing.

     First, there is a great difference to be made between the sole want
     of Baptism upon invincible necessity, and the contempt or wilful
     neglect of Baptism when it may be had. The latter we acknowledge to
     be a damnable sin, and, without repentance and GOD'S extraordinary
     mercy, to exclude a man from all hope of salvation. But yet if such
     a person, before his death, shall repent and deplore his neglect of
     the means of grace, from his heart, and desire, with all his soul,
     to be baptized, but is debarred from it invincibly, we do not, we
     dare not pass sentence of condemnation upon him; nor yet the Roman
     Catholics themselves. The question then is, whether the want of
     Baptism, upon invincible necessity, do evermore infallibly exclude
     from heaven?

     Secondly, we distinguish between the visible sign, and the invisible
     grace; between the exterior sacramental ablution, and the grace of
     the sacrament, that is, interior regeneration. We believe that
     whosoever hath the former, hath the latter also, so that he do not
     put a bar against the efficacy of the sacrament by his infidelity or
     hypocrisy, of which a child is not capable. And therefore our very
     Liturgy doth teach, that a child baptized, dying before the
     commission of actual, sin, is undoubtedly saved.

     Thirdly, we believe that without baptismal grace, that is,
     regeneration, no man can enter into the kingdom of GOD. But whether
     GOD hath so tied and bound himself to His ordinances and sacraments
     that He doth not or cannot confer the grace of the sacraments,
     extraordinarily, where it seemeth good to His eyes, without the
     outward element; this is the question between us.

   HAMMOND, PRESBYTER, CONFESSOR, AND DOCTOR.--Sermon XV.--A New Creature.

     It is observable, that our state of nature and sin is, in Scripture,
     expressed ordinarily by old age, the natural sinful man; that is,
     all our natural affections that are born and grow up with us, are
     called the old man; as if, since Adam's fall, we were decrepit and
     feeble, and aged as soon as born, as a child begotten by a man in a
     consumption never comes to the strength of a man, is always weak,
     and crazy, and puling, hath all the imperfections and corporal
     infirmities of age before he is out of his infancy. And, according
     to this ground, the whole analogy of Scripture runs; all that is
     opposite to the old decrepit state, to the dotage of nature, is new.
     The new covenant, Mark i. 27. The language of believers, new
     tongues, Mark xvi. 17. A new commandment, John xiii. 34. A new man,
     Eph. ii. 15. In sum, the state of grace is expressed by panta kaina,
     all is become new, 2 Cor. v. 17. So that old and new, as it divides
     the Bible, the whole state of things, the world; so it doth that to
     which all these serve, man; every natural man which hath nothing but
     nature in him, is an o]d man, be he never so young, is full of
     years, even before he is able to tell them. Adam was a perfect man
     when he was but a minute old, and all his children are old even in
     the cradle, nay, even dead with old age, Eph. ii. 5. And, then,
     consequently, every spiritual man, which hath somewhat else in him
     than he receiveth from Adam, he that is born from above, John iii.
     3, gennhqh anwqen, (for it may be so rendered from the original, as
     well as born again, as our English read it), he that is by GOD'S
     Spirit quickened from the old death, Eph. ii. 5., he is, contrary to
     the former, a new man, a new creature; the old eagle hath cast his
     beak and is grown young; the man, when old, hath entered the second
     time into his mother's womb, and is born again; all the grey hairs
     and wrinkles fall off from him, as the scales from blind Tobit's
     eyes, and he comes forth a refined, glorious, beauteous new
     creature: you would wonder to see the change. So that you find, in
     general, that the Scripture presumes it, that there is a renovation,
     a casting away the old coat, a youth and spring again in many men,
     from the old age and weak bedrid state of nature. Now that you may
     conceive wherein it consists, how this new man is brought forth in
     us, by whom it is conceived, and in what womb it is carried, I will
     require no more of you, than to observe and understand with me, what
     is meant by the ordinary phrase in our divines, a new principle, or
     inward principle of life, and that you shall do briefly thus. A
     man's body is naturally a sluggish, inactive, motionless, heavy
     thing, not able to stir or move the least animal motion, without a
     soul to enliven it; without that, it is but a carcase, as you see at
     death, when the soul is separated from it, it returns to be but a
     stock or lump of flesh; the soul bestows all life and motion on it,
     and enables it to perform any work of nature. Again, the body and
     soul together, considered in relation to somewhat above their power
     and activity, are as impotent and as motionless as before the body
     without the soul. Set a man to remove a mountain, and he will heave,
     perhaps, to obey your command, but in event will do no more towards
     the displacing of it, than a stone in the street could do: but now,
     let an omnipotent power be annexed to this man, let a supernatural
     spirit be joined to this soul, and then will it be able to overcome
     the proudest, stoutest difficulty in nature. You have heard, in the
     Primitive Church, of a grain of faith removing mountains; and
     believe me, all miracles are not yet outdated. The work of
     regeneration, the bestowing of a spiritual life on one dead in
     trespasses and sins, the making of a carcase walk, the natural old
     man to spring again, and move spiritually, is as great a miracle as
     that......

     For the third question, when this new principle enters: first you
     are to know, that it comes into the heart in a threefold condition;
     first, as an harbinger; secondly, as a private secret guest;
     thirdly, as an inhabitant or housekeeper. As it is an harbinger, so
     it comes to fit and prepare us for itself; trims up, and sweeps, and
     sweetens the soul, that it may be readier to entertain him when he
     comes to reside; and that he doth (as the ancient gladiators had
     their arma praelusoria) by skirmishing with our corruptions, before
     he comes to give them a pitched battle; he brandishes a flaming
     sword about our ears, and as by a flash of lightning, gives us a
     sense of a dismal, hideous state; and so somewhat restrains us from
     excess and fury; first, by a momentary remorse, then by a more
     lasting, yet not purifying flame, the spirit of bondage. In sum,
     every check of conscience, every sigh for sin, every fear of
     judgment, every desire of grace, every motion or inclination toward
     spiritual good, be it ever so short-winded, is praeludium spiritus,
     a kind of John Baptist to CHRIST, something that GOD sent before "to
     prepare the ways of the Lord." And thus the Spirit comes very often;
     in every affliction, every disease, (which is part of GOD'S
     discipline, to keep us in order,) in brief, at every sermon that
     works upon us at the hearing: then, I say, the lightning flashes in
     our eyes; we have a glimpse of his Spirit, but cannot come to a full
     sight of it: and thus he appears to many, whom he will never dwell
     with. Unhappy men, that cannot lay hold on him, when he comes so
     near them! and yet somewhat more happy than they that never came
     within ken of him; stopt their ears when he spake to them even at
     this distance. Every man in the Christian Church hath frequently, in
     his life, a power to partake of GOD'S ordinary preparing graces: and
     it is some degree of obedience, though no work of regeneration, to
     make good use of them; and if he without the inhabitance of the
     Spirit, cannot make such use as he should, yet to make the best he
     can: and thus, I say, [i. e. in a parallel way] the Spirit appears
     to the unregenerate, almost every day of our lives. 2ndly, when this
     Spirit comes a guest to lodge with us, then he is said to enter; but
     till by actions and frequent obliging works, he makes himself known
     to his neighbours, as long as he keeps his chamber, till he declare
     himself to be there, so long he remains a private secret guest, and
     that is called the introduction of the form, that makes a man to be
     truly regenerate; when the seed is sown in his heart, when the habit
     is infused, and that is done sometimes discernibly, sometimes not
     discernibly, but seldom, as when Saul was called in the midst of his
     madness, Acts ix., he was certainly able to tell a man the very
     minute of his change, of his being made a new creature. Thus they
     which have long lived in an enormous AntiChristian course, do many
     times find themselves strucken on a sudden, and are able to date
     their regeneration, and tell you punctually how old they are in the
     Spirit. Yet because there be many preparations to this Spirit, which
     are not this Spirit, many presumptions in our hearts false grounded,
     many tremblings and jealousies in those that have it, great affinity
     between faith natural and spiritual: seeing it is a Spirit that thus
     enters, and not as it did light on the Disciples, in a bodily shape,
     it is not an easy matter for any one to define the time of his
     conversion. Some may guess somewhat nearer than others, as
     remembering a sensible change in themselves; but, in a word, the
     surest discerning of it is in its working, not at its entering. I
     may know that now I have the Spirit, better than at what time I came
     to it. Undiscernibly GOD'S supernatural agency interposes sometimes
     in the mother's womb, as in John Baptist springing in Elizabeth at
     Mary's salutation, (Luke i. 41.) and perhaps in Jeremy, (Jer. i. 5.)
     "Before thou earnest out of the womb, I sanctified thee," and (in
     Isa. xlix. 5.) "The LORD that formed me from the womb to be his
     servant." But this divine address attends most ordinarily till the
     time of our Baptism, when the Spirit, accompanying the outward sign,
     infuses itself into their hearts, and there seats and plants itself,
     and grows up with the reasonable soul, keeping even their most
     luxuriant years within bounds; and as they come to an use of their
     reason, to a more and more multiplying this habit of grace into holy
     spiritual acts of faith and obedience; from which it is ordinarily
     said, that infants baptized have habitual faith, as they may be also
     said to have habitual repentance, and habits of all other graces,
     because they have the root and seed of those beauteous, healthful
     flowers, which will actually flourish there when they come to years.
     And this, I say, is so frequent to be performed at Baptism, that
     ordinarily it is not wrought without that means, and in those means
     we may expect it, as our Church doth in our Liturgy, where she
     presumes, at every Baptism, that it hath pleased GOD to regenerate
     the infant by his Holy Spirit. And this may prove a solemn piece of
     comfort to some, who suspect their state more than they need, and
     think it impossible that they should be in a regenerate condition,
     because they have not as yet found any such notable change in
     themselves, as they see and observe in others. These men may as well
     be jealous they are not men, because they cannot remember when their
     soul came to them: if they can find the effects of spiritual life in
     themselves, let them call it what they will, a religious education,
     or a custom of well-doing, or an unacquaintedness with sin; let them
     comfort themselves in their estate, and be thankful to GOD who
     visited them thus betimes; let it never trouble them that they were
     not once as bad as other men, but rather acknowledge GOD'S mercy,
     who hath prevented such a change, and by uniting them to Him in the
     cradle, hath educated and nursed them up in familiarity with the
     Spirit.

    TAYLOR, BISHOP, CONFESSOR, AND DOCTOR.--Life of CHRIST, sect. 9.--On
                            Baptism, part ii. 16.

     Thirdly, in baptism we are born again; and this infants need in the
     present circumstances, and for the same great reason that men of age
     and reason do. For our natural birth is either of itself
     insufficient, or is made so by the fall of Adam, and the consequent
     evils, that nature alone, or our first birth, cannot bring us to
     heaven, which is a supernatural end, that is, an end above all the
     power of our nature as now it is. So that if nature cannot bring us
     to heaven, grace must, or we can never get thither; if the first
     birth cannot, a second must: but the second birth spoken of in
     Scripture is baptism; "a man must be born of water and the Spirit."
     And therefore baptism is loutron paliggenesiaV, "the laver of a new
     birth." Either then infants cannot go to heaven any way that we know
     of, or they must be baptized. To say they are left to GOD, is an
     excuse, and no answer; for when GOD hath opened the door, and calls
     that the "entrance into heaven," we do not leave them to GOD, when
     we will not carry them to Him in the way which He hath described,
     and at the door which Himself hath opened: we leave them indeed, but
     it is but helpless and destitute: and though GOD is better than man,
     yet that is no warrant to us; what it will be to the children, that
     we cannot warrant or conjecture. And if it he objected, that to the
     new birth are required dispositions of our own, which are to he
     wrought by and in them that have the use of reason; besides that,
     this is wholly against the analogy of a new birth, in which the
     person to be born is wholly a passive, and hath put into him the
     principle that in time will produce its proper actions; it is
     certain that they that can receive the new birth, are capable of it.
     The effect of it is a possibility of being saved, and arriving to a
     supernatural felicity. If infants can receive this effect, then also
     the new birth, without which they cannot receive the effect. And if
     they can receive salvation, the effect of the new birth, what
     hinders them but they may receive that, that is in order to that
     effect, and ordained only for it, and which is nothing of itself,
     but in its institution and relation, and which may be received by
     the same capacity, in which one may be created, that is, a
     passivity, or a capacity obediential?

     Fourthly; concerning pardon of sins, which is one great effect of
     baptism, it is certain that infants have not that benefit, which men
     of sin and age may receive. He that hath a sickly stomach, drinks
     wine, and it not only refreshes his spirits, but cures his stomach:
     he that drinks wine, and hath not that disease, receives good by his
     wine, though it does not minister to so many needs; it refreshes,
     though it does not cure him: and when oil is poured upon a man's
     head, it does not always heal a wound, but sometimes makes him a
     cheerful countenance, sometimes it consigns him to be a king, or a
     priest. So it is in baptism: it does not heal the wounds of actual
     sins, because they have not committed them; but it takes off the
     evil of original sin: whatsoever is imputed to us by Adam's
     prevarication, is washed off by the death of the second Adam, into
     which we are baptized.

   HEYLIN, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--On the Apostles' Creed. Art. x. Chap.
                                     vi.

     In which, [Article the 27th] lest any should object, as Dr. Harding
     did against Bishop Jewell, that we make baptism to be nothing but a
     sign of regeneration, and that we dare not say, as the Catholic
     Church teacheth, according to the Holy Scriptures, "That in and by
     baptism, sins are fully and truly remitted, and put away," we will
     reply with the said most reverent and learned prelate, (a man who
     well understood the Church's meaning,) That we confess, and have
     ever taught, that in the Sacrament of Baptism, by the death and
     blood of CHRIST, is given remission of all manner of sins; and that
     not in half, or in part, or by way of imagination and fancy, but
     full, whole, and perfect of all together; and that if any man
     affirm, that "Baptism giveth not full remission of sins," it is no
     part nor portion of our doctrine. To the same effect also saith
     judicious Hooker, "Baptism is a Sacrament," &c. [quoted
     above]......But because these were private men, neither of which,
     for aught appears, had any hand in the first setting out of the Book
     of Articles, (which was in the reign of King Edward the Sixth,)
     though Bishop Jewell had in the second edition, when they were
     reviewed and published in Queen Elizabeth's time; let us consult the
     Book of Homilies, made and set out by those who composed the
     Articles; and there we find, that by GOD's mercy and the virtue of
     that sacrifice which our High Priest and Saviour CHRIST JESUS, the
     Son of GOD, once offered for us upon the cross, we do obtain GOD'S
     grace, and remission, as well of our original sin in baptism, as of
     all actual sin committed by us after baptism, if we truly repent and
     turn unfeignedly unto Him again. Which doctrine of the Church of
     England, as it is consonant to the Word of GOD in Holy Scripture, so
     is it also most agreeable to the common and received judgment of
     pure antiquity. For in the Scripture it is said expressly by St.
     Peter, &c. &c. This also was the judgment of the ancient writers,
     and that too long before the starting of the Pelagian heresies, to
     which much is ascribed by some as to the advancing of the efficacy
     and fruit of baptism, by succeeding Fathers. For thus Tertullian;
     "Now (saith he) do the waters daily preserve the people of GOD,
     death being destroyed and overthrown by the washing away of sins;
     for where the guilt is taken away, there is the punishment remitted
     also." St. Cyprian thus; "That the remission of sins, whether given
     in baptism, or by any other of the sacraments, is properly to be
     ascribed to the Holy Ghost." The African Fathers in full Council do
     affirm the same, and so doth Origen also for the Alexandrian, of
     both which we shall speak anon in the point of Paedobaptism. Thus
     Nyssen for the Eastern churches: "Baptism (saith he) is the
     expiation of our sins, the remission of our offences, the cause of
     our new birth and regeneration." Thus do the Fathers in the
     Constantinopolitan Council profess their faith in one baptism (or
     being only once baptized) "for the remission of sins." And finally,
     that this was the doctrine of the Church in general, before
     Augustine's time, who is conceived to be the first that did advance
     the power and efficacy of baptism to so great a height, in
     opposition to the Pelagian heresies, appears by a byword grown
     before his time into frequent use; the people being used to say,
     when they observed a man to be too much addicted to his lusts and
     pleasures, Let him alone to take his pleasure, "for as yet the man
     is not baptized." More of this we shall see anon in that which
     follows. Nor is this only Primitive, but good Protestant doctrine,
     as is most clear and evident by that of Zanchius, whom only I shall
     instance in, of the later writers. "When the minister baptizeth, I
     believe that CHRIST with his own hand, reacheth as it were from
     heaven, besprinkleth the infant with his blood to the remission of
     sins, by the hand of that man whom I see besprinkling him with the
     waters of baptism." So that I cannot choose but marvel how it comes
     to pass, that it must now be reckoned for a point of Popery, that
     the "Sacraments are instrumental causes of our justification," or of
     the "remission of our sins," or that it is a point of learning, of
     which neither the Scriptures, nor the reformed religion, have taught
     us anything. So easy a thing it is to blast that with Popery, which
     any way doth contradict our own private fancies.

                  ALLESTRIE, PRESBYTER.---Serm. ii. p. 23.

     In our Israel by our covenant there is as much of this required, for
     we were all initiated into our profession by washing, "regenerated
     in a laver," and "born again of water," becoming so Tertullian's
     sanctitatis designati, set aside for holiness, consecrated to
     cleanness, and made the votaries of purity: how clean a thing then
     must a Christian be who must be washed into the name? nor is he thus
     washed only in the font, there was a more inestimable "fountain
     opened for sin and uncleanness." (Apoc. xi. 5.) "Jesus CHRIST hath
     washed us in his own blood;" and Heb. ix. 14. "The blood of CHRIST
     did purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living GOD."
     How great is our necessity of being clean, when to provide a means
     to make us so, GOD opens his Son's side, and our laver is drawn out
     of the heart of CHRIST. Yet we have more effusions to contribute to
     it. (1 Cor. vi. 11.) "But ye are washed," &c. and we must "be
     baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire." A laver of flame also
     to wash away our scurfe as well as sallages, and beyond all these,
     some of us have been purged too with the fiery trial, and molten in
     the furnace of affliction, to separate our dross and purify us from
     alloy, that we may be clean and refined too, may become Christians
     of the highest carrect.

   BARROW, PRESBYTER AND DOCTOR.--Of the Holy Ghost. Serm. xlv. vol. iii.
                                   p. 370.

     The memorial therefore of that most gracious and glorious
     dispensation, [of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, &c.] the Christian
     Church wisely and piously hath continually preserved, obliging us at
     this time peculiarly to bless GOD for that incomparable and
     inestimable gift conferred then most visibly upon the Church, and
     still really bestowed upon every particular member duly incorporated
     thereinto.

     I say bestowed upon every particular member of the Church, for the
     evangelical covenant doth extend to every Christian; and a principal
     ingredient thereof is the collation of this Spirit, which is the
     finger of GOD, whereby (according to the Prophet Jeremy's
     description of that covenant) "GOD'S law is put into their inward
     parts, and written in their hearts!" inscribed (as St. Paul
     allusively speaketh) not with ink, but by the Spirit, &c.; not only
     as the Jewish law, represented from without to the senses, but
     impressed within upon the mind and affections; "whence GOD'S Spirit
     is called the Spirit of promise, the donation thereof being the
     peculiar promise of the Gospel; and the end of our Saviour's
     undertaking is by St. Paul declared, "that we might receive the
     promise of the Spirit by faith;" that is, by embracing Christianity
     might partake thereof, according to GOD'S promise; and the
     apostolical ministry or exhibition of the Gospel is styled "the
     ministration of the Spirit," and tasting "of the heavenly gift, and
     participation of the Holy Ghost," is part of a Christian's
     character; and the inception of Christianity is described by St.
     Paul, "But we are bound to give thanks," &c. (2 Thess. ii. 13.) and
     our Saviour instructed Nicodemus, that no man can enter into the
     kingdom of GOD (that is, become a Christian, or subject of GOD'S
     spiritual kingdom,) without being regenerated by water and by the
     spirit, that is, without baptism, and the spiritual grace attending
     it, according as St. Peter doth in the words adjoining to our text
     imply, that the reception of the Holy Spirit is annexed to holy
     baptism; "Repent (saith he) and be baptized every one," &c.... "for
     the promise (that great promise of the Holy Ghost) is unto you,"
     &c.....that is, the Holy Spirit is promised to all, how far soever
     distant in place and time, whoever shall be invited unto, and shall
     embrace the Christian profession. St. John also maketh it to be a
     distinctive mark of those, in whom CHRIST abideth, and who dwell in
     CHRIST, that is, of all true Christians, to have this Spirit;
     "Hereby [saith he] we know that he abideth in us by the Spirit,"
     &c..... and St. Paul denieth him to be a good Christian who is
     destitute thereof. "Now (saith he) if any man have not the Spirit,"
     &c.... "and know ye not, (saith he to the Corinthians) that ye are
     the temple," &c........that is, Do ye not understand this to be a
     common privilege of all Christians, such as ye profess yourselves to
     be? And the conversion of men to Christianity he thus expresseth,
     "After the kindness and love of GOD our Saviour," &c. (Tit. iii.
     4.). And all pious dispositions qualifying us for entrance into
     heaven and happiness (faith, charity, devotion, every grace, every
     virtue) are represented to be the fruits of the Holy Spirit. And the
     union of all Christians into one body; the Catholic society of all
     truly faithful people, doth, according to St. Paul, result from this
     one Spirit, as a common soul animating and actuating them: "For
     (saith he) by one Spirit are they all baptized," &c.....

     In fine, whatever some few persons, or some petty sects (as the
     Pelagians of old, the Socinians now) may have deemed, it hath been
     the doctrine constantly, and with very general consent, delivered in
     the Catholic Church, that to all persons by the holy mystery of
     baptism duly initiated to Christianity, or admitted into the
     communion of CHRIST'S body, the grace of GOD'S Holy Spirit certainly
     is bestowed, enabling them to perform the conditions of piety and
     virtue then undertaken by them; enlightening their minds, rectifying
     their wills, purifying their affections, directing and assisting
     them in their practice; the which holy gift (if not abused, ill
     treated, driven away, or quenched by their ill behaviour) will
     perpetually be continued, improved, and increased to them; it is
     therefore by Tertullian (in his prescriptions against heretics,)
     reckoned as part of that fundamental rule which was grounded upon
     the general tradition and consent of the Christian Church, that
     "CHRIST had sent the virtue of the Holy Ghost, in his room, which
     doth act believers;" to which that article doth answer of the
     Apostolical creed, in which we profess to believe the Holy Ghost,
     meaning, I suppose, thereby, not only the bare existence of the Holy
     Ghost, but also its gracious communication and energy.

                THORNDIKE, PRESBYTER.--Book iii. Chap. viii.

     It is demanded in the second place, what is that regeneration by
     that Holy Ghost, and wherein it consists, whereof infants that are
     baptized can be thought capable. For the wild conceits of those that
     imagine them to have faith in CHRIST (which without actual motion of
     the mind, is not), require miracles to be wrought of course, by
     baptizing, that the effect thereof may come to pass. And if the
     state of grace (which the habitual grace of GOD'S Spirit either
     supposeth or inferreth) is not to be attained but by the resolution
     of embracing the covenant of grace, (as, by all the premises, it is
     not otherwise attended), it will be every whit as hard to say what
     is that habitual grace, that is said to be poured into the souls of
     infants that are baptized, being nothing else but a facility in
     doing what the covenant of Grace requireth. But, if we conceive the
     regeneration of infants that are baptized to consist in the habitual
     assistance of GOD'S Spirit, the effects whereof are to appear, in
     making them able to perform that which their Christianity requires
     at their hands, so soon as they shall understand themselves to be
     obliged by it; we give reason enough of the effect of their baptism,
     whether they die or live, and yet become not liable to any
     inconvenience. For supposing the assistance of GOD'S Spirit,
     assigned them by the promise of baptism, to take effect when their
     bodily instruments enable the soul to act as Christianity requireth;
     if the soul, by death, come to be discharged of them, can any thing
     be said why original concupiscence, which is the law of the members,
     should remain any more, to impeach the subjection of all faculties
     to the law of GOD'S Spirit? Or will it be any thing strange, that
     when they come to be taught Christianity, the same Spirit of GOD
     should be thought to sway them, to embrace it of their own choice,
     and not only in compliance with the will of their parents? Yet is
     this no more, than the regeneration of infants by water and the Holy
     Ghost importeth; that the Spirit of GOD should be habitually
     present, to make those reasons which GOD hath given to convince the
     world, that they ought to be Christians, both discernible to the
     understanding, and weighing down the choice; whereas, those that are
     converted from being enemies to GOD, (that is to say, at those
     years, when no man can be converted to GOD, that is not His enemy
     before), though the Spirit of GOD knock at their hearts without,
     striving to cast out the strong man that is within doors, and to
     make a dwelling for itself in the heart, are possessed by a contrary
     principle, till they yield GOD'S Spirit that entertainment which GOD
     requireth.

      PEARSON, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--Exposition of the Creed, Article ix.

     Being therefore we are that the preaching remission of sins
     belongeth not only certainly, but in some sense peculiarly, to the
     Church of CHRIST, it will be next considerable how this remission is
     conferred upon any person in the Church.

     It is certain that forgiveness of sins was promised to all who were
     baptized in the name of CHRIST; and it cannot be doubted but all
     persons who did perform all things necessary to the receiving the
     ordinance of baptism, did also receive the benefit of that
     ordinance, which is remission of sins. "John did baptize in the
     wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission
     of sins." (Mark i. 4.) And St. Peter made this exhortation of his
     first sermon, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name
     of JESUS CHRIST, for the remission of sins." (Acts ii. 38.) In vain
     doth doubting and fluctuating Socinus endeavour to evacuate the
     evidence of this Scripture; attributing the remission either to
     repentance without consideration of baptism, or else to the public
     profession of faith made in baptism; or if any thing must be
     attributed to baptism itself, it must be nothing but a declaration
     of such remission. For how will these shifts agree with that which
     Ananias said unto Paul, without any mention either of repentance or
     confession, "Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins:" (Acts
     xxii. 16.) and that which St. Paul, who was so baptized, hath taught
     us concerning the Church, that CHRIST doth "sanctify and cleanse it
     with the washing of water." (Eph. v. 26.) It is therefore
     sufficiently certain that baptism, as it was instituted by CHRIST
     after the pre-administration of St. John, wheresoever it was
     received with all qualifications necessary in the person accepting,
     and conferred with all things necessary to be performed by the
     person administering, was most infallibly efficacious, as to this
     particular, that is, to the remission of all sins committed before
     the administration of this sacrament.

                    BULL, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--Sermon vii.

     "And besides this," &c. (2 Pet. i. 5.) As if he had said, You have
     now, GOD be thanked, escaped the pollutions of the world, and are
     truly, I hope, converted to Christianity, and in baptism have been
     regenerated by the Holy Ghost (that he means by their being made
     partakers of the divine nature). This indeed is a very great
     achievement, and an invaluable mercy of GOD, vouchsafed to you; yet
     I beseech you, rest not here: but besides this, giving all
     diligence, add to your faith, virtue, &c.

              COMBER, PRESBYTER.--Part iii. sect. iii. p. 201.

     We must not presently turn our backs upon GOD so soon as the holy
     rite [baptism] is finished, but complete the solemnity by
     thanksgiving and prayer; and that we may do both, not only with the
     spirit, but with understanding, the minister doth here teach us what
     must be the subjects of our praises and petitions. I. Our praises
     must look back upon the grace already showed, and the benefits which
     are already given to this infant, which are principally two: 1.
     Internally it is regenerated; 2. Externally it is grafted into
     CHRIST'S Church, for which we must give hearty thanks to Almighty
     GOD. To which we must add, II. Our prayers, which must look forward
     upon the grace which will be needful to enable it to live answerable
     to this estate into which it is admitted; and this we must beg of
     Almighty GOD also, or else the former blessings will be altogether
     in vain. Now all this is plain, that no more would need to be added,
     but only that some with Nicodemus are apt to say, "How can these
     things be?" (John iii. 9.) Judging it impossible that so great a
     matter as regeneration can be effected so soon, and by so mean an
     instrument as they account it; whereas the effect is to be ascribed
     to the divine power of the Author, not to the intrinsic efficacy of
     the outward means: yet in regard we can never bless GOD heartily for
     a mercy unless we believe He hath bestowed it, we must labour to
     remove these scruples by a fuller account of this baptismal
     regeneration, that we may not withhold the divine praises, by our
     doubting and unbelief. The word regeneration is but twice (that I
     know of) used in Scripture; first, Matt. xix. 28, "Ye that have
     followed me in the regeneration;" where though (by altering the
     point--"followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man," &c.)
     it may signify the resurrection; yet as we read, it signifies the
     renewing of men by the Gospel and baptism. Secondly, (Tit. iii. 5.)
     "He saved us by the laver of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
     Ghost," which is a paraphrase upon that of our Saviour, (John iii.)
     "Except a man be born of water," &c. And, because persons, come to
     age before their conversion, are first taught and persuaded by the
     Word of GOD, the language of Holy Writ enlarges the metaphor, and
     saith, Such as are begotten by the Word of GOD, (1 Cor. iv. 15.) and
     then born again or regenerated in baptism. In like manner speak the
     Fathers, who do constantly and unanimously affirm, that we are
     regenerated in, or by baptism. So that we must next enquire wherein
     this regeneration doth consist. And first, whereas both children and
     those of riper years are by nature dead in sin, so that they lie
     under the guilt and power thereof: our gracious Father doth here in
     baptism seal a covenant with us, wherein He promiseth to pardon us;
     and when this deadly load is removed, the soul receives as it were a
     new life, and takes new hopes and courage, being restored to the
     divine favour, and being set free from the sad expectations of
     unavoidable condemnation for former sin, original in infants, and
     both it and actual in those of riper years. Before this covenant we
     were dead in law, and by the pardon of our sins we are begotten
     again to a lively hope; and herein stands the first particular of
     our regeneration, viz. in the remission of sins, wherefore both
     Scripture and antiquity teach us, that baptism is the means for
     remission of sin, and hence they join pardon and regeneration
     commonly together, because this forgiveness puts us into a new
     estate, and an excellent condition in comparison of that which our
     natural birth had left us in.

     Secondly; But further, by baptism we gain new relations, and old
     things being done away all things become new, &c......

     Thirdly; Our corrupt nature is changed in baptism, and there is a
     renovation effected thereby, both as to the mortification of the old
     affections, and the quickening of the new, by the Holy Spirit, which
     is hereby given to all that put no bar or impediment unto it. This
     was the Ancients' doctrine, who affirmed a real change to be
     wrought, and believed the Spirit to be therein bestowed as GOD had
     promised, (Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26.) "That he would sprinkle clean
     water," &c........ And it is manifest that in the first ages of the
     Church there were abundant of gifts and graces miraculously bestowed
     upon Christians in their baptism, and no doubt if the catechumens of
     our days who are at age, would prepare themselves as strictly by
     repentance, fasting, and prayer, as they of old did, they should
     find incomparable effects of this sacred laver, if not in as
     miraculous measures, yet to as real purposes; that is, they should
     be truly regenerated, and their hearts changed by the influence of
     the Divine Spirit. But some may doubt whether infants be regenerate
     in this sense, because they are not capable of giving any evidences
     of their receiving the Spirit, nor doth there any immediate effects
     of their regeneration appear; hence the Pelagians denied it, but
     they are therefore condemned by the Milevitan Council, Can. ii. and
     confuted by St. Aug. ad Bon. lib. iii. It is confessed they can shew
     no visible signs of spiritual life in the operations thereof, no
     more can they of their having a rational soul, for some time, and
     yet we know they have the power of reason within them; and since all
     infants are alike, either all do here receive a principle of new
     life, or none receive it; wherefore I see no reason why we may not
     believe as the ancients did, that GOD'S grace (which is dispensed
     according to the capacity of the suscipient) is here given to
     infants to heal their nature, and that He bestowed on them such
     measures of His Spirit as they can receive; for the malignant
     effects of the first Adam's sin are not larger than the free gift
     obtained by the second Adam's righteousness. (Rom. v. 15, 18.) And
     if it be asked how it comes to pass then, that so many children do
     afterwards fall off to all impurity? I answer, so do too many grown
     persons also, and neither infants nor men are so regenerated in this
     life, as absolutely to extinguish the concupiscence; for the flesh
     still will lust against the Spirit: but thus GOD gives the Spirit
     also to lust against the flesh. (Gal. v.)

     KEN, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Exposition of Church Catechism, p. 136.

     Glory be to thee, O most indulgent Love, who in our baptism dost
     give us the Holy Spirit of Love, to be the principle of new life,
     and of love in us, to infuse into our souls a supernatural, habitual
     grace, and ability to obey and love thee, for which all love, all
     glory be to thee.

     Glory be to thee, O compassionate Love, who, when we were conceived
     and "born in sin," of sinful parents, when we sprang from a root
     wholly corrupt, and were all "children of wrath," hast in our
     baptism "made us children" of thy own heavenly Father by adoption
     and grace; when we were heirs of hell, hast made us heirs of heaven,
     even joint heirs with thy own self, of thy own glory; for which,
     with all the powers of my soul, I adore and love thee.

                    PATRICK, BISHOP.--On Baptism, p. 441.

     The sum of all is, that hereby we are regenerated and born again. It
     is the sacrament of the new birth, by which we are put into a new
     state, and change all our relations: so that whereas before we were
     only the children of Adam, we are now taken to be the children of
     GOD; such of whom He will have a fatherly care, and be indulgent and
     merciful unto. We have now a relation likewise to CHRIST as our
     Head, and to the Holy Ghost as the Giver of life and grace. Yea,
     herein He grants remission of sin, and we are sanctified, and set
     apart to His uses. We being hereby given to Him, and He accepting of
     us, do become His possession and proper goods, and cannot without
     being guilty of the foulest robbery, sin against GOD. We are made
     hereby the temples of the Holy Ghost, the place where He, and
     nothing else is to inhabit; and being by this consecrated to Him, He
     likewise then enters upon His possession, and we are said thereby to
     receive the Holy Ghost; so that if we run into sin, we defile His
     house, and commit the greatest profaneness and impiety, and may be
     said very truly to do despite to the Spirit of GOD whereby we were
     sanctified.

   BEVERIDGE, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--On admission into the Church by Baptism.
                         Vol. i. Serm. xxxv. p. 304.

     But what he means by being "born of water and the Spirit," is now
     made a question: I say now, for it was never made so till of late
     years. For many ages together none doubted of it, but the whole
     Christian world took it for granted, that our Saviour, by these
     words, meant only that except a man be baptized according to His
     institution, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD; this being the
     most plain and obvious sense of the words, forasmuch as there is no
     other way of being born again of water, as well as of the Spirit,
     but only in the Sacrament of Baptism.

     To understand what He means by being born again, we must call to
     mind what He saith in another place, "My kingdom is not of this
     world;" (John xviii. 36.) though it is in this world, it is not of
     it; it is not a secular or earthly kingdom, but a kingdom purely
     spiritual and heavenly: "It is not meat and drink, but
     righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost;" (Rom. xiv.
     17). And therefore when a man is born into this world, he is not
     thereby qualified for the kingdom of GOD, nor hath any right or
     title to it, no more than as if he had not been born at all; but
     before he enter into that, he must be born again, he must undergo
     another kind of birth than he had before: he was before born of the
     flesh, he must now be born of the Spirit; otherwise he cannot be
     capable of entering into such a kingdom as is altogether spiritual.
     Thus our Lord himself explains his own meaning in my text, by adding
     immediately in the next words, "That which is born of the flesh, is
     flesh," &c.... As if He had said, He that is born, as all men are at
     first, only of the flesh, such a one is altogether carnal and
     sensual; and so can be affected with nothing but the sensible
     objects of this world. But he that is born of the Spirit of GOD,
     thereby becomes a spiritual creature, and so is capable of those
     spiritual things of which the kingdom of GOD consisteth, "even of
     righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost." And he whose
     mind is changed, and turned from darkness to light, and from the
     power of Satan unto GOD, is truly said to be born again; because he
     is quickened with another kind of life than he had before; and to be
     born of the Spirit of GOD, because it is by it that this new and
     spiritual life is wrought in him. So that he is now born into
     another world, even into the kingdom of GOD, where he hath GOD
     himself, of whom he is born, for his Father, and the kingdom of GOD
     for his portion and inheritance. And therefore it is, that except a
     man be thus born of the Spirit, it is impossible he should enter
     into the kingdom of GOD, seeing he can enter into it no other way,
     than by being born of the Spirit.

     But that we may thus be born of the Spirit, we must be born also of
     water, which our Saviour here puts in the first place. Not as if
     there was any such virtue in water, whereby it could regenerate us,
     but because this is the rite or ordinance appointed by CHRIST,
     wherein to regenerate us by his Holy Spirit; our regeneration is
     wholly the act of the Spirit of CHRIST. But there must be something
     done on our parts in order to it, and something that is instituted
     and ordained by CHRIST himself, which in the Old Testament was
     circumcision; in the New, baptism, or washing with water; the
     easiest that could be invented, and the most proper to signify His
     cleansing and regenerating us by his Holy Spirit. And seeing this is
     instituted by CHRIST himself, as we cannot be born of water without
     the Spirit, neither can we, in an ordinary way, be born of the
     Spirit without water, used or applied in obedience and conformity to
     His institution. CHRIST hath joined them together, and it is not in
     our power to part them: he that would be born of the Spirit, must be
     born of water too......

     As baptizing necessarily implies the use of water, so our being made
     thereby disciples of CHRIST, as necessarily implies our partaking of
     His Spirit: For all that are baptized, and so made the disciples of
     CHRIST, are thereby made the members of His body; and are therefore
     said to be baptized into CHRIST, (Rom. vi. 5. Gal. iii. 27.) But
     they who are in CHRIST, members of His body, must needs partake of
     the Spirit that is in Him their Head. Neither doth the Spirit of
     CHRIST only follow upon, but certainly accompanies the Sacrament of
     Baptism, when duly administered according to His institution. For as
     St. Paul saith, "By one Spirit we are all baptized into one body."
     (1 Cor. xii. 13.) So that in the very act of baptism, the Spirit
     unites us unto CHRIST, and makes us members of His body; and if of
     His body, then of His Church and kingdom, that being all His body.
     And therefore all who are rightly baptized with water, being at the
     same time baptized also with the Holy Ghost, and so born of water
     and the Spirit, they are, ipso facto, admitted into the kingdom of
     GOD, established upon earth, and if it be not their own fault, will
     as certainly attain to that which is in heaven.

     Ibid. p. 306.--This I would desire all here present to take special
     notice of, that you may not be deceived by a sort of people risen up
     among us, who being led, as they pretend, by the light within them,
     are fallen into such horrid darkness, and damnable heresies, that
     they have quite laid aside the Sacrament of Baptism, and affirm, in
     flat contradiction to our Saviour's words, that they may be saved
     without it. I pray GOD to open their eyes, that they may not go
     blindfold into eternal damnation. And I advise you all, as you
     desire not to apostatize from the Christian religion, and as you
     tender your eternal salvation, take heed that you be never seduced
     by them, under any pretence whatsoever; but rather, if you be
     acquainted with any of them, do what you can to turn them from
     darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto GOD again; that they
     may obtain forgiveness of their sins, and inheritance among them who
     are sanctified by faith in Him, who saith, "Except a man be born of
     water," &c.

     Not only a man, in contradiction to a child, or a woman, but as it
     is in the original, ean mh tiV, except any one, any human creature
     whatsoever, man, woman, or child, "except he be born of water,"
     &c.... So that our Lord is so far from excluding children from
     baptism, that He plainly includes them, speaking in such general
     terms, on purpose that we may know that no sort of people, old or
     young, can ever be saved without it. And so He doth too, where He
     commands, as was observed before, that "All nations should be made
     disciples by being baptized in the name of," &c.... For, under all
     nations, children must needs be comprehended, which make a great, if
     not the greatest part of all nations. And although these general
     expressions be sufficient to demonstrate the necessity of Infant
     Baptism, yet foreseeing that ignorant and unlearned people would be
     apt to wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, He elsewhere
     commands children particularly to be brought unto Him, saying,
     "Suffer the little children," &c. (Mark x. 14.) But if the kingdom
     of GOD consist of children, as well as other people, they must of
     necessity be baptized, or born of water and the Spirit; for
     otherwise, He Himself saith, "They cannot enter into the kingdom."

     Hence it is, that we find the Apostles baptizing whole families,
     children, if any, as well as others: and the whole Catholic Church,
     in all places and ages ever since, hath, constantly admitted the
     children of believing parents into the Church, by baptizing them
     according to the institution and command of our Saviour; none ever
     making any question of it, but all Christians, all the world over,
     taking it for granted that it ought to be done, till of late years.

                SHARP, ARCHBISHOP.--Vol. v. Sermon v. p. 71.

     There is the same relation between CHRIST and Christians, that there
     is between the vine and the branches; the same necessity of
     communication of vital influences from the root to the branch in the
     one as in the other: which communication of influences is made by
     the Holy Spirit of GOD, derived from CHRIST, and diffusing Himself
     into every particular member of the whole body of Christians. Hence
     it is Christians are so frequently called the Temples of the Holy
     Ghost. "Know ye not," saith St. Paul, "that ye are," &c.; and,
     again, "Know ye not, that your bodies are the members," &c. which he
     explains presently after thus: "Know ye not that your bodies are the
     Temples," &c. And the same St. Paul, in the eighth to the Romans,
     lays the foundation of our relation to CHRIST, and our hopes of
     eternal life, in the very thing, viz. the Spirit of GOD his dwelling
     in us; as may be there seen more at large.

     This, then, being the privilege of all Christians, that by their
     being consecrated to CHRIST, they have a right to the continual
     presence of the Holy Ghost in their souls; or, if you will, GOD hath
     so great a right and property in them, that He sends down his Holy
     Spirit to take possession of them, in order to the securing and
     sealing them for His own in the other world; we may easily, from
     hence, gather what it is to grieve the Holy Spirit, (which is the
     thing we are now enquiring into,) viz. We then grieve Him, when
     being already Christians in profession, we either will not vouchsafe
     Him a lodging in our hearts, which He doth desire; and, in order to
     the obtaining it, makes frequent applications to our souls by His
     holy motions; or, when we have already given Him entertainment, we
     carry ourselves so unbecomingly towards Him, as to tempt Him to
     forsake us. We then grieve the Holy Spirit, when, having taken upon
     ourselves the covenant of Baptism, and thereby consecrated and
     consigned ourselves to GOD, we either refuse to admit the Spirit to
     take possession of us, or having admitted Him, do not show that
     respect, nor observe that decency, nor express that kindness, that
     is due to so worthy a guest; but by our rude, and unmannerly, and
     ill-natured behaviour towards Him, put such affronts upon Him as
     highly provoke Him to quit His habitation.

        SCOTT, PRESBYTER--Christian Life, chap. ii. sect. i. p. 354.

     Second sort of the Holy Ghost's operations, viz. that which He
     ordinarily doth, and always hath done, and will always continue to
     do; for, upon the cessation of these His miraculous operations, the
     Holy Ghost did not wholly withdraw Himself from mankind, but He
     still continues mediating with us under CHRIST, in order to the
     reconciling our wills and affections to GOD, and subduing that
     inveterate malice and enmity against Him, which our degenerate
     nature hath contracted. For it is by this blessed Spirit that CHRIST
     hath promised to be with us to the end of the world. (Matt, xxviii.
     20.) And CHRIST himself hath assured us, that upon his ascension
     into heaven he would "pray his Father, and He should give us another
     Comforter," meaning this Holy Ghost, "that he might abide with us
     for ever;" (John xiv. 16.;) and, accordingly, the Holy Ghost is
     vitally united to the Church of CHRIST, even as souls are united to
     their bodies. For as there is one Body, the Church, so here is one
     Spirit, i. e. the Holy Ghost, which animates that Body, (Eph. iv.
     4,) and hence the unity of the Church is in the foregoing verse
     called the unity of the Spirit: because as the soul, by diffusing
     itself through all the parts of the body, unites them together, and
     keeps them from flying abroad, and dispersing into atoms; so the
     Holy Spirit, by diffusing Himself throughout this mystical Body,
     joins and unites all its parts together, and makes it one separate
     and individual corporation. So that, when by Baptism we are once
     incorporated into this body, we are entitled to, and do at least, de
     jure, participate of the vital influences of the Holy Ghost, who is
     the soul of it; and, accordingly, as Baptism joins us to that body,
     of which this Divine Spirit is the soul; so it also conveys that
     Divine Spirit to us. So that, as in natural bodies, those ligaments
     which unite and tie the parts to one another, do also convey life
     and spirit to them all; so also in this mystical body, those federal
     rites of Baptism and the LORD'S Supper, which are, as it were, its
     nerves and arteries, that join and confederate its members to one
     another, are also the conveyances of that spiritual life from the
     Holy Ghost, which moves and actuates them all. And hence the
     "washing of regeneration," and "the renewing of the Holy Ghost," the
     "being born of water and of the Holy Ghost," are put together as
     concurrent things; and in Acts ii. 38. Baptism is affirmed to be
     necessary to our receiving the Holy Ghost; and if by Baptism we
     receive the Holy Ghost, that is a right and title to His Grace and
     Influence, then must the Holy Ghost be still supposed vitally united
     to the Church, whereof we arc made members by our Baptism, and, like
     an omnipresent soul, to be diffused all through it, and to move and
     actuate every part of it by his heavenly Grace and Influence.

         JENKIN, PRESBYTER.--On Christian Religion, vol. ii. p. 427.

     Baptism is very agreeable to the nature of the Christian Religion,
     being a plain and easy rite, and having a natural significancy of
     that purity of heart, which it is the design of the Gospel to
     promote and establish in the world; and it is fitted to represent to
     us the cleansing of our souls by the Blood of CHRIST, and the grace
     of purity and holiness, which is conveyed in this sacrament, and the
     spirit of regeneration which is conferred by it. Tit. iii. 5.

                   SHERLOCK, BISHOP.--Vol. ii., Disc. vii.

     You see the power of Baptism, and the blessings that are annexed to
     it, to which all are entitled who partake in the Baptism of CHRIST:
     for Himself He was neither born nor baptized but for our sakes; that
     the blessings of both might descend on us, who, through faith, are
     heirs together with Him of the promises of GOD.

     By Baptism the gates of heaven are set open to us, and the way paved
     for our return to our native country. By Baptism we are declared to
     be such sons of GOD in whom He will delight, and whom He will
     appoint to be heirs of His kingdom. By Baptism we receive the
     promise of the Spirit, by which we cry, Abba, Father.

     Are not these great privileges? And is not here room for mighty
     expectations? And yet how unsuitable to these claims do the
     circumstances of a Christian's life often appear? He is upon the
     road to heaven, you say, and the gates stand open to receive him;
     but how does he stumble and fall like other men, and sometimes lose
     his way, and wander long, bewildered in night and darkness? Or, if
     he keeps the road, how lazily does he travel, as if he were
     unwilling to come to his journey's end, and afraid to see the
     country which he is going to possess? The Christian only, of all
     men, pretends to supernatural power and strength, and an intimate
     acquaintance with the Spirit of GOD; and yet how hardly does he
     escape the pollutions of the world, and how often look back, with
     languishing eyes, upon the pleasures, riches, and honours of this
     life? And though he boasts of more than human strength, yet how does
     he sometimes sink below the character and dignity even of a man? Ye
     sons of GOD, for such ye are, how do ye die like the children of
     men, and how like is your end to theirs?

     And what must we say of these things? Is the promise of GOD become
     of none effect? Is Baptism sunk into mere outward ceremony, and can
     no longer reach to the purifying the heart and mind? The fact must
     not be disputed; it is too evident, at least in these our days, that
     the lives of Christians do not answer to the manifold gifts and
     graces bestowed on them.

          WALL, PRESBYTER.--On Infant Baptism, part ii., chap. vi.

     I believe Calvin was the first that ever denied this place (John
     iii. 5.) to mean Baptism. He gives another interpretation, which he
     confesses to be new. This man did, indeed, write many things in
     defence of Infant Baptism. But he has done ten times more prejudice
     to that cause, by withdrawing (as far as in him lay) the strength of
     this text of Scripture (which the ancient Christians used as a chief
     ground of it) by that forced interpretation of his, than he has done
     good to it by all his new hypotheses and arguments. What place of
     Scripture is more fit to produce, for the satisfaction of some plain
     and ordinary man, (who, perhaps, is not capable of apprehending the
     force of the consequences by which it is proved from other places,)
     that he ought to have his child baptized, than this, (especially if
     it were translated in English, as it should be,) where our Saviour
     says, that no person shall come to heaven without it? meaning, at
     least in GOD'S ordinary way.

         POTTER, ARCHBISHOP.--Of Church Government, chap. i. p. 14.

     Whoever wilfully neglects to be made a member of the Christian
     Church, does, by necessary consequence, deprive himself of all the
     privileges which belong to it; just as in any civil corporation they
     who are not members of it can plead no right to any of its
     privileges. This has already been shown to be the sense of CHRIST,
     and the same is constantly affirmed by the Christian writers of all
     ages. "They who do not come into the Church [saith Irenaeus] do not
     partake of the Spirit, but deprive themselves of life." For where
     the Church is, there is the Spirit of GOD. And in St. Cyprian's
     opinion, he cannot have GOD for his Father who has not the Church
     for his Mother.

     Hence the privileges of the Christian Church, such as Remission of
     Sins, the Grace of the Holy Spirit, and Eternal Life, are commonly
     said to be annexed to Baptism, this being the constant rite of
     initiation into the Church. Thus, in Ananias's exhortation to St.
     Paul, "Arise, and be baptized," &c...... St. Barnabas expressly
     affirms, that "Baptism procures remission of sins;" and proves, from
     the Scriptures, that they who are baptized, are received into GOD'S
     favour, whereas all the rest of mankind lie under His displeasure.
     Peter thus exhorts his new converts: "Repent, and be baptized every
     one of you," &c...... Our blessed SAVIOUR joins Faith and Baptism
     together, as necessary conditions of salvation: "Except a man be
     born of water and of the Spirit," &c....... And in another place,
     "He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved." From these, and
     like passages of Scripture, the Primitive Church constantly
     inferred, that where the Gospel had been sufficiently propounded, no
     man could be saved, without Baptism actually obtained, or earnestly
     desired. Whence Tertullian calls it the "happy sacrament of water,
     whereby we are washed from the sins of our former blindness, and
     delivered into eternal life.'' And Cyprian gives this reason, why
     the Baptism of infants should not be delayed so long as the eighth
     day after their birth, that (since it is said in the Gospel, that
     "the Son of Man came not to destroy men's souls, but to save them")
     it is our duty, as far as in us lies, to take care that no soul
     shall be destroyed.

              NELSON, CONFESSOR.--Festivals and Fasts, p. 115.

     By this means [by Baptism] the children of believers are entered
     into covenant with GOD under the Gospel, as they were under the Law
     by circumcision; and that infants are capable of this federal
     relation, is plainly declared by Moses; (Deut. xxix. 11;) and since
     they are the offspring of Adam, and consequently obnoxious to death
     by his fall, how can they be made partakers of that redemption which
     CHRIST hath purchased for the children of GOD, if they do not enjoy
     the advantage of that method which is alone appointed by CHRIST for
     them to become members of GOD'S kingdom? For JESUS himself has
     assured us, "Except one be born of water," &c...... And therefore it
     was the constant custom of the Primitive Church to administer
     Baptism to infants for the remission of sins. And this practice was
     esteemed, by the best tradition, to be derived from the Apostles
     themselves.

                 WATERLAND, PRESBYTER.---On Regeneration. 2.

     The second is the case of infants. Their innocence and incapacity
     are to them instead of repentance, which they do not need, and of
     actual faith, which they cannot have. They are capable of being
     savingly born of water and the Spirit, and of being adopted into
     sonship with what depends thereupon; because, though they bring no
     virtues with them, no positive righteousness, yet they bring no
     obstacle, no impediment. They stipulate, they enter into contract,
     by their sureties, upon a presumptive and interpretative consent,:
     they become consecrated in solemn form to Father, Son, and Holy
     Ghost; pardon, mercy, and other covenant privileges are made over to
     them; and the Holy Spirit translates them out of their state of
     nature (to which a curse belongs) to a state of grace, favour, and
     blessing; this is their regeneration.

        KETTLEWELL, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--On the Creed--Article,
                        Forgiveness of Sins, p. 685.

     Ques.--For whose sake doth ALMIGHTY GOD allow us all this benefit of
     forgiveness?

     Ans.--For JESUS CHRIST, who, as you have seen, died for our sins,
     and gave His Wood a ransom, to purchase for us this pardon of them.
     "He is set forth a propitiation," &c. (Rom. iii. 25.) And thus we
     shall receive all this mercy for His sake, when, with the
     disposition before expressed, we devoutly pray to GOD for it in His
     name.

     Ques.--By the promises of the Gospel, I see that this forgiveness is
     assured to all Christians upon the terms which you have described.
     But is it in any signs and tokens outwardly dispensed to them?

     Ans.--Yes; both in the Holy Sacraments and in the sacerdotal
     Absolution. Which ways of ministering this forgiveness, as well as
     the forgiveness itself, are noted in some ancient Creeds: this
     article being thus professed in St. Cyprian's Form at Baptism: "I
     believe the Remission of Sins by the Church."

     Ques.--Is this forgiveness dispensed to us in the Sacrament of
     Baptism?

     Ans.--Yes; and that most amply, the water of Baptism washing off the
     stain of all former sins." "Be baptized, and wash away thy sins,"
     said Ananias to Saul; "Repent, and be baptized for the Remission of
     Sins," said St. Peter to the Jews; and "He hath saved us by the
     Laver of Regeneration;" i. e. the Water of Baptism, and the renewing
     of the Holy Ghost. (Tit. iii. 5.) So that whatever pollutions men
     had upon them, if they come to Baptism with true faith and
     repentance, they are thereby made clean again.

            HICKES, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Christian Priesthood.

     It belonged to the Apostles and Presbyters, by virtue of their
     sacerdotal office and ministry, to be advocates and intercessors
     with GOD..... I need not insist upon their power of baptizing for
     the remission of sins with fasting and prayer, which was a most
     solemn act of expiation for washing away all the past sins of the
     baptized.

    JOHNSON, PRESBYTER.--Unbloody Sacrifice,--Vol. i. ch. ii. sect. 1. p.
                                    165.

     I think the only immediate effect of the Spirit in Baptism, is the
     remission of all sin, and removing our natural disability to the
     worship and service of GOD, and the sentence of condemnation under
     which we were all born: (Rom. v. 16.) and that other graces are
     wrought in us by that Holy Spirit, which by Baptism receives us
     under its protection, gradually, and according to the capacity of
     the recipient: and this doctrine I learned from those words of St
     Barnabas, in his Epistle, cap. vi.: "After, therefore, that CHRIST
     had renewed us by the remission of our sins, he made us [in] another
     shape, so as to have an infant-like soul, even as he himself
     reformed us:" where he plainly makes renovation to consist in
     forgiving sins; and makes the new moulding, or reformation of our
     minds, to be not performed at the same time with the other, or all
     at once, but to be consequent upon the former renovation: and CHRIST
     is always thus reforming us, from our Baptism to our death. And I
     look on these words of St. Barnabas to be a better explication of
     the renovation, or regeneration of Christians by Baptism, than whole
     volumes of modern writers upon the same subject. And I may here very
     reasonably observe, that as the Holy Spirit is present in our
     Baptism, to seal the remission of sins, and to infuse the beginnings
     of Christian Life; for He is present in confirmation, to shed
     further influences on them that receive it, for the further
     suscitation of the gift of GOD bestowed in Baptism and in the
     Eucharist, as will hereafter appear at large for our further
     progress and increase in grace.

          LESLIE, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--On Water Baptism, ยง 5.

     The end of CHRIST'S Baptism was, to instate us into all the
     unconceivable glories, and high eternal prerogatives which belong to
     the members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones, (Eph. v.
     30.) that we might receive the adoption of sons. (Gal. iv. 5.)
     Henceforth no more servants, but sons of GOD, and heirs of heaven!
     These are ends so far transcendent above the ends of all former
     Baptisms, that, in comparison, other Baptisms are not only less, but
     none at all; like the glory of the stars in presence of the sun,
     they not only are a lesser light, but when he appears they become
     altogether invisible.

     And as a pledge or foretaste of these future and boundless joys, the
     gift of the Holy Ghost is given upon earth, and is promised as an
     effect of the Baptism of CHRIST: as Peter preached (Acts ii. 38.),
     "Repent, and be baptized," &c. And (Gal. iii. 27.) "As many of you
     as have been baptized into CHRIST have put on CHRIST."

     This of the gift of the Holy Ghost was not added to any Baptism
     before CHRIST'S, and does remarkably distinguish it from all others.

     WILSON, BISHOP, CONFESSOR, AND DOCTOR.--Maxims of piety, Vol. i. p.
                                    310.

     The Holy Spirit at Baptism takes possession of us, and keeps
     possession, till men grieve Him; then He forsakes us, and an evil
     spirit succeeds.

     By Baptism we contract and oblige ourselves, all our life long, to
     complete and perfect the image of JESUS CHRIST in ourselves. The
     blessings and excellencies of Baptism:--It separates us from Adam,
     and engrafts us into CHRIST.---It is a resurrection from sin to
     grace.--It discharges us from the debt owing to the justice of GOD,
     by our sins, now fully satisfied by faith in the suffering and death
     of CHRIST.--It cancels the law of death and malediction which was
     against us.--In Baptism our sins did indeed die, and were buried;
     but the seed and root remain in us. These we are to mortify all our
     lives long.

            BINGHAM, PRESBYTER.--On Lay Baptism, part ii. ch. vi.

     .... What it [indelible character] was taken to signify in Baptism?
     For an indelible character was always supposed to be imprinted as
     much in Baptism as in ordination; though I do not remember that any
     ancient Council expressly used that term about either, but only say
     something that may be reckoned equivalent to it; and that is this,
     as it relates to Baptism: that a man, who is once truly baptized,
     can never do any thing that can so far erase or cancel his Baptism,
     as that he shall need, upon any occasion, to be re-baptized with a
     second Baptism. Thus far the ancients believed an indelible
     character in Baptism. Though a man turns his back on Christianity,
     and totally apostatize and fall away from the profession of it;
     though he turn heretic or schismatick; though he excommunicate
     himself, or be excommunicated by the Church; though he embrace
     Paganism or Judaism, or any other opposite Religion; though he curse
     and blaspheme CHRIST in a synagogue or in a temple, as many of the
     old apostates did; though he become a Julian or an Ecebolius, and
     "trample under foot the Son of GOD, and count the Blood of the
     Covenant an unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace;"
     yet, after all, if this man turn again to Christianity, he was not
     to be received by a second Baptism. His repentance, and the Church's
     absolution was sufficient in that case to reinstate him in his
     ancient profession, and he was not to be re-baptized to be made
     again a Christian. The Church had but one Baptism for the remission
     of sins, and the virtue of that was so far indelible, that it would
     always qualify the man that had received it, to be admitted to
     communion again after the greatest apostacy, only by a true
     repentance and reconciliatory imposition of hands, without
     re-baptizing. This was what the ancients understood by what we now
     call the indelible character of Baptism. But they were far from
     thinking, that a man who was such an apostate had any right or
     authority whilst he was an apostate, to challenge any of the common
     privileges of a Christian. They did not think, whilst he was a Pagan
     or a Jew, that he was properly a member of the Christian Church
     still, because of his Baptism; or that he had any right to he called
     Christian, or to be admitted to the prayers of the Church, and much
     less to the communion with other faithful laymen: and yet, after
     all, there was so much of a Christian in him, by virtue of his
     Baptism, that he needed not to be baptized again as a mere Jew or
     Pagan. His Baptism was such as nothing could obliterate; it would
     remain with him when he was an apostate, and either go to hell with
     him to his condemnation, or bring him back to heaven and the Church
     by way of repentance, not re-baptization. Now, if any one should ask
     whether such an apostate, while he continued an apostate, was a
     Christian? the answer must be in the negative; but yet there is
     something of a Christian in this apostate, that is, his Baptism; in
     respect of which he is not so perfectly a no-Christian, as one that
     never was baptized.

                  SKELTON, PRESBYTER.--Vol. ii. Disc. xxi.

     Our blessed Saviour and Mediator, who hath procured the benefit of
     this covenant for us by the "sacrifice of His Blood," hath appointed
     the Sacrament of Baptism as the means whereby the contracting
     parties, GOD and the new Christian, solemnly plight their promises
     to each other; and hath likewise made the other Sacrament, that of
     His Last Supper, the seal which renews and confirms the covenant
     with every penitent transgressor. In both He communicates the
     assistance of the Holy Spirit, which "helps our infirmities," and
     enables us, if we are not shamefully wanting to ourselves, to
     observe and perform the conditions promised on our part.

     We have already seen, in general, what we are to expect as the
     fruits of peace with GOD; namely, eternal life, eternal happiness
     and glory. Our present assurance of this is represented in various
     lights by the Scriptures. We are made one with CHRIST, as He is one
     with the Father. We are united into one Church, or Spiritual Body,
     whereof "He is the head." All together "we are the body of CHRIST,
     and members in particular." Thus joined to Him, who is by nature the
     Son of GOD, we also become, by a "new birth in Baptism," the adopted
     sons or children of GOD. "We have received the Spirit of adoption,
     whereby we cry, "Abba, Father:" and being taken into the family of
     GOD, are made His children by "faith in JESUS CHRIST." The provision
     made for us is suitable to the grandeur of our new relation; no less
     than an eternal kingdom, "which it is the Father's good pleasure to
     give us," as His beloved children, and, consequently, "heirs of GOD,
     and joint heirs with CHRIST: ' insomuch that being one with Him,
     "where He is there shall we he also," partakers both of His nature,
     and of His inheritance in happiness and glory. We need not say,
     since these are the promises of GOD, that they cannot possibly fail
     of performance, provided we do our utmost to fulfil the promises
     made on our part.

              HORNE, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--Vol. ii. Disc, xviii.

     The first portion of sanctifying grace is given at Baptism, which is
     the seal of justification, and the beginning of sanctification;
     inasmuch as the sinner being thus sacramentally buried with CHRIST
     into His death, arises with Him in the power of His resurrection,
     justified from the guilt of sin through repentance and faith in His
     blood, and renewed unto holiness by the operation of His Spirit.
     This total renewal, at first conferred by the baptismal laver, is
     styled regeneration, and answers in things natural to the birth of
     an infant. But then, as an infant, though born complete in all its
     parts, yet comes to its full stature and strength by slow and
     imperceptible degrees; by being supplied with proper kinds of food
     for its nourishment when in health, and proper medicines for its
     recovery when otherwise; so is it with the regenerate spirit of a
     Christian: while it is (as St. Peter calls it) a babe in CHRIST, it
     must be fed with the milk of the word; when it is more grown in
     grace, with the strong meat of its salutary doctrines; when it is
     infirm, it must be strengthened by the comforts of its promises; and
     when sick, or wounded by sin, it must be recovered and restored by
     GODly counsel and wholesome discipline, by penance and absolution,
     by the medicines of the word and sacraments as duly and properly
     administered in the Church, by the lawfully and regularly appointed
     delegates and representatives of the Physician of souls. This
     gradual and complex work of our sanctification is carried on,
     through our lives, by the Spirit of GOD, given, in due degree and
     proportion, to every individual for that purpose. And it is
     marvellous to behold, as the excellent Bishop Andrews observes, how,
     from the laver of regeneration, to the administration of the
     viaticum, this good Spirit helpeth us, and poureth His benefits upon
     us, having a grace for every season. When we are troubled with
     erroneous opinions, he is the Spirit of truth; when assaulted with
     temptations, he is the Spirit of holiness; when dissipated with
     worldly vanity, he is the Spirit of compunction; when broken with
     worldly sorrow, he is the Holy Ghost the Comforter. It is he who,
     after having regenerated us in our baptism, confirms us by the
     imposition of hands; renews us to repentance, when we fall away;
     teaches us, all our life long, what we know not; puts us in mind of
     what we forget; stirs us up when we are dull; helps us in our
     prayers; relieves us in our infirmities; consoles us in our
     heaviness; gives us songs of joy in the darkest night of sorrow;
     seals us to the day of our redemption; and raises us up again in the
     last day; when that which was sown in grace shall be reaped in
     glory, and the work of sanctification, in spirit, soul, and body,
     shall be completed.

    JONES, PRESBYTER.--On the figurative Language of the Holy Scriptures.
                              Lect. vi. p. 156.

     As the Ark was prepared by Noah, so hath CHRIST prepared His Church,
     to conduct us in safety through the waves of trouble and the perils
     of the world, in which so many are lost. And as the waters of the
     flood carried Noah and his family into a new world after the old was
     drowned; so do the waters of baptism carry us into a new state with
     JESUS CHRIST, who passed over the waves of death, and is risen from
     the dead. And this practical inference is to be made in favour of
     the ordinance of the Church, that as the ark could not be saved but
     by water, so must all the Church of CHRIST be baptized.

     Ibid. p. 167.--We know that Satan has not that sovereignty over
     baptized Christians as he hath over men in the state of nature.
     After baptism a Christian is no longer the subject of that tyrant,
     but the child of GOD, who undertakes thenceforth to conduct him
     through all the trials and dangers of this life to the inheritance
     promised to the fathers.

                 HEBER, BISHOP.--Sermons in England, xviii.

     It (justification) is the same with that regeneration of which
     baptism is the outward symbol, and which marks out, wherever it
     occurs (that it ordinarily occurs in baptism, I am for my own part
     firmly persuaded,) our admission into the number of the children of
     GOD, and the heirs of everlasting happiness. It is the commencement
     of that state of salvation, in which, if a man continues, death has
     no power over him, in as much as the grave, which our nature so
     greatly fears, is to him no extinction of life, but a passage to a
     life more blessed and more glorious.

           JEBB, BISHOP.--Pastoral instructions. Disc. vi. p. 112.

     But how, may it be asked, are the benefits and blessings of
     spiritual regeneration conferred upon infants in their tender years?
     To this enquiry we need not be careful to reply: we need only state,
     that in this, as in various other instances, it hath pleased
     Almighty GOD to set limits to the presumptuousness of human
     curiosity; and thus, at once to try our humility and our faith. It
     is enough for us, rest assured, that GOD is now, and ever, the same
     all-good and gracious Parent; that, as in times past, it was "out of
     the mouths of babes and sucklings he perfected praise;" and as "He
     revealed unto babes those things which were hidden from the wise and
     prudent," so He is, at all times, abundantly able to pour forth the
     dew of His blessing upon infants who are faithfully brought to the
     baptism of his Son. It is enough for us, to believe and cherish the
     prevalent sentiment of the universal Church, as it has been
     maintained from the age of the Apostles, that at the time of
     baptism, a new nature is divinely communicated, and gracious
     privileges are especially vouchsafed, in such measure and degree
     that, whosoever are clothed with this white garment, may, through
     GOD'S help, "keep their baptism pure and undefiled, for the
     remainder of their lives, never wilfully committing any deadly sin."

                 VAN MILDERT, BISHOP.--Bampton Lectures, vi.

     Regeneration is represented, by a certain class of interpreters, as
     an instantaneous, perceptible, and irresistible operation of the
     Holy Spirit upon the heart and mind; which, whether the person have
     been baptized or not, affords the only certain evidence of his
     conversion to a saving and justifying faith. By others, it is
     regarded as a continued and progressive work of the SPIRIT, or as a
     state commencing in baptism, but not completed until, by
     perseverance to the end, the individual has "finished his course,
     and is about to enter upon his final reward." Others again,
     separating what the Scriptures state to be joined together in the
     work of the new birth, maintain a distinction between baptismal and
     spiritual regeneration; the former taking place in the Sacrament of
     Baptism; the latter subsequent to it, and, whether progressive or
     instantaneous in its operation, equally necessary with baptism to a
     state of salvation.

     But here the analogy of faith seems to be violated throughout. For
     how can any of these views of regeneration consist with the plain
     and simple notion of it as an entrance upon a new state, or a
     sacramental initiation into the Christian covenant? Nay, how can
     they consist with the terms and conditions of the covenant itself?
     If the Gospel be a covenant, admission into which, on the terms of
     faith and repentance, gives an immediate title to its present
     privileges, with an assurance of the spiritual helps necessary for
     the attainment of salvation; and if baptism be the
     divinely-appointed means of admission into that covenant, and of a
     participation in those privileges, is not the person so admitted
     actually brought into a new state? Has he not obtained that thing
     which by nature he cannot have? "And being thus regenerated and born
     anew of water and of the HOLY GHOST," to what subsequent part of his
     Christian life can a term so peculiarly expressive of his first
     entrance upon it be with propriety applied?

                    MANT, BISHOP.--Bampton Lectures, vi.

     Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and
     of the SPIRIT, &c. It should appear, I say, that he was here
     alluding by anticipation to the Sacrament of Baptism, which he
     intended to ordain: and to that supernatural grace which was thereby
     to be conferred through the instrumentality of water, and by the
     HOLY GHOST; adopting, not only the ceremony itself, which he meant
     to exalt to more noble and spiritual purposes; but also the very
     term, by which the Jews had described the change wrought in the
     baptized, although he undoubtedly employed it, in a similar sense
     indeed, but in an infinitely more dignified sense. To the proselyte
     from heathenism to the Jewish faith, baptism had been a death to his
     natural incapacities, and a new birth to the civil privileges of a
     Jew: to him, who should be admitted to a profession of the Christian
     faith, and who should be "born not of blood, nor of the will of the
     flesh," &c. it was to be a death unto sin, and a new birth unto
     those spiritual privileges, which should accompany his deliverance
     "from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
     children of GOD." The Jewish proselyte had been baptized with water:
     the Christian was to be baptized, not with water only, but with the
     HOLY GHOST.

     OXFORD,

   The Feast of St. Michael and All Angels.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///hooker/index.html
   2. file:///heylyn/index.html
   3. file:///england/comber/index.html
