                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 VIA MEDIA.

                                   No. I.

                                 [Number 38]
     __________________________________________________________________

     Laicus
     .---Will you listen to a few free questions from one who has not
     known you long enough to be familiar with you without apology? I am
     struck by many things I have heard you say, which show me that,
     somehow or other, my religious system is incomplete; yet at the same
     time the world accuses you of Popery, and there are seasons when I
     have misgivings whither you are carrying me.

     Clericus
     .---I trust I am prepared, most willing I certainly am, to meet
     any objections you have to bring against doctrines which you have
     heard me maintain. Say more definitely what the charge against me
     is.

     L
     . That your religious system, which I have heard some persons style
     the Apostolical, and which I so name by way of designation, is like
     that against which our forefathers protested at the Reformation.

     C
     . I will admit it, i. e. if I may reverse your statement, and say,
     that the Popish system resembles it. Indeed, how could it be
     otherwise, seeing that all corruptions of the truth must be like the
     truth which they corrupt, else they would not persuade mankind to
     take them instead of it?

     L
     . A bold thing to say, surely; to make the earlier system an
     imitation of the later!

     C
     . A bolder, surely, to assume that mine is the later, and the Popish
     the earlier. When think you that my system (so to call it)
     arose?---not with myself?

     L
     . Of course not; but whatever individuals have held it in our Church
     since the Reformation, it must be acknowledged that they have been
     but few, though some of them doubtless eminent men.

     C.
     Perhaps you would say (i. e. the persons whose views you are
     representing), that at the reformation, the stain of the old
     theology was left among us, and has shown itself in its measure ever
     since, as in the poor, so again in the educated classes;---that
     the peasantry still use and transmit their Popish rhymes, and the
     minds of students still linger among the early Fathers; but that the
     genius and principles of our Church have ever been what is commonly
     called Protestant.

     L
     . This is a fair general account of what would be maintained.

     C.
     You would consider that the Protestant principles and doctrines of
     this day were those of our Reformers in the sixteenth century; and
     that what is called Popery now, is what was called Popery then.

     L.
     On the whole: there are indeed extravagancies now, as is obvious. I
     would not defend extremes; but I suppose our Reformers would agree
     with moderate Protestants of this day, in what they meant by
     Protestantism and by Popery.

     C.
     This is an important question, of course; much depends on the
     correctness of the answer you have made to it. Do you make it as a
     matter of history, from knowing the opinions of our Reformers, or
     from what you consider probable?

     L.
     I am no divine. I judge from a general knowledge of history, and
     from the obvious probabilities of the case, which no one can
     gainsay.

     C.
     Let us then go by probabilities, since you lead the way. Is it not
     according to probabilities that opinions and principles should not
     be the same now as they were 300 years since? that though our
     professions are the same, yet we should not mean by them what the
     Reformers meant? Can you point to any period of Church history, in
     which doctrine remained for any time uncorrupted? Three hundred
     years is a long time. Are you quite sure we do not need A SECOND
     REFORMATION?

     L.
     Are you really serious? Have we not Articles and a Liturgy, which
     keep us from deviating from the standard of truth set up in the
     sixteenth century?

     C
     . Nay, I am maintaining no paradox. Surely there is multitude of men
     all around us who say the great body of the Clergy has departed from
     the doctrines of our Martyrs at the Reformation. I do not say I
     agree with the particular charges they prefer; but the very
     circumstance that they are made is a proof there is nothing
     extravagant in the notion of the Church having departed from the
     doctrine of the sixteenth century.

     L
     . It is true; but the persons you refer to, bring forward, at least,
     an intelligible charge; they appeal to the Articles, and maintain
     that the Clergy have departed from the doctrine therein contained.
     They may be right or wrong; but at least they give us the means of
     judging for ourselves.

     C
     . This surely is beside the point. We were speaking of
     probabilities. What change actually has been made, if any, is a
     further question, a question of fact. But before going on to examine
     the particular case, I observe that change of opinion was probable;
     probable in itself you can hardly deny, considering the history of
     the universal Church; not extravagantly improbable, moreover, in
     spite of Articles, as the extensively prevailing opinion to which I
     alluded, that the clergy have departed from them, sufficiently
     proves. Now consider the course of religion and politics, domestic
     and foreign, during the last three centuries, and tell me whether
     events have not occurred to increase this probability almost to a
     certainty; the probability, I mean, that the members of the English
     Church of the present day differ from the principles of the Church
     of Rome more than our forefathers differed. First, consider the
     history of the Puritans from first to last. Without pronouncing any
     opinion on the truth or unsoundness of their principles, were they
     not evidently further removed from Rome than were our Reformers? Was
     not their influence all on the side of leading the English Church
     farther from Rome than our Reformers placed it? Think of the fall of
     the Scottish Episcopal Church. Reflect upon the separation and
     extinction of the Nonjurors, upon the rise of Methodism, upon our
     political alliances with foreign Protestant communities. Consider
     especially the history and the school of Hoadly. That man, whom a
     high authority of the present day does not hesitate to call a
     Socinian, was for near fifty years a bishop in our Church.

     L
     . You tell me to think on these facts. I wish I were verse enough in
     our ecclesiastical history to do so.

     C
     . But you are as well versed in it as the generality of educated
     men; as those whose opinions you are now maintaining. And they
     surely ought to be well acquainted with our history, and the
     doctrines taught in the different schools and eras, who scruple not
     to charge such as me with a declension from the true Anti-popish
     doctrine of our Church. For what the doctrine of the Church is, what
     it has been for three centuries, is a matter of fact which cannot be
     known without reading.

     L.
     Let us leave, if you please, this ground of probability, which,
     whatever you may say, cannot convince me while I am able to urge
     that strong objection to it which you would not let me mention just
     now. I repeat, we have Articles; we have a Liturgy; the dispute lies
     in a little compass, without need of historical reading:---do you
     mean to say we have departed from them?

     C
     . I am not unwilling to follow you a second time, and will be
     explicit. I reply, we have departed from them. Did you ever study
     the Rubrics of the Prayer Book?

     L
     . But surely they have long been obsolete;---they are
     impracticable!

     C
     . It is enough; you have answered your own question without trouble
     of mine. Not only do we not obey them, but it seems we style them
     impracticable. I take your admission. Now, I ask you, are not these
     Rubrics (I might also mention parts of the Services themselves which
     have fallen into disuse), such as the present day would call Popish?
     and, if so, is not this a proof that the spirit of the present day
     has departed (whether for good or evil) from the spirit of the
     Reformation?---and is it wonderful that such as I should be
     called Popish, if the Church Services themselves are considered so?

     L
     . Will you give me some instances.

     C
     . Is it quite in accordance with our present Protestant notions,
     that unbaptized persons should not be buried with the rites of the
     Church?---that every Clergyman should read the Daily Service
     morning and evening at home, if he cannot get a
     congregation?---that in college chapels the Holy Communion should
     be administered every week---that Saints' Days should be
     observed?---that stated days of fasting should be set apart by
     the Church? Ask even a sober-minded really serious man about the
     observance of these rules; will he not look grave, and say, that he
     is afraid of formality and superstition if these rules were attended
     to?

     L
     . And is there not the danger?

     C
     . The simple question is, whether there is more danger now than
     three centuries since? was there not far more superstition ill the
     sixteenth than in the nineteenth century? and does the spirit of the
     nineteenth move with the spirit of the sixteenth, if the sixteenth
     commands and the nineteenth draws back?

     L
     . But you spoke of parts of the Services themselves, as laid aside?

     C
     . Alas!....

     What is the prevailing opinion or usage respecting the form of
     absolution in the office for Visiting the Sick? What is thought by a
     great body of men of the words in which the Priesthood is conveyed?
     Are there no objections to the Athanasian Creed? no murmurs against
     the Commination Service? Does no one stumble at the word
     "oblations," in the Prayer for the Church Militant? Is there no
     clamour against parts of the Burial Service? No secret or scarcely
     secret complaints against the word regeneration in the Baptismal? No
     bold protestations against reading the Apocrypha? Now do not all
     these objections rest upon one general ground: viz. That these parts
     of our Services savour of Popery? And again, are not these the
     popular objections of the day?

     L
     . I cannot deny it.

     C
     . I consider then that already I have said enough to show that
     Churchmen of this day have deviated from the opinions of our
     Reformers, and become more opposed than they were to the system they
     protested against. And therefore, I would observe, it is not fair to
     judge of me, or such as me, in the off-hand way which many men take
     the liberty to adopt. Men seem to think that we are plainly and
     indisputably proved to be Popish, if we are proved to differ from
     the generality of Churchmen now-a-days. But what if it turn out that
     they are silently floating down the stream, and we are upon the
     shore?

     L
     . All, however, will allow, I suppose, that our Reformation was
     never completed in its details. The final judgment was not passed
     upon parts of the Prayer Book. There were, you know, alterations in
     the second edition of it published in King Edward's time; and
     these tended to a more Protestant doctrine than that which had first
     been adopted. For instance, in King Edward's first book the
     dead in CHRIST were prayed for; in the second this commemoration was
     omitted. Again, in the first book the elements of the LORD'S
     Supper were more distinctly offered up to GOD, and more formally
     consecrated than in the second edition, or at present. Had Queen
     Mary not succeeded, perhaps the men who effected this would have
     gone further.

     C
     . I believe they would; nay indeed they did at a subsequent period.
     They took away the Liturgy altogether, and substituted a Directory.

     L
     . They? the same men?

     C
     . Yes, the foreign party: who afterwards went by the name of
     Puritans. Bucer, who altered in King Edward's time, and the
     Puritans, who destroyed in King Charles's, both came from the
     same religious quarter.

     L
     . Ought you so to speak of the foreign Reformers? to them we owe the
     Protestant doctrine altogether.

     C
     . I like foreign interference, as little from Geneva, as from Rome.
     Geneva at least never converted a part of England from heathenism,
     nor could lay claim to patriarchal authority over it. Why could we
     not be let alone, and suffered to reform ourselves?

     L
     . You separate then your creed and cause from that of the Reformed
     Churches of the Continent?

     C
     . Not altogether; but I protest against being brought into that
     close alliance with them which the world now-a-days would force upon
     us. The glory of the English Church is, that it has taken the VIA
     MEDIA, as it has been called. It lies between the (so called)
     Reformers and the Romanists; whereas there are religious circles,
     and influential too, where it is thought enough to prove an English
     Clergyman unfaithful to his Church, if he preaches any thing at
     variance with the opinions of the Diet of Augsburg, or the
     Confessions of the Waldenses. However, since we have been led to
     speak of the foreign Reformers, I will, if you will still listen to
     me, strengthen my argument by an appeal to them.

     L
     . That argument being, that what is now considered Protestant
     doctrine, is not what was considered such by the Reformers.

     C
     . Yes; and I am going to offer reasons for thinking that the present
     age has lapsed, not only from the opinions of the English Reformers,
     but from those of the foreign also. This is too extensive a subject
     to do justice to, even had I the learning for it; but I may draw
     your attention to one or two obvious proofs of the fact.

     L
     . You must mean from Calvin; for Luther is, in some points, reckoned
     nearer the Romish Church than ourselves.

     C
     . I mean Calvin, about whose extreme distance from Rome there can be
     no doubt. What is the popular opinion now concerning the necessity
     of an Episcopal Regimen?

     L
     . A late incident has shown what it is; that it is uncharitable to
     define the Catholic Church, as the body of Christians in every
     country as governed by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; such a
     definition excluding pious Dissenters and others.

     C
     . But what thought Calvin? "Calvin held those men worthy of anathema
     who would not submit themselves to truly Christian Bishops, if such
     could be had." What would he have said then to the Wesleyan
     Methodists, and that portion of the (so called) Orthodox Dissenters,
     which co-operates, at present, with the Church? These allow that we,
     or that numbers among us, are truly Christian, yet make no attempts
     to obtain Bishops from us. Thus the age is more Protestant now than
     Calvin himself.

     L
     . Certainly in this respect; unless Calvin spoke rhetorically under
     circumstances.

     C
     . Now for a second instance. The following is his statement
     concerning the LORD'S Supper. "I understand what is to be
     understood by the words of CHRIST; that He doth not only offer us
     the benefits of His death and Resurrection, but His very body,
     wherein He died and rose again. I assert that the body of CHRIST is
     really, (as the usual expression is,) that it is truly given to us
     in the Sacrament, to be the saving food of our souls." ...... "The
     SON of GOD offers daily to us in the Holy Sacrament, the same body
     which He once offered in sacrifice to His Father, that it may be our
     spiritual food."... "If anyone ask me concerning the manner, I will
     not be ashamed to confess that it is a secret too high for my reason
     to comprehend, or my tongue to express." Now, if I were of myself to
     use these words, (in spite of the qualification at the end,
     concerning the manner of His presence in the Sacrament,) would they
     not be sufficient to convict me of Popery in the judgment of this
     minute and unlearned generation?

     L
     . You speak plausibly, I will grant; yet surely, after all, it is
     not unnatural that the Reformers of the sixteenth century should
     have fallen short of a full Reformation in matters of doctrine and
     discipline. Light breaks but gradually on the mind: one age begins a
     work, another finishes.

     C
     . I am arguing about a matter of fact, not defending the opinions of
     the Reformers. As to this notion of their but partial illumination,
     I am not concerned to oppose it, being quite con tent if the persons
     whom you are undertaking to represent are willing to admit it. And
     then, in consistency, I shall beg them to reproach me not with
     Popery but with Protestantism, and to be impartial enough to assail
     not only me, but "the Blessed Reformation," as they often call it,
     using words they do not under stand. It is hard, indeed, that when I
     share in the opinions of the Reformers, I should have no share of
     their praises of them.

     L
     . You speak as if you really agreed with the Reformers. You may say
     so in an argument, but in sober earnest you cannot mean to say you
     really agree with the great body of them. Neither you nor I should
     hesitate to confess they were often inconsistent, saying, at one
     time, what they disowned at another.

     C
     . That they should have said different things at different times, is
     not wonderful, considering they were searching into Scripture and
     Antiquity, and feeling their way to the Truth. Since, however, they
     did vary in their opinions, for this very reason it is obvious I
     should be saying nothing at all, in saying that I agreed with them,
     unless I stated explicitly at what period of their lives, or in
     which of their writings. This I do state clearly: I say I agree with
     them as they speak in the formularies of the Church; more cannot be
     required of me, nor indeed is it possible to say more.

     L
     . What persons complain of is, that you are not satisf1ed with the
     formularies of the Church, but add to them doctrines not contained
     in them. You must allow there is little stress laid in the Articles
     on some points, which are quite cardinal in your system, to judge by
     your way of enforcing them.

     C
     . This is not the first time you have spoken of this supposed system
     of ours. I will not stop to quarrel with you for calling it ours, as
     if it were not rather the Church's; but explain to me what you
     consider it to consist in.

     L
     . The following are some of its doctrines: that the Church has an
     existence independent of the State; that the State may not
     religiously interfere with its internal concerns; that none may
     engage in ministerial works except such as are episcopally ordained;
     that the consecration of the Eucharist is especially entrusted to
     Bishops and Priests. Where do you find these doctrines in the
     formularies of the Church; that is, so prominently set forth, as to
     sanction you in urging them at all, or at least so strongly as you
     are used to urge them?

     C
     . As to urging them at all, we might be free to urge them even
     though not mentioned in the Articles; unless indeed the Articles are
     our rule of faith. Were the Church first set up at the Reformation,
     then indeed it might be right so to exalt its Articles as to forbid
     to teach "whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved
     thereby." I cannot consent, I am sure the Reformers did not wish me,
     to deprive myself of the Church's dowry, the doctrines which
     the Apostles spoke in Scripture and impressed upon the early Church.
     I receive the Church as a messenger from CHRIST, rich in treasures
     old and new, rich with the accumulated wealth of ages.

     L
     . Accumulated?

     C
     . As you will yourself allow. Our Articles are one portion of that
     accumulation. Age after age, fresh battles have been fought with
     heresy, fresh monuments of truth set up. As I will not consent to be
     deprived of the records of the Reformation, so neither will I part
     with those of former times. I look upon our Articles as in one sense
     an addition to the Creeds; and at the same time the Romanists added
     their Tridentine articles. Theirs I consider unsound; ours as true.

     L
     . The Articles have surely an especial claim upon you; you have
     subscribed them, and are therefore more bound to them, than to other
     truths, whatever or wherever they be.

     C
     . There is a popular confusion on this subject. Our Articles are not
     a body of divinity, but in great measure only protest against
     certain errors of a certain period of the Church. Now I will preach
     the whole counsel of GOD, whether set down in the Articles or not. I
     am bound to the Articles by subscription; but I am bound, more
     solemnly even than by subscription, by my baptism and by my
     ordination, to believe and maintain the whole Gospel of CHRIST. The
     grace given at those seasons comes through the Apostles, not through
     Luther or Calvin, Bucer or Cartwright. You will presently agree with
     me in this statement. Let me ask, do you not hold the inspiration of
     Holy Scripture?

     L
     . Undoubtedly.

     C
     . Is it not a clergyman's duty to maintain and confess it?

     L. Certainly.

     C
     . But the doctrine is no where found in the Articles; and for this
     plain reason, that both Romanists and Reformers admitted it; and the
     difference between the two parties was, not whether the Old and New
     Testament were inspired, but whether the Apocrypha was of canonical
     authority.

     L
     . I must grant it.

     C
     . And in the same way, I would say, there are many other doctrines
     unmentioned in the Articles, only because they were not then
     disputed by either party; and others, for other reasons, short of
     disbelief in them. I cannot indeed make my neighbour preach them,
     for he will tell me he will believe only just so much as he has been
     obliged to subscribe; but it is hard if I am therefore to be
     defrauded of the full inheritance of faith myself. Look at the
     subject from another point of view, and see if we do not arrive at
     the same conclusion. A statesman of the last century is said to have
     remarked that we have Calvinistic Articles, and a Popish Liturgy.
     This of course is an idle calumny. But is there not certainly a
     distinction of doctrine and manner between the Liturgy and the
     Articles? and does not what I have just stated account for it, viz.
     that the Liturgy, as coming down from the Apostles, is the
     depository of their complete teaching; while the Articles are
     polemical, and except as they embody the creeds, are only protests
     against certain definite errors? Such are my views about the
     Articles; and if in my teaching, I lay especially stress upon
     doctrines only indirectly contained in them, and say less about
     those which are therein put forth most prominently, it is because
     times are changed. We are in danger of unbelief more than of
     superstition. The Christian minister should be a witness against the
     errors of his day.

     L
     . I cannot tell whether on consideration I shall agree with you or
     not. However, after all, you have said not a word to explain what
     your real differences from Popery are; what those false doctrines
     were which you conceive our Reformers withstood. You began by
     confessing that your opinions and the Popish opinions had a
     resemblance, and only disputed whether yours should be called like
     the Popish, or the Popish like yours. But in what are yours
     different from Rome?

     C
     . Be assured of this---no party will be more opposed to our
     doctrine, if it ever prospers and makes noise, than the Roman party.
     This has been proved before now. In the seventeenth century the
     theology of the divines of the English Church was substantially the
     same as ours is; and it experienced the full hostility of the
     Papacy. It was the true Via Media; Rome sought to block up that way
     as fiercely as the Puritans. History tells us this. In a few words
     then, before we separate, I will state some of my irreconcilable
     differences with Rome as she is; and in stating her errors, I will
     closely follow the order observed by Bishop Hall in his treatise on
     "The Old Religion," whose Protestantism is unquestionable.

     I consider that it is unscriptural to say with the Church of Rome,
     that "we are justified by inherent righteousness."

     That it is unscriptural that "the good works of a man justified do
     truly merit eternal life."

     That the doctrine of transubstantiation, as not being revealed, but
     a theory of man's devising, is profane and impious.

     That the denial of the cup to the laity, is a bold and unwarranted
     encroachment on their privileges as CHRIST'S people.

     That the sacrifice of masses, as it has been practised in the Roman
     Church, is without foundation in Scripture or antiquity, and
     therefore blasphemous and dangerous.

     That the honour paid to images is very full of peril, in the case of
     the uneducated, that is, of the great part of Christians.

     That indulgences, as in use, are a gross and monstrous invention of
     later times.

     That the received doctrine of purgatory is at variance with
     Scripture, cruel to the better sort of Christians, and administering
     deceitful comfort to the irreligious.

     That the practice of celebrating divine service in an unknown tongue
     is a great corruption.

     That forced confession is an unauthorised and dangerous practice.

     That the direct invocation of Saints is a dangerous practice, as
     tending to give, often actually giving, to creatures the honour and
     reliance due to the Creator alone.

     That there are not seven Sacraments.

     That the Roman Doctrine of Tradition is unscriptural.

     That the claim of the Pope to be Universal Bishop is against
     Scripture and antiquity.

     I might add other points in which also I protest against the Church
     of Rome, but I think it enough to make my confession in Hall's
     order, and so leave it. And having done so, I will ask you but one
     question. Which says more against Popery, the Articles or I? The
     only severe words in the Articles being, that "the Sacrifice of
     Masses" "were blasphemous fables a dangerous deceits;" whereas the
     "doctrines concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping, and
     Adoration, as well of images as of relics, and also Invocation of
     saints," are only called "a fond thing," vainly invented, and
     grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the
     Word of GOD."

     L
     . Thank you for this conversation; from which I hope to draw matter
     for reflection, though the subject seems to involve such deep
     historical research, I hardly know how to find my way ..through it.

     OXFORD,

     The Feast of St. James.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
