                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

             THE NECESSITY AND ADVANTAGE OF FREQUENT COMMUNION.

         (Extracted from Bishop Beveridge's Sermon on the subject.)

                                 [Number 26]
     __________________________________________________________________

     I HAVE done what I could; I have taken all occasions to convince you
     of your sin and danger in neglecting this Blessed Sacrament, and to
     persuade you to a more frequent receiving of it; but I see nothing
     will do: indeed nothing can do it but the Almighty Power of GOD,
     whom I therefore beseech of His Infinite mercy to open men's
     eyes, that they may "see the things that belong to their everlasting
     peace, before they be hid from them." And then I am sure this
     Sacrament would be as much frequented, as it hath been hitherto
     neglected. But seeing He is usually pleased to do this great work by
     the Ministry of His Word, I shall make it my business at this time,
     in his name, to put you in mind of your duty and interest in this
     particular, and so set before you such reasons why you ought to take
     all opportunities of receiving the Mystical Body and Blood of CHRIST
     your SAVIOUR, as I hope by His blessing may prevail with many to do
     it: GOD grant that it may do so with all that hear me at this time.

     For this purpose, therefore, I desire you to consider, First, that
     this is CHRIST'S own Institution and Command. He, "who being in
     the form of GOD, thought it no robbery to be equal with GOD, and yet
     made Himself of no reputation for your sakes." He, who loved you so,
     as to give Himself for you,---He, who laid down his own life to
     redeem and save you,---He, the very night before He died for you,
     He then instituted this Holy Sacrament; and He then said to all that
     hoped to be saved by Him, and to you among others, "Do this in
     remembrance of Me;" and, "do this as oft as ye drink it, in
     remembrance of me." What? and will you that hope to be saved by Him,
     will you never do this at all? or only now and then, when perhaps
     you have nothing else to do? How then can ye hope to be saved by
     Him? Do you think that He will save you, whether ye observe His
     commands or no? And which of all his commands can ye ever observe,
     if ye do not observe this, which is so plain, so easy, so useful,
     and so necessary for you? No, deceive not yourselves. He that came
     into the world, and died on purpose to save you, you may be
     confident would never have required you to do this, and as often as
     you do it, to remember Him, but that it is necessary for your
     salvation that ye do it, and that ye do it as often as ye can, in
     remembrance of Him. And if it had been necessary in no other, as it
     is in many respects, yet His very commanding it, makes it so to you,
     and to your salvation. For as He is the only "Author of eternal
     salvation," He is so only to those who obey Him," (Heb. v. 9); that
     is, "to those who observe all things whatsoever He hath commanded."
     (Matth. xxviii. 20.) But this is one of those things which he hath
     commanded; and therefore unless you do this, you do not obey Hi, and
     so have no ground to expect salvation from Him. He Himself hath told
     you in effect, that He will not save you; in that He said, "Except
     ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." (Luke xiii. 3, 5.) But ye
     all know, that he who lives in any wilful and known sin, or in the
     wilful neglect of any known duty, he hath not yet repented, and
     turned to GOD, but is still in his natural estate, in a state of sin
     and damnation. And if he happens to do so, he must inevitably
     perish; there is no help in the world for it.

     Wherefore, my brethren, ye had need look about you. CHRIST your
     SAVIOUR hath expressly commanded you often to receive the Sacrament
     of His Body and Blood in remembrance of Him. And therefore you, who
     never yet received it, have lived all this while in the wilful
     breach of a known Law, and by consequence in a wilful and known sin:
     and you who receive it but seldom, do not fully obey or come up to
     the Law, which plainly requires you to do it often: at least if it
     may be had. It is true, should GOD in His Providence cast you upon a
     place where you could not receive it if ye would, I do not doubt but
     He would accept of your earnest desires of it, as well as if ye did
     receive it; and would make up the great losses you sustained in your
     spiritual estate for want of it, some other way. But blessed be His
     Great Name, this is not your case; for He in His good Providence
     hath so ordered it, that you live in a place where this Holy
     Sacrament is actually celebrated every LORD'S Day, and may be
     so, if there be occasion, every day in the year. Our Church requires
     the first, and hath provided for the other, by ordering that the
     same Collect, Epistle, and Gospel which is appointed for the Sunday,
     shall serve all the week after; and by consequence the whole
     Communion Service, of which they are a part. And therefore, unless
     you receive it, and receive it often too, you will live in the gross
     neglect, if not in a plain contempt of CHRIST'S command; as you
     will one day find to your shame and sorrow; for how well soever ye
     may otherwise live, this one sin is enough to ruin and destroy you
     for ever. "For," as St. James saith, "whosoever shall keep the whole
     law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all." (James ii.
     10.) And therefore, whatsoever else ye do, if ye do not this, but
     offend in this one point, you are liable to all the punishments that
     are threatened in the Law of GOD. Neither is there any way to avoid
     them, except you repent, and turn from this as well as from all
     other sins.

     And that ye may not think that the receiving of this Blessed
     Sacrament only now and then, as perhaps two or three times a year,
     will excuse you from the imputation of living in the neglect of
     CHRIST'S command; I desire you to consider how the Apostles
     themselves and the Primitive Christians understood it. Which they
     sufficiently declared by their practice. For when our LORD was gone
     to Heaven, and had, according to Hs promise, sent down the HOI.Y
     SPIRIT upon His Apostles, and by that means brought into His Church
     about three thousand souls in one day, it is said of them, that "
     they continued stedfastly in the Apostles' doctrine and
     fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers," (Acts ii.
     42.); and of all that believed, it is said, that " they, continuing
     daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house
     to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart,
     (ii. 46.) Where we may observe, first, that by breaking of bread in
     the New Testament, is always meant the Administration of the LORD'S
     Supper. Secondly, this they are said to have done, [kat' oikon]
     from house to house, as we translate it; or rather in the house, as
     the Syriac and Arabic versions have it, and as the phrase [kat'
     oikon] is used by the Apostle himself, Rom. xvi. 5. 1 Cor. xvi. 19.;
     that is, they did it either in some private house, where there was a
     Church, or more probably in some of the houses or chambers belonging
     to the Temple, where they daily continued. Thirdly, as they
     continued daily in the Temple at the hours of prayer, to perform
     their solemn devotions there, so they daily received the Holy
     Sacrament, and ate this spiritual food "with gladness and singleness
     of heart." This being indeed the chief part of their devotions,
     whensoever they could meet together to perform them. Especially upon
     the LORD'S Day, as the HOLY GHOST Himself informs us, saying, "And
     upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to
     break bread, Paul preached unto them, being ready to depart on the
     morrow," (Acts xx. 7.); where we see, they did not only break bread,
     or administer the Sacrament of our LORD'S Supper upon the first day
     of the week, which we, from St. John, call the LORD'S Day; but upon
     that day they came together for that end and purpose. It is true,
     St. Paul being to go away next day, he took that opportunity when
     they were met together for that end, to give them a Sermon. But that
     was not the end of their meeting together at that time. They did not
     come to hear a Sermon, though St. Paul himself was to preach, but
     they came together to administer and receive CHRIST'S Mystical Body
     and Blood; which plainly shows, that this was the great work they
     did every LORD'S Day; and that they came together then on purpose to
     meet with CHRIST, and to partake of Him at His own table. And seeing
     that the Law itself required, "that none should appear before the
     LORD empty, (Exod. xxiii. 15.); therefore St. Paul requires, that
     upon the first day of the week, when Christians thus met together to
     receive the Sacrament, "every one should lay by him in store, as GOD
     prospered him, for pious and charitable uses," (1 Cor. xvi. 2.) And
     hence proceeded that custom which is still continued in our Church,
     and ought to be so ill all. That whensoever we appear before the
     LORD at His own table, we, every one, according to his ability,
     offer up some thing to Him, of what He had bestowed upon us, as our
     acknowledgment of His bounty to us, in giving us whatsoever we have,
     and of His infinite mercy in giving Himself for us.

     Now seeing the Apostles themselves, and such as they first converted
     and instructed in the faith of CHRIST, usually received this Holy
     Sacrament every day in the week, and constantly upon the LORD'S Day;
     it cannot be doubted, but that they looked upon themselves as
     obliged by CHRIST'S command to do so; and that when He said, "Do
     this, as often as ye do it, in remembrance of Me," His meaning and
     pleasure was, that they should often do it, so often as they met
     together to perform their public devotion to Him, if it was
     possible, or at least upon the LORD'S Day. And as this was the sense
     wherein the Apostles understood our SAVIOUR'S words; so they
     transmitted the same together with the Faith, to those who succeeded
     them. For Tertullian, who lived in the next century after the
     Apostles, saith, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist, "in omnibus
     mandatum a Domino, etiam Ante lucanis coetibus," was commanded by
     our LORD, to be celebrated in all Christian assemblies, even those
     which were held before day, (Ter. de cor. mil. cap. 3.) And before
     him Pliny the Second, who was contemporary with St. John, in the
     account he gave of the Christians' manners to the Emperor Trajan,
     saith, among other things, "that they were wont upon a certain day,
     to meet together, before it was light, and to bind themselves by a
     Sacrament, not to do any ill thing," (Plin. Ep. 1. 10. cap. 97.)
     Which can be understood only of the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper,
     as administered and received by them upon the LORD'S Day. And Justin
     Martyr himself, who lived in the next age after, in the Apology he
     wrote to Antonius Pius in behalf of the Christians, giving a
     particular account of what they did in their public congregations,
     saith, that [te tou heliou legomene hemera] upon that which is
     called the day of the Sun, or Sunday, all Christians that live
     either in the cities, or in the country, meet together; where they
     hear the writings of the Prophets and Apostles read, and an
     exhortation made to them; and then they having all joined together
     in their common prayers, bread and wine is brought and consecrated,
     or blessed by the President or Minister; and distributed to every
     one there present, and carried by Deacons to such as were absent.
     [kai he diadosis kai he matalepsis apo ton eucharistethenton hekasto
     ginetai]. And the distribution and participation of the consecrated
     elements is made to every one, (Just. Mart. Apol. 2.) And this food,
     saith he, [kaleitai par' hemin Eucharistia], is called by us
     the Eucharist. From whence it appears, that in these days, every one
     that was at Prayers and Sermon, received also the Holy Sacrament, at
     least upon the LORD'S Day. None offered to go out until that was
     over; or if they did so, they were cast out of the Church, as not
     worthy to be called Christians: as appears from the Apostolical
     Canons made or collected much about that time, or soon after. One
     whereof runs thus, [Pantas tous eisiontas pistous], etc. All
     believers that come to Church, and hear the Scriptures, but do not
     stay to join in the Prayers, and the Holy Communion, ought to be
     excommunicated, as bringing confusion into the Church, (Can.
     Apostol. 9.) It was then, it seems, reckoned a great disorder and
     confusion for any to go out of the Church, as they now commonly do,
     until the whole Service, of which the Communion was the principal
     part, was all over; and if any did so, they were judged unfit to
     come to Church, or keep company with Christians any longer. This was
     the discipline of the Primitive and Apostolic Church. This was the
     piety of the first Christians: and it continued in a great measure
     for some ages, as might easily be shown. But this may be sufficient
     at present to prove, that the Apostles and Primitive Christians did
     not think that they observed our LORD'S command in the institution
     of this Holy Sacrament aright, by receiving it only now and then.
     For, as they would never have done it at all, but only in obedience
     unto that command; so is obedience to that command, they took all
     opportunities they could get, of doing it; at least they never
     omitted it upon the LORD'S Day. But upon that day, whatsoever they
     did besides, they always did this in remembrance of what their Great
     LORD and SAVIOUR had done for them. And if we desire to be such
     Christians as they were, we must do as they did. We must, after
     their pious example, observe our LORD'S command, by eating this
     bread, and drinking this cup as often as we can; lest otherwise we
     lose the benefit of that death He suffered for us, by our neglecting
     to do what He hath commanded in remembrance of it.

                                    * * *

     What effect they [my arguments] will have upon those that hear them,
     I know not; but fear that it will be much the same that reason and
     argument usually have upon the greatest part of mankind; that, very
     little, or none at all. But for my own part, when I seriously
     consider these things, I cannot but wonder with myself, how it comes
     to pass, that this Holy Sacrament, instituted by CHRIST Himself, is
     so much neglected and disused as it is, in a place where His
     religion is professed and acknowledged to be, as really it is, the
     only true religion in the world. And after all my search, I can
     resolve it into nothing else but the degeneracy of the age we live
     in, and the great decay of that most Holy Religion among us. I am
     sure, from the beginning it was not so. For some ages after the
     Establishment of the Christian Religion by CHRIST our Saviour, so
     long as they who embraced it gave them selves up to the conduct of
     that HOLY SPIRIT which He sent down among them, and were inspired by
     it with true zeal for GOD, and inflamed with love to their ever
     blessed REDEEMER, SO as to observe all things that He had commanded,
     whatsoever it cost them; then they never met together upon any day
     in the week, much less upon the LORD'S Day, for the Public Worship
     of GOD, but they all received this Holy Sacrament, as the principal
     business they met about, and the most proper Christian service they
     could perform. And it is very observable, that so long as this
     continued, men were endowed with the extraordinary gifts as well as
     the graces of GOD'S HOLY SPIRIT, SO as to be able to do many
     wonderful things by it; yea, and suffer too whatsoever could be
     inflicted On them for CHRIST'S sake. But in process of time men
     began to leave off their first love to Him, and turn His religion
     into dispute and controversy; and then as their piety and devotion
     grew cooler and cooler, the Holy Sacrament began to be neglected
     more and more; and the Priests who administered it, had fewer and
     fewer to receive it, until at length they had some



     obliged in duty and conscience to consecrate and receive it them
     selves, although they had none to receive with them. And this
     mistake, I suppose, gave the first occasion to that multitude of
     private masses which have been so much abused in the Church of Rome;
     where the priest commonly receives himself, although he hath never a
     one to communicate with him; and so there can be no communion at
     all. And as that abuse, so the disuse of the Holy Sacrament, sprang
     first from men's coldness and indifferency in religion, which hath
     prevailed so far in our days, that there are many thousands of
     persons who are baptized, and live many years in the profession of
     the Christian religion, and yet never receive the Sacrament of
     CHRIST'S Body and Blood in all their lives. And but very few that
     receive it above once or twice a year; which is a great reproach and
     shame to the age we live in; but none at all to the Church: for she
     is always ready to administer it, if people could be persuaded to
     come to it. But that they cannot, or rather will not be; they have
     still one pretence or other to excuse themselves, but none that will
     excuse them before GOD and their own consciences another day.

     What their pretences are, I shall not undertake to determine. They
     are so many, that they cannot easily be numbered. And many of them
     so vain and trifling, that they are not worth rehearsing. But the
     bottom of them all is this; men renounced the world, the devil, and
     the flesh in their baptism, but they are loth to do it in their
     lives: they then promised to serve GOD, but now they find something
     else to do. They have all one sin or other that reigns over them,
     and captivates their hearts and affections, so that they cannot
     endure the thoughts of parting with it. And they think, as they
     ought to do, that if they come to the Holy Sacrament, they must
     first examine themselves, repent of all their sins, turn to GOD,
     renew their baptismal vow, and resolve to lead a new life. But this
     they are resolved not to do. And if they should come to the
     Sacrament, it would but disturb their quiet, make them uneasy in
     their minds, and hinder them from enjoying the pleasure they were
     wont to take in all their sins. And for their part, they had rather
     displease GOD than themselves; and neglect their duty rather than
     leave their sins. And to add sin to sin, and "treasure up to
     themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
     righteous judgment of GOD." This is plainly the case of most of
     those who live in the neglect of His Holy Commandment. And what can
     be said to such men? so long as such, they are not fit to come to
     the Communion. And therefore all that can be said to them, is only
     to beg of them to consider their condition before it be too late,
     and repent as soon as they can: lest they die, as they have lived,
     in sin, and so be punished with "everlasting destruction from the
     "presence of the LORD, and from the glory of His power."

     But there are others who do receive the Sacrament of CHRIST'S Body
     and Blood sometimes, as perhaps two or three times in a year; and my
     charity prompts me to believe, that they would do it oftener, if
     they thought it to be their duty. But there are some things which at
     first sight may seem, at least to them, to plead their excuse; and
     therefore deserve to be duty considered by us. As first, they say,
     our Church requires them only to receive three times a year: and
     they do not question but she would oblige them to receive it
     oftener, if it was necessary. This is a mistake that a great many
     have fallen into, and by that means have been kept from the
     Sacrament more than otherwise they would have been. I call it a
     mistake; for it is so, and a very great one. For as in all things
     else, so particularly in this, our Church keeps close to the pattern
     of the Apostolic and Primitive Church; when, as I have before
     observed, the LORD'S Supper was administered and received commonly
     every day in the week, but most constantly upon the LORD'S Day. And
     our Church supposeth it to be so still, and therefore hath
     accordingly made provision for it. Which, that I may fully
     demonstrate to you, it will be necessary to inquire into the sense
     and practice of our Church in this point all along from the
     beginning of the Reformation, or, to speak more properly, from the
     time when she was restored to that Apostolical form which she is now
     of, as she was at first; which we date from the reign of King Edward
     VI.

     For in the first year of that pious prince, the Liturgy, or Book of
     Common Prayer, was first compiled; and in the second it was settled
     by Act of Parliament. In which book it is ordered, that the
     Exhortation to those who are minded to receive the Sacrament, shall
     be read; which is there set down, much the same that we read now.
     But afterwards it is said, "in Cathedral Churches, or other places
     where there is daily Communion, it shall be sufficient to read this
     Exhortation above written once in a month. And in Parish Churches
     upon the week-days it may be left unsaid." Fol. 123. Where we may
     observe, first, that in those days there was daily Communion in
     Cathedral Churches, and other places, as there used to be in the
     Primitive Church. And accordingly I find, in the records of St.
     Paul's, that when the plate, jewels, &c. belonging to the said
     Cathedral, were delivered to the King's Commissioners, they, upon
     the Dean and Chapter's request, permitted to remain, among other
     things, "two pair of basyns for to bring the Communion Bread, and to
     receive the offerings for the poor; whereof one pair silver, for
     every day, the other for festivals, &c. gilt." (Dugdal Hist. of St.
     Paul's, page 274.) From whence it is plain, that the Communion was
     then celebrated in that Church every day. And so it was even in
     Parish Churches. For otherwise it needed not to be ordered as it is
     in the Rubric above mentioned, that in Parish Churches upon the
     week-days the said Exhortation may be left unsaid. And to the same
     purpose it is afterwards said, "when the Holy Communion is
     celebrated on the work-day, or in private houses, then may be
     omitted the Gloria in Excelsis, the Creed, the Homily, and the
     Exhortation." Fol. 132.

     Next after that we quoted first, this Rubric immediately follows;
     "And if upon the Sunday or Holy-day, the people be negligent to come
     to the Communion, then shall the Priest earnestly exhort his
     parishioners to dispose themselves to the receiving of the Holy
     Communion more diligently, saying," &c. Which shows, that upon all
     Sundays and Holy-days people then generally received; the Church
     expected and required it of them. And if any Minister found that his
     parishioners did not always come, at least upon those days, he was
     to exhort and admonish them to dispose themselves more diligently
     for it; and that by the command of the Church itself; whereby she
     hath sufficiently declared her will and desire, that all her members
     should receive the Communion as they did in the Primitive times,
     every day in the week if possible; and if that could not be, yet at
     least every Sunday and Holy-day in the year.

     In the Rubric after the Communion Service, there are several things
     to the same purpose; for it is there ordered, that upon Wednesdays
     and Fridays, although there be none to communicate, the Priest shall
     say all things at the Altar appointed to be said at the celebration
     of the LORD'S Supper, until after the Offertory. And then it
     follows: "And the same order shall be used whensoever the people be
     customably assembled to pray in the Church, and none disposed to
     communicate with the Priest." Fol. 130. Whereby we are given to
     understand, that upon what day soever people came to Church, the
     Priest was to be ready to celebrate the Holy Sacrament if any were
     disposed to communicate with him. And if there were none, he was to
     show his readiness, by reading a considerable part of the Communion
     Service.

     There is another Rubric in the same place, that makes it still
     plainer. Which I shall transcribe, because the book is not commonly
     to be had; neither can it be expressed better than in its words,
     which are these: "Also, that the receiving of the Sacrament of the
     Blessed Body and Blood of CHRIST, may be most agreeable to the
     Institution thereof, and to the usage of the Primitive Church, in
     all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches there shall always some
     communicate with the Priest that ministereth. And that the same may
     be also observed every where abroad in the country, some one at the
     least of that house in every Parish, to whom by course, after the
     ordinance herein made, it appertaineth to offer for the charges of
     the Communion; or some other whom they shall provide to offer for
     them, shall receive the Holy Communion with the Priest; the which
     may be the better done, for that they know before when their course
     cometh, and may therefore dispose themselves to the worthy receiving
     of the Sacrament. And with him or them, who doth so offer the
     charges of the Communion, all other who be then godly disposed
     thereunto, shall likewise receive the Communion. And by this means
     the Minister having always some to communicate with him, may
     accordingly solemnize so High and Holy Mysteries, with all the
     suffrages and due order appointed for the same. And the Priest on
     the week day shall forbear to celebrate the Communion, except he
     have some that will communicate with him."

     Here we see what care the Church took that the Sacrament might be
     daily administered, not only in Cathedral, but likewise in Parish
     Churches. For which purpose, whereas every Parishioner had before
     been used to find the Holy Loaf, as it was called, in his course; in
     the Rubric before this, it is ordained that every Pastor or Curate
     shall find sufficient Bread and Wine for the Communion; and that the
     Parishioners every one in his course, shall offer the charges of it
     at the Offertory to the Pastor or Curate; and in this it is ordained
     that every such Parishioner shall then in his course communicate, or
     else get some other per son to do it, that so the Communion may be
     duly celebrated; and all there present that were godly disposed
     might partake of it. Which one would have thought as good a
     Provision as could have been made in the case. But notwithstanding,
     through the obstinacy or carelessness of some, in not making their
     said offering as they were commanded, it sometimes failed; as
     appears from the Letter written about a year after by the Privy
     Council, and subscribed by the Archbishop of Canterbury and others,
     to the Bishops, to assure them that the King intended to go on with
     the Reformation, wherein among other things they say: "And farther,
     whereas it is come to our knowledge that divers froward and
     obstinate persons do refuse to pay towards the finding of Bread and
     Wine for the Holy Communion, according to the order prescribed in
     the said book, by reason whereof the Holy Communion is many times
     omitted upon the Sunday. These are to will and command you to
     convent such obstinate persons before you, and them to admonish and
     command to keep the order prescribed in the said book. And if any
     such shall refuse so to do, to punish them by suspension,
     excommunication, or "other censures of the Church." (Hist. of
     Reform. Part II. Coll. p. 192.) From whence we may also learn how
     much they were troubled to hear that the Holy Sacrament was ally
     where omitted even upon the Sunday, upon any Sunday; how great a
     fault and scandal they judged it to be, and what care they took to
     prevent it for the future.

     This was the state of this affair at the beginning of the
     Reformation, and it continues in effect the same to this day. About
     three or four years after the aforesaid Book of Common Prayer first
     came out, it was revised, and set forth again with some alterations
     in the form, but none that were material in the substance of it.
     Only the former way of the Parishioners finding Bread and Wine for
     the Communion every one in his course, being now found not so
     effectual as was expected; that was now laid aside, and it was
     ordered to be provided at the charges of the Parish in general, in
     these words: "The Bread and Wine for the Communion shall be provided
     by the Curate and Church "wardens, at the charges of the Parish; and
     the Parish shall be discharged of such sums of money or other
     duties, which hitherto they have paid for the same, by order of
     their houses, every Sunday." Where we may take notice, that as
     hitherto it had been provided every Sunday by the houses of every
     Parish, as they lay in order, it was now to be provided by the
     Minister and Churchwardens, at the charges of the whole Parish, but
     still every Sunday, as it was before; which being the most certain
     way that could be found out for it, it is still continued. The first
     part of this Rubric, whereby it is enjoined, being still in force.
     But the latter part, from these words, "and the Parish shall be
     discharged," &c. is now left out, as it was necessary it should be,
     after the former course had been disused for above an hundred years.

     Now this Book of Common Prayer, which was thus settled by Act of
     Parliament, in the fifth and sixth year of Edward the VI., was that
     which was afterwards confirmed in the beginning of Queen
     Elizabeth's reign, with one alteration or addition of certain
     lessons to be used on every Sunday in the year, and the form of the
     Litany altered, and corrected, with two sentences only added in the
     delivery of the Sacrament to the Communicants. These were all the
     alterations that were then made, or indeed that have been ever made
     since that time to this, except it be in words or phrases, in the
     addition of some prayers, and in some such inconsiderable things, as
     do not at all concern our present purpose. For the care of our
     Church, to have the Holy Communion constantly celebrated, hath been
     the same all along, from the time that the Book of Common Prayer
     before spoken of, was first settled. As may be easily proved from
     that which was established by the last Act of Uniformity. Which
     therefore I shall now briefly consider, so far as it relates to the
     business in hand; that we may understand the sense of our Church at
     present concerning it.

     For this purpose therefore we may first observe that the Communion
     Service is appointed for the Communion itself, and therefore called
     the Order for the Administration of the LORD'S Supper, or Holy
     Communion. Now our Church supposing, or at least hoping that some of
     her members will receive this Holy Communion every day, hath taken
     care that this service may be used every day in the week, as appears
     from the Rubric immediately before the proper lessons, which is
     this: "Note also, that the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel appointed
     for the Sunday, shall serve all the week after, where it is not in
     this book otherwise ordered." But the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel
     are part of the Communion Service, for which there is no occasion on
     the week days; neither can it be used except the Communion be
     administered, which therefore is here supposed to be done every day
     in the week. And so it is also in the celebration of the Communion
     itself, where there are proper prefaces appointed to be used upon
     certain days. Upon Christmas-day and seven days after. Upon
     Easter-day and seven days after. Upon Ascension-day and seven days
     after. Upon Whit-Sunday and six days after (the next day being
     Trinity Sunday, which hath one peculiar to itself). Now to what
     purpose are these prefaces appointed to be used seven days together,
     or six, none of which can be a Sunday, if the Sacrament ought not to
     be administered upon all those days, and so upon week days as well
     as Sundays? They are all, as I intimated before, to be used in the
     actual Administration of it, and therefore plainly suppose it to be
     actually administered upon each of those days, which being for the
     most part neither Sundays nor Holy-days, they most evidently
     demonstrate, that according to the mind and order of our Church, as
     well as the Primitive, the LORD'S Supper ought to be
     administered every day, that all who live as they ought, in her
     Communion, may be daily partakers of it.

     In the rules and orders (which we call the Rubric), after the
     Communion Service, there are several things that deserve to be
     considered in this case. It is there ordered, that there shall be no
     celebration of the Communion, except there be a convenient number;
     that is, four, or three at the least, to communicate with the
     Priest. According to which rule, although the Priest have all things
     ready, and desires to consecrate and receive the Holy Sacrament
     himself, yet he must not do it, unless he have such a number to
     communicate with him, that it may be properly a Communion. But, as
     it is there ordered, "Upon the Sundays and other Holy-days (if there
     be no Communion) shall be said all that is appointed at the
     Communion until the end of the general prayer (for the good estate
     of the Catholic Church of CHRIST);" where we may observe, that the
     Church, as I have shown, appoints the Sacrament to be administered
     every day. But if it so fall out, that there be not in any place a
     convenient number to communicate with the Priest, and by
     consequence, according to the order before mentioned, no Communion;
     yet nevertheless upon Sundays and other Holy-days so much of the
     Communion Service shall be said as is there limited. Why only upon
     Sundays and Holy-days, but to distinguish them from other days, on
     which if there be a sufficient number of Communicants, the whole
     Communion Service is to be used; but no part of it, except there be
     so; but upon Sundays and Holy-days, although there be not such a
     number, and therefore no Communion; yet, however, the Priest shall
     go up to the Altar, and there read all that is appointed to be said
     at the Communion, until the end of the prayer for CHRIST'S
     Catholic Church; whereby the people may see, that neither he nor the
     Church is to be blamed, if the Holy Sacrament be not then
     administered. For as much as he is there ready by the order of the
     Church to do it, and goes as far as he can in the Service appointed
     for it, without the actual administration of it; and therefore that
     the fault is wholly in themselves that it is not actually
     administered, because they will not make up a convenient number
     among them to communicate with him. Which is a most excellent order;
     for the people hereby have not only GOD'S Holy Commandments
     solemnly proclaimed, the Epistle and Gospel for the day, the Nicene
     Creed, and prayers proper for that occasion read to them; but they
     are likewise put in mind of their duty to their SAVIOUR in receiving
     His most Blessed Body and Blood, and upbraided with their neglect of
     it. For which purposes also, I think it very expedient, that the
     order of the Church for the reading that part of the Service at the
     Communion Table, even when there is no Communion, be duly observed.

     The next Rubric, in the same place, that concerns our present
     business, is this; " And in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches
     and Colleges, where there are many Priests and Deacons, they shall
     all receive the Communion with the Priest every Sunday at the least,
     except they have a reasonable cause to the contrary." Where we see
     that the Church doth not command, but supposes that the Sacrament is
     constantly administered in all such places; taking it for granted,
     that it is never omitted there, where there are so many persons
     devoted to the service of GOD; but that there is always a sufficient
     number to communicate. But she absolutely commands, that all Priests
     and Deacons that belong to such foundations, shall receive the
     Communion with the Priest every Sunday at the least, except any o£
     them have a reasonable cause to the contrary (which the Ordinary of
     the place, I suppose, is to be judge of): they are bound therefore,
     all and every one of them, to receive it every Sunday, which
     notwithstanding they cannot do, unless it be administered every
     Sunday among them. Wherefore if there be any such places where it is
     not so administered, or any such persons who do not, without just
     cause to the contrary, receive it every Sunday in the year, I do not
     see how they can answer it to GOD, to the Church, or to their own
     consciences, Neither are they bound to receive it only every Sunday,
     but every Sunday at the least: which plainly supposeth that it is
     administered upon other days as well as Sundays. For otherwise they
     could not receive it oftener, if they would. And it is to be hoped,
     that all such persons receive it as often as it is administered
     among them. But the Church expressly requires them to receive it at
     least every Sunday, so as never to omit it at least upon that day,
     except they have a reasonable, or such a cause to the contrary as
     will justify their omission of it before the Church, and CHRIST
     Himself at the last day. These things being thus briefly explained,
     we shall easily see into the meaning of the words that gave us the
     occasion to discourse of them, which are these, in the place last
     quoted; And note, that every parishioner shall communicate at the
     least three times in the year, of which EASTER to be one. From
     whence some have been tempted to think, that the Church doth not
     look upon it as necessary that they should communicate above thrice
     a year. I say, tempted to think so. For no man surely in his right
     wits can of himself draw such an inference from these words, which
     is so directly contrary to the sense of the Church, and hath no
     foundation at all in the words themselves. For the Church, as I have
     shown, hath taken all the care she can, that the Holy Sacrament
     should be every where administered, if it was possible, every day,
     at least every Sunday and Holy-Day in the year; which she would
     never have done, if she had thought it sufficient for any one to
     receive only thrice a year. For then all her care about the frequent
     administration of it, would be in vain, and to no purpose. And
     besides, she hath drawn up an excellent exhortation to be read by
     the Minister of every parish, in case he sees the people negligent
     to come to the Holy Communion, beginning thus: "Dearly beloved,
     on---I intend by GOD'S Grace, to celebrate the LORD'S
     Supper." Where we may observe, that it is not said on such a Sunday,
     but on------with a blank, to shew that the Minister may
     appoint the Communion on any day of the week, when he can have a
     sufficient number to communicate with him; and so it is in the other
     exhortation; only there is day put in, which may be understood of
     Tuesday or Wednesday, or any other day as well as Sunday, for the
     same reason. In that first mentioned, the Minister, in the words,
     and by the order of the Church, invites all there present, and
     beseecheth them for the LORD JESUS CHRIST'S sake, to come to
     the LORD'S Supper. And among other things, he saith to them
     all, "I bid you in the name of GOD, I call you in CHRIST'S
     behalf, I exhort you as you love your own salvation, that ye will be
     partakers of this Holy Communion." There are several such pathetical
     expressions in that Exhortation, wherewith the Church most earnestly
     exhorts, adviseth, admonisheth all persons to come to this Holy
     Sacrament. And this Exhortation every Minister is to read publicly
     before all his congregation, whensoever he sees them negligent to
     come to it; as all are, who come but two or three times a year,
     where they may have it oftener if they will. They plainly live in
     the neglect of it, and therefore ought to have this Exhortation read
     to them, according to the order of the Church. Whereby she hath
     sufficiently demonstrated, that she doth not think it enough for
     people generally to receive it only three times in a year; but that
     it is her opinion, that they ought, and her hearty desire they would
     receive it as often as it is, or, according to her order, ought to
     be, administered among them.

     But then she wisely considers withal, that being a National Church,
     made up of all sorts of persons, it is necessary that her general
     Rules and Orders should be accommodated, as much as possible, to the
     several conditions and circumstances that many of them may be
     sometimes in. And therefore, although she exhorts all her members to
     frequent and constant Communion, yet she does not think fit to
     command, and oblige them all, under the pain of excommunication, to
     receive oftener than three times a year, lest some might be thereby
     tempted to come sometimes without that preparation and disposition
     of mind that is requisite to the worthy partaking of so great a
     Mystery. I say, under pain of excommunication; for that is the
     meaning and the effect of this law, that they who do not communicate
     at least three times in a year, may, and ought to be cast out of the
     communion of CHRIST'S Church, as no longer fit to be called
     Christians, seeing they live in such a gross neglect of
     CHRIST'S own command, and of that duty whereby Christians are
     in an especial manner distinguished from other men. Other men, as
     Jews, Turks, and Heathens, may fast and pray and hear Sermons, in
     their way; but to receive the Sacrament of CHRIST'S Supper, is
     proper and peculiar only to Christians, or such as profess that
     religion which JESUS CHRIST hath settled in the world. And therefore
     they who receive the Sacrament, do thereby manifest themselves to be
     Christians. They who do it not, make it at least doubtful whether
     they be Christians or no; for although they were baptized, and so
     made Christians once, who knows whether they have not renounced
     their baptism and apostatized from the Christian religion? They
     themselves perhaps may profess they have not; but the Church can
     never know it, but hath just cause to suspect the contrary, so long
     as they refuse to renew the vow they made in the Sacrament of
     Baptism, by receiving that of the LORD'S Supper. And the least
     that can be required of them for that purpose, is to do it three
     times a year; which therefore the Church absolutely requires; not
     that it is not necessary for them to receive it oftener, in order to
     their salvation; but because it is necessary they should do it at
     least so often, that the Church may be satisfied that they continue
     in their communion, and constant to that religion wherein alone
     salvation can be had.

     And hence it is, that in the rule itself, it is not said that every
     person, but every parishioner, shall communicate at the least three
     times in the year; which therefore is required of all, not as they
     are members only of the Catholic, but as they are members of a
     Parochial Church; and they are bound by this law to do it at least
     so often in their own Parish Church, where they are parishioners:
     otherwise they do not do it as parishioners, as the law requires. So
     that although a man communicates an hundred times in any other
     place; as in the Cathedral, which is free to all of the Diocess, or
     in a Chapel of Ease, or in any other Church, when he can have it at
     his own, this does not satisfy the law. But he must communicate at
     least three times in the year, as a parishioner, in his own Parish
     Church, where there are officers called Churchwardens, appointed on
     purpose to take notice of it, and to inform the Church against him,
     if he neglect to do it so often as she requires. That she may use
     the most effectual means to bring him to repentance for his sin, and
     to make him more careful for the future to perform so great and
     necessary a duty as this is; or if he continue obstinate, cut him
     off from the Body of CHRIST, as no longer worthy to be called a
     member of it. And therefore all that can be reasonably inferred from
     this law, is, that the Church doth not think them fit to communicate
     at all, who will not communicate at least three times in the year.
     But as for her opinion of the necessity of communicating oftener, in
     order to men's obtaining eternal salvation by the Blood of
     CHRIST, that she hath sufficiently declared, by the great care she
     hath taken, to have this Holy Sacrament administered constantly, as
     often as it was in the Apostles' and Primitive time of
     Christianity; that is, as often as any Christian can desire to have
     it. For according to the order and discipline of our Church, if a
     sufficient number of parishioners, against whom there is no just
     exception, desire to receive it every Sunday, or every day in the
     year, the Minister of their parish not only may, but, as I humbly
     conceive, is bound to consecrate and administer it to them. The want
     of such a number being, as far as I can perceive, the only reason
     that can ever justify the omission of it.

     I have endeavoured to set this matter in as clear a light as I
     could, because it will discover to us, several things very
     observable concerning the Church we live in. For hereby we see how
     exactly she follows the pattern of the Primitive and Apostolic
     Church in this particular, as well as others; what great care she
     hath taken that the Bread and Water of Life may be duly distributed
     to all her members whensoever they hunger and thirst after it. With
     how great prudence she hath so ordered it, that all may have it as
     often as they will, and yet none compelled to receive it oftener
     than it is absolutely necessary, in order to their manifesting
     themselves to continue in the faith of CHRIST. How desirous she is
     that all would receive it constantly, and yet how careful that none
     may receive it unworthily. How uniform she hath been in her orders
     about it all along; and by consequence, what cause we all have to
     bless GOD, that we live in the communion of such a Church; and how
     much it behoves us to receive the Holy Communion of her; not only as
     often as she strictly commands all to receive it, under the pain of
     excommunication, but as often as she adviseth and exhorteth us to do
     it in order to our eternal salvation, and as she is ready and
     desirous to communicate it to us; And then we should be sure to
     receive it as often as we are bound, either in duty to GOD, or by
     our own interest to do it.

                                   * * * *

     The Blessed Body and Blood of CHRIST, received, as it ought to be,
     with quick and lively faith, will most certainly have its desired
     effect. But it operates, for the most part, upon our souls, as our
     ordinary food doth upon our bodies, insensibly and by degrees. We
     eat and drink every day, and by that means our bodies grow to their
     full stature, and are then kept up in life, health, and vigour,
     though we ourselves know not how this is done, nor perhaps take any
     notice of it. So it is with this spiritual meat and drink, which GOD
     hath prepared for our souls. By eating and drinking frequently of
     it, we grow by degrees in grace, and in the "knowledge of our LORD
     and SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST," and still continue steadfast and active
     in the true faith and fear of GOD; though after all, we may be no
     way sensible how this wonderful effect is wrought in us, but only as
     we find it to be so by our own experience. And if we do ;that,
     we have no cause to complain that we get nothing by it; for we get
     more than all the world is worth; being strengthened in the inward
     man, and so made more fit for the service of GOD, more constant in
     it, and more able to perform it; or at least are kept from falling
     back, and preserved from many sins and temptations, which otherwise
     we might be exposed to; and this surely is enough to make any one
     that really minds the good of his soul, to hunger and thirst after
     this Bread and Water of life, and to eat and drink it as often as he
     can, although he do not presently feel the happy effect of it, as
     some have done, and as he himself some times may, when GOD seeth it
     necessary or convenient for him. In the mean while he may rest
     satisfied in his mind, that he is in the way that CHRIST hath made
     to Heaven; and thank GOD for giving him so many opportunities of
     partaking of CHRIST'S Body and Blood, and also grace to lay
     hold of them, to improve them to his own unspeakable comfort, such
     as usually attends the worthy receiving of the LORD'S Supper:
     whereby we are not only put in mind of the great Sacrifice which the
     SON of GOD offered for our sins, but likewise have it actually
     communicated unto us, for our pardon and reconciliation to the
     ALMIGHTY GOVERNOR of the world, which is the greatest comfort we can
     have on this side Heaven; so great, that we shall never be able to
     express it unto others, how deeply soever we may be affected with it
     in ourselves. And though we be not always thus sensibly cheered and
     refreshed with it, as we could wish to be, howsoever we can never
     receive the blessed Sacrament, but we have the pleasure and
     satisfaction of having done our duty to our MAKER and REDEEMER,
     which far exceeds all the comforts of this life, and therefore may
     well stay our stomachs till GOD sees good to give us more.

                                   * * * *

     The oftener we do it, [partake the LORD'S Supper,] the more I
     expert we shall be at it, and the more benefit and comfort we shall
     receive from it. It is very difficult, if not impossible, for those
     who do it only now and then, (as once or twice a year,) ever to do
     it as they ought; for every time they come to it, they must begin as
     it I were again; all the impressions which were made upon their
     minds I at the last Sacrament, being worn out before the next; and
     it I being a thing they are not accustomed to, they are as much to
     seek I how to do it now, as if they had never done it before. It is
     by frequent acts that habits are produced. It is by often eating and
     drinking this spiritual food, that we learn how to do it, so as to
     digest and convert it into proper nourishment for our souls. And
     therefore I do not wonder that they who do it seldom, I never do it
     as they ought, nor by consequence, get any good by it, I should
     rather wonder if they did. But let any man do it often, and always
     according to the directions before laid down, and my life for his,
     he shall never lose his labour; but, whether he perceives it or not,
     he will grow in grace, and gather spiritual strength every time more
     and more.

     If such considerations as these will not prevail upon men, to lay
     aside their little excuses for the neglect of so great a duty, and
     to resolve for the future upon the more constant performance of it;
     for my part, I know not what will and therefore shall say no more,
     but that I never expect to see our Church settled, Primitive
     Christianity revived, and true piety and virtue flourish again among
     us, till the Holy Communion be oftener celebrated, than it hath been
     of late, in all places of the Kingdom: and am sure, that if people
     were but sensible of the great advantage it would be to them, they
     would need no other arguments to persuade them to frequent it as
     often as they can. For we should soon find, as many have done
     already, by experience, that this is the great means appointed by
     our Blessed REDEEMER, whereby to communicate Himself, and all the
     merits of His most precious Death and Passion to us, for the pardon
     of all our sins, and for the "purging our consciences from dead
     works to serve the living GOD." So that by applying ourselves thus
     constantly unto Him, we may receive constant supplies of grace and
     power from Him to live in His true faith and fear all our days; and
     by conversing so frequently with Him at His Holy Table upon earth,
     we shall be always fit and ready to go to Him, and to converse
     perpetually with Him at His Kingdom I above, where we shall have no
     need of Sacraments, but shall see Him face to face, and adore and
     praise Him for ever; as for all His other blessings, so particularly
     for the many opportunities he hath given us, of partaking of His
     most Blessed Body and Blood.

     OXFORD,

     The Feast of the Purification.
