                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                   SERMONS FOR SAINTS' DAYS AND HOLIDAYS.

            No. II, THE ANNUNCIATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY.

                                 [Number 54]
       _______________________________________________________________

     "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto
     you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
     accursed."---Galatians i. 8.
       _______________________________________________________________

     THIS day, though named from the Blessed Virgin, is one of the
     greatest festivals of our Saviour. And, therefore, in former times
     the Church of England reckoned it the beginning of her year; thereby
     especially giving intimation, that she would have the whole year
     dedicated to JESUS CHRIST. For this day, with which she began it,
     marks the time of His gracious incarnation; upon which all that we
     have or hope, both in Heaven and in earth, entirely depends. For, as
     St. Paul argues concerning another link in the chain of GOD'S
     mysterious mercy, If Christ were not truly made man, then He did not
     truly die for our sins: if He did not, then was He not raised again:
     and "if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your
     sins." Such was the adorable will of GOD Almighty, in His counsels
     for redeeming lost mankind. There was to be no communion between GOD
     and man, except through the everlasting SON, Himself both GOD and
     man. This is the foundation laid from the beginning, besides which
     no man can lay any other. Men may think little of it, but the evil
     spirits know it well; and accordingly, they have busied themselves
     from the beginning in nothing so much as in perplexing the minds of
     the unwary with regard to the incarnation of our LORD and SAVIOUR,
     and our communion with GOD through him. Church history is little
     else than a record on the one hand, of their unceasing endeavours to
     corrupt the Faith on these two points; on the other of His watchful
     Providence, meeting and baffling them, in every age, by ways of His
     own, prepared also from the beginning, for their confusion, and our
     trial.

     One of the very chiefest of these precautions was His appointing
     persons in his Church to watch the treasure of Divine Truth, to try
     and assay, by comparison with it, whatever doctrines from time to
     time became current, and to give notice, with all authority,
     wherever they found GOD'S mark wanting. To mention no other
     places; our Lord himself, in the text which I considered on St.
     Matthias' day, expresses himself in this manner. "I ordained
     you, that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
     should remain." The Apostles were to take precautions, not only that
     their ministry might be fruitful for the time, but also that it
     might flourish and abound for ever. Those who work under their
     commission, may in virtue of this promise expect more abiding
     results from their labours, than any, however zealous, who may
     venture to take this honour to themselves. Not to forfeit this
     privilege, the holy Apostles instituted a regular custom, according
     to which, in all future times the faithful might be warned against
     heretical doctrines. When any new point arose, regarding which the
     judgment of the Church was doubtful, reference was made to the chief
     pastors or Bishops, solemnly assembled to consider the subject; and
     they having thoroughly examined it, proclaimed an anathema, i. e. a
     sentence of excommunication, against the teachers and maintainers of
     dangerous error. For example; the very first controversy which arose
     in the Church related to the question whether the whole law of Moses
     ought to be observed as a condition of the Christian covenant. It
     was settled by the Apostles' meeting at Jerusalem, as you read
     in the fifteenth chapter of the Acts. And, being settled, whoever
     contradicted it, whoever added either Moses' law or any thing
     else to the terms of salvation by Christ, and thereby began to
     preach a new Gospel, other than that received at first, you hear in
     the text what St. Paul says of him. "Though we or an angel from
     heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have
     preached unto you, let him be accursed:" let him be anathema, cut
     off from the communion of Christian people; not allowed to pray, or
     receive the sacrament, in the assemblies of Christian men. Let him
     be, to those who obey CHRIST, as a heathen man and a Publican." Thus
     speaks the Apostle of those who should be so presumptuous as to
     teach the Jewish fable of the necessity of circumcision, after the
     decision of the Holy Spirit by Apostolical Church had been
     published. For it was published, with the utmost care, by letters
     and messengers sent to all the Churches; and being so, could not be
     disobeyed without wilful arrogancy and irreverence. Thus St. Paul
     and the rest of the Apostles made known to the Church in all ages
     their right, and the right of the Bishops, their successors, to mark
     out such heretics as might arise from time to time, and put the
     faithful on their guard against them. And thus quite down from the
     time of our LORD, the Apostolical succession of pastors has
     continued, as a divinely-appointed guard, meant to secure the
     integrity of Apostolical doctrine.

     Let us, as on this day we are bound, consider more especially what
     we owe to that holy succession, in respect of that on which, as
     Christians, our all, as we cannot but know, depends: I mean the true
     doctrine of the Incarnation of our LORD and SAVIOUR. It may be
     positively said, that under Providence we owe our inheritance of
     this saving doctrine to the chain of rightly-ordained Bishops,
     connecting our times with the time of its first promulgation. This
     will be more clearly seen, if the two following statements are
     considered; neither of which can be reasonably doubted by any one
     who has looked much into Church history.

     1. In ancient times the system of Apostolical, i.e. of episcopal
     anathemas, was the Church's main safeguard against the
     misinterpretations of Scripture, which from time to time threatened
     to deprive her children of their faith in GOD the SON, made man for
     our salvation.

     2. Wheresoever in modern times the Apostolical succession has been
     given up, there the true doctrine of our LORD'S incarnation has
     been often corrupted, always in jeopardy.

     These propositions are of course too large to be fully made out in
     the narrow limits of a sermon. But a few instances of each will show
     what is meant, and will serve to draw serious minds to reverential
     thought on the whole subject.

     I. Even during the Apostolic age, there were many, who under
     pretence of purer doctrine, refused to confess "JESUS CHRIST come in
     the flesh." This we know from the later books of the New Testament;
     especially from the writings of St. John. And by the records of the
     two next generations we learn that the corruptions were of two
     kinds, apparently opposite. Some, out of pretended reverence for our
     LORD'S Divine nature, refused to own Him, made very man for us.
     They would have it, that His blessed body was no more than a dream
     or vision, and all that He did here, a scene as it were enacted by
     the will of the Almighty to make an impression on our minds. Others,
     on the contrary, denied His divine being, pretending, no doubt,
     extraordinary reverence towards GOD the Father Almighty, they would
     not hear the Gospel doctrine that he who is One with the FATHER, had
     vouchsafed to become one of us. They would have it that the
     crucified Jesus was either a mere human saint, or at best a sort of
     good angel. Against both these blasphemous errors St. John himself
     had given warning, pronouncing as it were the Church's anathema
     beforehand. "There are many deceivers entered into the world, who
     confess not JESUS CHRIST come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and
     an anti-Christ. . . . Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in
     the doctrine of CHRIST, hath not GOD. He that abideth in the
     doctrine CHRIST, he hath both the FATHER AND THE SON. If there come
     any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your
     house, neither bid him GOD speed. For he that biddeth him God speed
     is partaker of his evil deeds." However, in the next generation
     after St. John, this evil leaven was still found working in the
     Church, and the false teachers of both sorts still had the boldness
     to please Scripture, which somehow they contrived to wrest and
     pervert in their own way. How were they to be answered? How was it
     to be made manifest that their interpretation of Scripture was
     wrong? It was done by appealing to that interpretation, which had
     the warrant of the Apostles themselves. How was that interpretation
     known? By its preservation in the several Churches which had been
     founded by the Apostles,---Rome, Corinth, Jerusalem, and the
     rest. How had the right interpretation of Scripture been preserved
     in each of those places? By the succession of Bishops, each in turn
     handing over to the Bishop that followed him what he had himself
     learned of his predecessors. The defenders of Evangelical truth
     reasoned as follows:---

     "The tradition of the Apostles, made known in all the world, may be
     clearly discerned in every Church, by those who are willing to
     behold things as they are; nay, and we are able to enumerate those
     whom the Apostles ordained to be Bishops in the several Churches,
     along with their successors, even down to our time, none of whom
     ever taught or imagined any such doctrine as the heretics, in their
     frenzy, maintain. If such interpretations had been known to the
     Apostles, in the manner of hidden mysteries, reserved to be taught
     apart to the most perfect, surely, of all others, they to whom the
     Churches themselves were committed would have had these mysteries
     committed to them also. For it was the Apostles' wish to have
     their successors, and those entrusted to bear sway in their stead,
     complete and unblameable in every thing; whose correct demeanour was
     sure to be the Church's blessing; their fall, her extreme
     calamity. It were too long, however, at present to enumerate the
     chains of Bishops in all the Churches. Look at one of the greatest
     and ancientest, well known to all, the Church founded and
     established at Rome, by two most glorious Apostles, Peter and Paul.
     What tradition she received from the Apostles, and what faith, to be
     preached to all men, we are able to ascertain; the same having come
     down to us by the unbroken series and succession of her Bishops. And
     thus we confound all those who in any way draw wrong conclusions,
     through self-complacency, or vain glory, or blindness of heart and
     evil prejudice. For to this Church of Rome, because of the eminent
     dignity" (of that city), "it cannot be but that other Churches
     resort, I mean believers, from every quarter; and in the same
     Church, among those so resorting, the tradition of the Apostles has
     been preserved entire." Thus speaks the holy Bishop and martyr
     IrenÃSus, who lived within twenty years of St. John himself; and, to
     make good his words, he proceeds to reckon up the Bishops of Rome,
     from the first, appointed by the two great Apostles, to the time of
     his writings---twelve in number. "By this order and succession,"
     says IrenÃSus, "the tradition inherited by the Church from the
     Apostles, and the substance of their preaching, has come down safe
     to our times."

     Thus wrote IrenÃSus, living in Gaul. And in like manner, not long
     after him, Tertullian, writing against the same heretics in Africa,
     and defending that doctrine of our LORD'S true Incarnation,
     which is the very life of the world:--- "The heretics," says he,
     "themselves plead Scripture. How are we to know whether their's
     is the true sense or our's? The natural way is to look and see
     whether either of the two can be traced back to the time of the
     Apostles. What CHRIST revealed to them they preached; what they
     preached, must be known by the testimony of those Churches which
     they themselves founded. If there be any heresies claiming
     Apostolical antiquity, let them give account of the first beginning
     of their Churches; let them unfold the roll of their Bishops, so
     continued by succession from the beginning, as that their first
     Bishop shall have received ordination from some Apostle or disciples
     of the Apostles; such a disciple, I mean, as went out from them. For
     thus do the Churches which are truly Apostolical make out, as it
     were, their genealogical tables: the Church of Smyrna vouching as
     her first Prelate Polycarp, there established by St. John; the
     Church of Rome, Clement, in like manner, ordained by St. Peter; and
     the other Churches no less have each some person to name, fixed by
     the Apostles, as Bishops, in each respectively; through whom each
     derives the seed of Apostolical communion." Now, as Tertullian goes
     on to argue, "this unbroken connexion with the Apostles was a strong
     pledge of their inheriting sound Apostolical doctrine, too, except
     it could be proved their doctrine had varied at any time. For, as
     the Apostles must have agreed with each other in their teaching, so
     neither could Apostolical men have put forth doctrines contrary to
     the Apostles; except that they were such as had revolted from the
     Apostles, and might be detected by the diversity of their doctrine."
     And this would hold in each following age, till some actual
     variation took place. And if it held in respect of any one Church,
     how much more in respect of the combined evidence of the independent
     Churches in all parts of the world, each producing their several
     lines of succession, terminating in several Apostles or Apostolical
     men, and each agreeing (for all material points) in the same
     traditionary doctrine and the interpretation of the Scriptures! For
     instance, when on some occasion, as the same Tertullian relates, the
     Churches of Rome and Africa "interchanged the watchword," or, as we
     might say, "compared notes;" what an encouragement and confirmation
     must it not have proved to both, to find themselves mutually agreed,
     without previous concert, in their views of Scripture truth, and of
     the system established by the Apostles.

     By such arguments in the first age were the enemies of Christ's
     Incarnation put to silence. It is plain, so far, how well the
     Episcopal succession answered the purpose assigned to it by our
     LORD, of providing that the fruit of Apostolical teaching should
     remain; and how vigorously the Church's anathema, first
     pronounced by St. John, was followed up, to the confusion of those
     who "abode not in the doctrine of CHRIST."

     Still more remarkable to the same purpose are the examples of the
     following age. There, too, we find the Apostolical succession the
     main out-work of Apostolical doctrine; the truth of CHRIST'S
     Incarnation defended, not as in the former age by single writers
     appealing to the long lines of Bishops who had taught it, but by the
     Bishops of the Church themselves, synodically met to pass sentence
     on the questionable teaching of some of their colleagues. Being so
     met, they represented not simply the judgment of the contemporary
     Churches, but also that of each former generation of Christians, on
     the great mystery in dispute. Each Bishop taking part in a synodical
     decision on those cardinal points of the faith, was understood as
     avouching, besides his own opinion, the traditionary interpretation
     likewise which his Church had inherited from her first founder. A
     very little thought will show how greatly this adds to the support
     furnished by such meetings to orthodox and saving truth. A
     convention of learned theologians agreeing in their views of
     Scripture, would, no doubt, carry great authority. A council of
     Bishops, in the third century, was such a convention, and a great
     deal more: it was a collection of harmonious independent testimonies
     to the way in which the writers of Scripture had originally intended
     their writings to be understood.

     The advantage of so meeting and comparing their respective
     traditions, was particularly evident in those cases in which any
     member of their own sacred order had countenanced, or seemed to
     countenance, heretical opinions. For instances of the kind occur in
     the age now under consideration; the one displaying in a peculiar
     way the scrupulous watchfulness of the early Church: the other, her
     uncompromising firmness;---both in vindication of the pure Gospel
     of GOD manifest in the flesh.

     The first is the case of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, one of the
     most famous Prelates of his time. The heresy of Sabellius had sprung
     up in his province, which, under pretence of magnifying our blessed
     LORD, confounded His Person with that of the Almighty FATHER, and so
     in fact denied the whole economy of Salvation: maintaining that the
     FATHER himself was incarnate; that He appeared on earth as the SON,
     and suffered on the cross for us. Refuting these, the holy Bishop
     had argued from those expressions of Scripture which represent our
     LORD in his human nature, as the work or creature of GOD the FATHER.
     "The Incarnate SON," said he, "is not the same with the FATHER, as
     the tree is not the same with the husbandman, nor the ship with the
     builder." Expression surely justifiable enough, since what they
     affirm is found almost word for word in our LORD'S own
     discourses. "I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman."
     However, the expressions were misunderstood, although from St.
     Dionysius' own report it should seem that he had carefully
     guarded them by the context; it was generally reported that he had
     used language derogatory of the Divine honour of our LORD. A synod
     met a t Rome to examine the matter, on behalf of which the then
     Bishop of Rome, also named Dionysius, wrote to the Bishop of
     Alexandria, requesting an explanation; which he gave to the full
     satisfaction of the whole Church; summing up his doctrine in these
     remarkable words: "Of the names used by me to express the Divine
     Persons, there is none which can be separated or divided from the
     other to which it is related. Thus, suppose I speak of the FATHER;
     before I add the term ;SON,' I have implied His existence,
     by using the term ;FATHER.' I add the term SON; though I
     had not mentioned the FATHER, assuredly the idea of Him would have
     been comprised in that of the SON: I join to these the ;HOLY
     GHOST,' but at the same time I annex the thought of the
     fountain from whom and the channel by whom He proceeds;" calling
     him, as it seems, the SPIRIT of the FATHER and the SON. "Thus, on
     the one hand, we do as it were expand the UNITY, without division,
     into a TRINITY of Persons; on the other hand, we gather the TRINITY,
     without diminution, into an UNITY of substance." This noble
     confession of a perfect faith we owe to the friendly remonstrance of
     the assembled Bishops; and surely the advantage is great, of such a
     standing guard, in enabling the Church not only to recognize and
     repel her enemies, but also to know for certain those friends about
     whom otherwise she might stand in doubt. If, when the excellent
     Bishop Taylor published his ;Liberty of Prophesying,'
     there had been a council of primitive Bishops at hand, to warn him
     authoritatively of the evil consequences which heretics would
     afterwards draw from some of his positions, the Church would, in all
     probability, have been a gainer in two ways: first, what he had
     there put incautiously would have been corrected, and the sting
     taken out: and next, we might so much the more unreservedly use his
     authority on other points.

     But to proceed with the third century:---Very soon after this
     friendly debate with Dionysius, both he, and the Bishops who had
     remonstrated with him, and indeed the great body of the Orthodox
     Prelacy, were called on to maintain the truth of our LORD'S
     incarnation in another case, in which all remonstrance had failed.
     This was the case of Paul of Samosata, himself also Bishop and
     Pastor of one of the most renowned sees, Antioch; the only Church
     which at that time could compare in dignity with Rome and
     Alexandria. To expose the errors of so high a functionary, to call
     him to account, and finally, he continuing obstinate, to depose him,
     was the work of no mean authority; especially as he had the support
     of a strong political party, and used many arts which in all times
     have been found popular and effective. It appears by the report of
     the synod of Bishops assembled to inquire into his cause, that he
     delighted to resemble men of much secular business; to have people
     pressing on him; to be reading letters and dictating answers as he
     went along the public street. Again, in his preaching, he constantly
     aimed at making a show of ingenuity, and producing a splendid effect
     for the time. His action was violent and showy, and he encouraged in
     the very Church, the rude expressions of applause, shaking of
     handkerchiefs, and the like, which were practised in the theatres.
     The fathers, and their interpretations of Scripture, he took all
     opportunities of disparaging, praising himself at their expense,
     more like one lecturing, or telling fortunes for hire, than like a
     genuine Christian Bishop. It is clear at once, what view such a
     person would be likely to take of the high and mysterious doctrines
     of our religion. It is no matter of surprise to find him
     maintaining, in opposition to our LORD'S own words, that CHRIST
     was from beneath, and not from above; that he was merely a human
     Prophet, not the SON of GOD come down from Heaven; that the wisdom
     of the Almighty dwelt in Him as it had dwelt in former Prophets,
     only in more abundant measure. In short, he held the same doctrine
     as those who now call themselves Unitarians. And there is good
     reason to think, that he was favoured and protected by the ruling
     power in the state. Zenobia, who at that time exercised imperial
     sway in Syria with the title of Queen of the East, was strongly
     addicted to a kind of deistical Judaism, the same in substance with
     his Unitarian opinions. These few particulars may give some idea of
     the peril in which the orthodox faith and true Church lay then at
     Antioch. But even under the most untoward circumstances, the Bishops
     of the neighbouring sees assembled; and their interference, by the
     blessing of GOD, was effectual in preserving their charge from
     apostasy. It is worth observing how well their proceedings answer to
     the line marked out in such cases by our LORD himself, in His
     charter of Church censures. First, then send Paul a brotherly
     expostulation, telling him his fault between them and him alone. The
     first sentence of this letter is much to be noticed, not only for
     its calm and gentle tone, but also, for its very distinct reference
     to the succession of doctrine from the Apostles as a test of truth.
     "Health in CHRIST:---We have just now, by discourse with each
     other, satisfied ourselves of our mutual faith. Now that every
     one's mind may be clearly disclosed, and all disputed question
     more completely set a t rest, we have thought good hereby to set
     forth in writing the faith which we have received from the
     beginning, and hold fast, handed down as it is and safely guarded in
     the Catholic and holy Church, preached even to this day, through
     succession by the blessed Apostles, those who were even
     eye-witnesses and ministers of the word; this faith we have decreed
     to set forth out of the Law and the Prophets, and the New
     Testament." Then having gone though a large body of Scripture
     evidence for the most High Godhead of our LORD and SAVIOUR, they
     conclude:--- "These things, a few out of very many, we have set
     down, desiring to know whether you think and teach as we do, and
     requesting you to signify to us your approbation or disapprobation
     of what we have written." This epistle was followed up by various
     conferences: but Paul yet refusing to be reclaimed, the Bishops of
     Syria went to act upon the remaining part of our SAVIOUR'S
     enactment in such cases: they assembled, to the number of seventy or
     eighty, and called on him to "hear the Church:" which, when he
     refused, they formally deposed him, and separated him from the body
     of Christian people, pronouncing on him the following
     sentence:--- "Him, thus setting himself against GOD, and refusing
     to give way, we have been compelled to excommunicate, and his room
     to set another as Bishop over this Catholic Church; by the
     providence of GOD, as we believe." This they made known to the
     Bishops of Rome and Alexandria, and all the world over, that they,
     acquiescing in the sentence pronounced, might lose no time in
     writing to the new Bishop of Antioch letters of communion and
     acknowledgment, as the manner of the churches then was; directing
     their letter, "To the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria, and all our
     fellow servants throughout the world, whether Bishops, Priests, or
     Deacons, and to the whole Catholic Church under Heaven." By the
     co-operation of those distant Bishops, the sentence was finally and
     effectually confirmed: the Church of Antioch delivered from her
     unfaithful shepherd, and the verity of our LORD'S Divine Nature
     passed on, as a precious deposit, to other councils and other times.

     These few brief examples,---not, it will be observed, standing
     apart, but taken as what they truly are, specimens of a great and
     general system, continually in action throughout the Christian
     world;---these few examples may serve to show how close a
     connexion naturally subsists between sound doctrine and apostolical
     succession in the ministry. We have seen that the one, in those
     primitive ages, was constantly appealed to as no slight guarantee
     for the other. It could not well be otherwise, as long as the
     successors of the Apostles did their duty, originally in ordaining
     none but orthodox men, and afterwards in watching and censuring (if
     need were) the most exalted even of their own colleagues, on
     sufficient proof of defection on their part.

     Two facts are quite indisputable: the first, that in those ages the
     Bishops and Pastors were considered as the chosen apostolical
     guardians of the truth faith; the other, that they really acted as
     such. Does not the conclusion irresistably follow, that such
     Providence intended them to be? And can any one, knowing these
     circumstances, read the peculiarly significant promises at sundry
     times addressed by our LORD to His Apostles, and not perceive in the
     Episcopal succession the appropriate fulfilment of those promises?
     For instance, " I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should
     go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain." "I am
     with you always, even unto the end of the world." "Upon this Rock I
     will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
     against it."

     We have then from Scripture, the consolation of believing, that as
     long as we reverence and uphold the Apostolical ministry, we are in
     our line and measure "labouring together" with GOD himself. We are
     so far doing our humble part in that system which the all-wise
     Redeemer has ordained to be the human, visible, secondary instrument
     of guarding and propagating those truths, on which our communion
     with Him depends.

     This will be seen yet more clearly, on proceeding to examine the
     doctrinal results, such as they appear on the whole in those
     Churches, which from error or necessity have parted with the
     Apostolical succession. This must be attempted on some future
     occasion.

     For the present, reverting to that ineffable mystery, from which on
     this day especially all our devout thoughts should begin, and in
     which they should end, I would only ask one question. What will be
     the feelings of a Christian, particularly of a Christian pastor,
     should he find hereafter that in slighting or discouraging
     Apostolical claims and views, (be the temptation what it may) he has
     really been helping the evil spirit to unsettle men's faith in
     THE INCARNATION OF THE SON OF GOD?

     OXFORD,

     The Feast of the Purification.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
