                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                               THE EMBER DAYS.

                                 [Number 14]
     __________________________________________________________________

     IN reading the Epistles of St. Paul we cannot but observe how
     earnestly he presses upon those to whom he was writing, the duty of
     praying for a blessing on himself and his ministry. We not only find
     his request contained in general terms (1 Thess. v. 25.), "Brethren,
     pray for us;" but when he feels he stands in need of any particular
     support, he mentions it as an especial subject of prayer for the
     Churches. For instance, in writing to the Romans, at a time when he
     was looking forward to trouble from Jewish unbelievers, he says to
     them, (c. xv. 30.) "Strive together with me in your prayers to GOD
     for me, that I may be delivered from them that do not believe in
     Judaea;" and in Phil. i. l9. he expresses a confidence that the very
     opposition he was meeting with would, through the intercession of
     the Saints, be turned into a good to himself. "I know that this
     shall turn to my salvation through your prayer." It is the same when
     he has any object at heart, which he desires to see accomplished. He
     longs much for the spread of the Gospel, and therefore, in 2 Thess.
     iii. 1. he says, "Finally, Brethren, pray for us, that the word of
     GOD may have free course and be glorified." And feeling his own
     weakness to discharge the sacred trust committed to him, he asks the
     Ephesians (c. vi. 15. 19.) to make supplication in his behalf, "that
     utterance might be given unto him, that he might open his mouth
     boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel." I shall mention
     but one passage more, that in 2 Cor. i. 11.; for here not only the
     duty of praying for their Apostle is pressed upon the people, but
     they are bidden to do so for the express purpose that they might
     also join in expressing thanks that their prayer had been graciously
     heard. "Ye also helping together by prayer for us, that, for the
     gift bestowed on us by the means of many persons, thanks may be
     given by many on our behalf" (Compare Col. ii. 4. Heb. xiii. 19.
     Philem. 22.)

     These texts show clearly, that it is the Christian's duty to
     pray at all times for the Ministers of the Gospel. There are other
     texts which teach that supplication ought particularly to be made
     for them at the time of their Ordination. We find, that, when our
     LORD was about to send forth His twelve Apostles to preach His
     kingdom, "He went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all
     night in prayer to GOD." (Luke vi. 12.) And when one of those
     Apostles had by transgression fallen from his Ministry, the whole
     Church united in supplication to GOD, that He would shew whom He had
     chosen to succeed him. (Acts i. 24, 25.) The same is observable in
     the Ordination of the first Deacons, where it is said, (Acts vi. 6.)
     the multitude set them before the Apostles, and "when they had
     prayed, they laid their hands on them." Again, when Paul and
     Barnabas are sent forth on their special mission, "the Church fasted
     and prayed" for them. (Acts xiii. 3.) And St. Paul in turn observed
     the same practice, when he ordained Elders in the Churches where he
     had preached. "They prayed with fasting, and commended them to the
     Lord, on whom they believed." Acts xiv. 23.

     In conformity to this Apostolical custom, the Church of England
     views with peculiar solemnity the times at which her Ministers are
     ordained; and invites all her members to join, at these sacred
     seasons, in prayer and fasting in their behalf. It is the object of
     these pages to bring this subject especially before the
     reader's notice; for the observance of this ordinance of the
     Church has fallen so generally into disuse, that few comparatively
     feel the value of it; and some perhaps are not even aware of its
     existence. To those who may be in this case, I would say briefly
     that the Ordination Sundays occur four times a year, and that the
     days of fasting, or Ember Days, (as they are called,) are in the
     week immediately before those respective Sundays. These days are as
     follows; the Wednesday, Friday and Saturday after the first Sunday
     in Lent; after the Feast of Pentecost; after Sept. 14; after Dec.
     13; as may be seen by referring to the Prayer-Book. And particular
     prayers are ordered during the whole of the weeks, in which these
     days occur; that the Bishops may make a wise and faithful choice,
     and that those who are to be called to the Ministry, may especially
     be blessed with GOD'S grace and heavenly benediction.

     That such a practice is good and right in itself, and could not fail
     to produce a large benefit, cannot be doubted by those, who believe
     that prayer is the appointed channel whereby GOD is pleased to send
     mercies on mankind. He that feels the truth of "Ask, and it shall be
     given you," cannot deny, that he is losing a great privilege,
     whenever he neglects this duty. And if there is any Order of men who
     more especially need the help of others' supplications, it is
     that of those, who are called to the high office of ministering the
     Word of Life to their fellow-creatures, and of being labourers
     together with their Divine Master in bringing men to salvation. I
     would go further than this, and say, that if there is any time when
     the Ministers of the Gospel more particularly call for the prayers
     of the Church, it is at these seasons of Ordination. Whether we
     consider the solemn office which the Bishops are performing, or the
     solemn vows which the Priests and Deacons are taking on themselves,
     we must allow that it is an occasion of the greatest importance.
     Here are a number of men going forth for the great work of winning
     back to CHRIST souls which have gone astray from the right path, and
     of fighting in the first ranks against the world, the flesh, and the
     devil; and in most cases going forth young and inexperienced in
     their work, not knowing (for who can know till he has tried?) the
     dangers and difficulties which beset them. Surely it is the duty of
     every Christian to give them what help he can, and send them forth
     strengthened for the labours of their journey.

     I doubt not that there are many in this kingdom, who are in the
     habit of making supplication to GOD for their Ministers; many who
     join heartily in the several prayers of the Church services, where
     mention is made of them, as well as remember them in their private
     devotions. And some of these may ask, of what advantage it is to
     appoint particular days for such intercession. They may say, "we
     pray daily for the Clergy, and not unfrequently for those who are
     just entering their Ministerial life, Why should one day be fixed
     upon as better than another for this purpose? Let each do as he
     finds opportunity." I would answer, first, that as it was the custom
     of the Apostles to set apart the times of Ordination for especial
     prayer, as well as the regulation of our own Church, it is no longer
     a matter of indifference to us whether we adopt this method or not.
     The example of the one, and the injunction of the other, mark
     plainly for us what we ought to do. But, secondly, there will be
     advantages to ourselves in taking the course so recommended; I would
     mention one or two which appear to be of importance.

     1. When men have been at all careless and indifferent about any
     duty, (and how few are there who can say that they have not been
     careless in this matter?) it is very useful to have some settled way
     for beginning it aright. What has long been put off from time to
     time is seldom properly attended to, if we leave the performance of
     it to any chance opportunity that may be offered. The convenient
     season will seldom come, or at least will not come to us in so
     profitable a way. For setting apart a particular occasion for solemn
     prayer, brings with it more seriousness and attention, and makes us
     think far more of the value of the blessing for which we ask.

     2. And, secondly, I would remind all those who value the promises of
     the Bible, that there is an especial blessing promised to united
     prayer. Our LORD says, (Matt. viii. 19.) "If two of you shall agree
     on earth, as touching any thing they shall ask, it shall be done for
     them of MY FATHER which is in Heaven." And when a good is sought for
     all, all ought to be seeking for it, and "striving together," that
     it may be obtained. Now this could not be done, except days were
     appointed, which all may know of as a standing Ordinance; and to be
     able to join together in spirit, however far apart they are in body.
     We might thus not only in all parts of this kingdom, but in distant
     lands, wherever our brethren are residing, unite in sending up
     supplications, which our common FATHER would not fail to hear and
     answer abundantly. And when engaged in prayer we should have the
     great comfort and support of knowing that we are not single, but
     that others are perhaps mentioning what we are leaving out; and that
     others have more earnestness and devotion than we feel in ourselves.

     Should this paper fall into the hands of any who have never before
     heard or thought seriously of this Institution, it may be useful to
     offer a few hints for its better observance. Let each consecrate the
     days as much as possible to prayer and holy meditation, adding to
     them religious Fasting, if health permit. The true end of fasting is
     beautifully expressed in the Collect for the first Sunday in Lent;
     "using such abstinence, that our Flesh being subdued to the Spirit,
     we may ever obey our LORD'S godly motions in righteousness and
     true holiness." It is to give the mind liberty and ability to
     consider and reflect while it is actually engaged in Divine service,
     or preparing for some solemn part of it; to humble ourselves before
     GOD under a sense of our sins, and the misery to which they expose
     us; to deprecate his anger, and to supplicate His mercy and favour.
     [1] We must use it in the same spirit in which Daniel did, when he
     set himself to pray for pardon for his own and his brethren's
     sins, and sought "the LORD GOD with prayer and supplication, and
     fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes." Dan. ix. 3.

     The subjects for Prayer on the Ember days will be the Church of GOD
     of which we are members; especially those who are called to bear
     office in the same; and of these, more particularly those who are
     either ordaining or being ordained. But our Petitions need not stop
     with these. These are seasons, in which every Minister should be
     remembered before the throne of grace, in which every Bishop,
     Priest, and Deacon, claims the prayers of the People. We may ask for
     them, that their doctrine may be sound and pure, and may come to the
     hearts of their hearers; that they may diligently labour in their
     several spheres of action, for the glory of GOD and the good of
     mankind; above all, that they may themselves lead holy lives, such
     as are consistent with their high profession. And, because we are so
     much more earnest in prayer when we are asking for particular
     things, and those which we feel to need ourselves, we may make
     especial mention of our own Clergyman, and our own Bishop, praying
     that the light, which shines on them, may be reflected on our own
     neighbourhood. For the same reason, if we happen to know of any
     trouble or trial, to which the Sacred Ministry near us is exposed,
     we may mention this also. Additional subjects of meditation will
     arise according to the particular Ember days which we are
     celebrating. In those in Lent we shall have more particularly before
     us our LORD'S example of prayer and fasting, and ask for His
     Ministers, that they may be like Him, in retiring from the world,
     and overcoming worldly snares and temptations. In those in
     Whitsun-week, we shall remember our SAVIOUR'S words, that His
     disciples would fast when He was taken from them, think much of the
     HOLY SP1RIT, which is vouchsafed to them to supply His absence, and
     implore GOD that on us in our day this precious Blessing may be
     given abundantly. And again in those in Advent, we shall reflect on
     the near approach of the anniversary of our LORD'S birth,
     reflect on His forerunner, the self-denying Baptist, who was filled
     with the Holy Ghost from His mother's womb, and pray that the
     "ministers and stewards of His mysteries may like him prepare the
     way for CHRIST'S second coming.

     The times in which we live will furnish additional ground for
     supplication. We cannot but see, that there is a great struggle
     going on between good and evil; and that, while we trust true
     Religion is increasing, it cannot be denied that Infidelity and
     Opposition to lawful authority, whether of GOD or man, is in
     creasing likewise. And, especially, as regards our own Church, we
     cannot shut our eyes to the fact, that she has many and powerful
     enemies, both visible and invisible, and that wicked spirits and
     wicked men are seeking to undermine and overthrow her. The thought
     of these evils on all sides will naturally lead us to Him, who alone
     can protect us from them.

     These remarks are written, in the hope that those who read will ask
     themselves honestly, whether they have not been guilty of neglecting
     the proper observance of the Ember days; and whether the revival of
     the primitive custom of keeping them might not be attended with a
     great national blessing; whether it might not be a means under God
     of averting the dangers which surround us. Many are now lamenting
     that we have in some respects lost sight of that "godly discipline,"
     which the Church orders for the good of her members. But ought we
     not to seek a restoration of what is lost, as well as lament for it;
     and seriously set ourselves to the most effectual way of gaining
     what we need? And again, many are crying out against the faults of
     the Church; but have any a right to do so, till they themselves have
     tried every means in their power of amending what they feel to be an
     evil? And can we say, that we have tried every means, as long as an
     Institution like that of which I have been speaking, so edifying,
     and so likely to gain a blessing, is so generally neglected?


                                   FOOTNOTE

     [l] Nelson's Festivals and Fasts, p. 358.
