                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                                     THE

                    HISTORY OF POPISH TRANSUBSTANTIATION;

    TO WHICH IS OPPOSED THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE, THE
                 ANCIENT FATHERS, AND THE REFORMED CHURCHES.

                     (By John Cosin, Bishop of Durham.)

                                 [Number 27]
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  CHAPTER I.

       The Spiritual Presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Lord's
                                   Supper.

     THOSE words which our Blessed SAVIOUR used in the institution of the
     blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, "This is My Body which is given
     for you; this is My Blood which is shed for you, for the remission
     of sins;" are held and acknowledged by the Universal Church to be
     most true and infallible: and if any one dares oppose them, or call
     in question CHRIST'S veracity, or the truth of His words, or
     refuse to yield his sincere assent to them, except he be allowed to
     make a mere figment, or a bare figure of them, we cannot, and ought
     not, either excuse or suffer him in our Churches; for we must
     embrace and hold for an undoubted truth whatever is taught by Divine
     Scripture. And therefore we can as little doubt of what CHRIST
     saith, John vi. 55, "My Flesh is meat indeed, and My Blood is drink
     indeed;" which, according to St. Paul, are both given to us by the
     consecrated Elements; for he calls the Bread, "the Communion of
     CHRIST'S Body," and the Cup, "the Communion of His Blood."

     Hence it is most evident, that the Bread and Wine, (which according
     to St. Paul are the Elements of the holy Eucharist), are neither
     changed as to their substance, nor vanished, nor reduced to nothing,
     but are solemnly consecrated by the words of CHRIST, that by them
     His blessed Body and Blood may be communicated to us.

     And further it appears from the same words, that the expression of
     CHRIST and the Apostle, is to be understood in a sacramental and
     mystic sense; and that no gross and carnal presence of body and
     blood can be maintained by them.

     And though the word Sacrament be no where used in Scripture to
     signify the blessed Eucharist, yet the Christian Church, ever since
     its Primitive ages, hath given it that name, and always called the
     presence of CHRIST'S Body and Blood therein, Mystic and
     Sacramental. Now a Sacramental expression doth, without any
     inconvenience, give to the sign the name of the thing signified; and
     such is as well the usual way of speaking, as the nature of
     Sacraments, that not only the names, but even the properties and
     effects of what they represent and exhibit, are given to the outward
     Elements. Hence (as I said before) the Bread is as clearly or
     positively called by the Apostle, the Communion of the Body of
     CHRIST.

     This also seems very plain, that our Blessed SAVIOUR'S design
     was not so much to teach, what the Elements of Bread and Wine are by
     nature and substance, as what is their use and office and
     signification in this mystery; for the Body and Blood of our SAVIOUR
     are not only fitly represented by the Elements, but also, by virtue
     of His institution, really offered to all, by them, and so eaten by
     the faithful mystically and sacramentally; whence it is, that "He
     truly is and abides in us, and we in Him."

     This is the spiritual (and yet no less true and undoubted than if it
     were corporal) eating of CHRIST'S Flesh, not indeed simply as
     it is flesh, without any other respect, (for so it is not given,
     neither would it profit us), but as it is crucified and given for
     the redemption of the world; neither doth it hinder the truth and
     substance of the thing, that this eating of CHRIST'S body is
     spiritual, and that by it the souls of the faithful, and not their
     stomachs, are fed by the operation of the HOLY GHOST; for this none
     can deny, but they who being strangers to the Spirit and the divine
     virtue, can savour only carnal things, and to whom, what is
     spiritual and sacramental, is the same as if a mere nothing.

     As to the manner of the presence of the Body and Blood of our LORD
     in the Blessed Sacrament, we that are Protestant and Reformed
     according to the ancient Catholic Church, do not search into the
     manner of it with perplexing inquiries; but, after the example of
     the Primitive and purest Church of CHRIST, we leave it to the power
     and wisdom of our LORD, yielding a full and unfeigned assent to His
     words. Had the Romish maintainers of Transubstantiation done the
     same, they would not have determined and decreed, and then imposed
     as an article of faith absolutely necessary to salvation, a manner
     of presence, newly by them invented, under pain of the most direful
     curse, and there would have been in the Church less wrangling, and
     more peace and unity than now is.

                                 CHAPTER II.

                   Illustrated from Protestant Authorities.

     So then, none of the Protestant Churches doubt of the real (that is,
     true and not imaginary,) presence of CHRIST'S Body and Blood in
     the Sacrament; and there appears no reason why any man should
     suspect their common confession, of either fraud or error, as though
     in this particular they had in the least departed from the Catholic
     faith.

     For it is easy to produce the consent of Reformed Churches and
     authors, whereby it will clearly appear, (to them that are not
     wilfully blind,) that they all zealously maintain and profess this
     truth, without forsaking in any wise the true Catholic faith in this
     matter.I begin with the Church of England ..It teacheth therefore,
     "that in the Blessed Sacrament, the Body of CHRIST is given, taken,
     and eaten; so that to the worthy receivers, the consecrated and
     broken Bread is the communication of the Body of CHRIST; and
     likewise the consecrated Cup the communication of His Blood; but
     that the wicked, and they that approach unworthily the Sacrament of
     so sacred a thing, eat and drink their own damnation, in that they
     become guilty of the Body and Blood of CHRIST. "And the same Church,
     in a solemn prayer before the consecration, prays thus; "Grant us,
     gracious Lord, so to eat the Flesh of thy dear Son JESUS CHRIST, and
     to drink His Blood, that our sinful bodies may be made clean by His
     body, and our souls washed through His most precious blood; and that
     we may evermore dwell in Him, and He in us." The Priest also,
     blessing or consecrating the Bread and Wine, saith thus; "Hear us, O
     merciful FATHER, we most humbly beseech Thee, and grant that we
     receiving these Thy creatures of Bread and Wine according to Thy Son
     our Saviour JESUS CHRIST'S holy institution, in remembrance of
     His Death and Passion, may be partakers of His most blessed Body and
     Blood." . The same, when he gives the Sacrament to the people
     kneeling, giving the bread, saith; "The Body of our LORD JESUS
     CHRIST which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto
     everlasting life." Likewise when he gives the cup, he saith, "The
     Blood of our LORD JESUS CHRIST which was shed for thee, preserve thy
     body and soul to everlasting life." Afterwards, when the Communion
     is done, follows a thanksgiving; " Almighty and everliving GOD, we
     most heartily thank Thee, for that Thou dost vouchsafe to feed us,
     who have duly received these holy mysteries, with the spiritual food
     of the most precious Body and Blood of Thy Son, our Saviour JESUS
     CHRIST ;" with the Hymn, Glory be to God on high, &c. Also in the
     public authorised Catechism of our Church, appointed to be learned
     of all, it is answered to the question concerning the inward part of
     the Sacrament, that "it is the Body and Blood of CHRIST which are
     verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the
     LORD'S Supper." And in the Apology for this Church, writ by
     that worthy and Reverend Prelate Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, it is
     expressly affirmed, "that to the faithful is truly given in the
     Sacrament the Body and Blood of our LORD, the life-giving Flesh of
     the SON of GOD which quickens our souls, the Bread that came from
     Heaven, the Food of immortality, grace and truth, and life; and that
     it is the Communion of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, that we may
     abide in Him, and He in us; and that He may be ascertained that the
     Flesh and Blood of CHRIST is the food of our souls, as bread and
     wine is of our bodies."

                                  *  *  *  *

     The right Reverend Doctors, T. Bilson, and L. Andrews, Prelates both
     of them, thoroughly learned, and great defenders of the Primitive
     Faith, .... made it most evident by their printed writings, that the
     Faith and Doctrine of the Church of England is in all things
     agreeable to the holy Scriptures, and the Divinity of the Ancient
     Fathers. And as to what regards this mystery, the first treats of
     it, in his Answer to the Apology of Cardinal Alan, and the last in
     his Answer to the Apology of Cardinal Bellarmine, where you may find
     things worthy to be read and noted as follows. "CHRIST said, This is
     My Body; in this, the object, we are agreed with you, the manner
     only is controverted. We hold by a firm belief, that it is the Body
     of CHRIST, of the manner how it comes to be so, there is not a word
     in the Gospel; and because the Scripture is silent in this, we
     justly disown it to be a matter of faith; we may indeed rank it
     among tenets of the school, but, by no means, among the Articles of
     our Christian Belief. We like well of what Durandus is reported to
     have said, ;We hear the word, and feel the motion, we know not
     the manner, and yet believe the presence;' for we believe a
     real presence no less than you do. We dare not be so bold as
     presumptuously to define any thing concerning the manner of a true
     presence; or rather, we do not so much as trouble ourselves with
     being inquisitive about it; no more than in Baptism, how the Blood
     of CHRIST washeth us: or in the Incarnation of our Redeemer, how the
     divine and human natures were united together. We put it in the
     number of sacred things, or sacrifices, (the Eucharist itself being
     a Sacred Mystery,) whereof the remnants ought to be consumed with
     fire; that is, (as the Fathers elegantly have it,) adored by faith,
     but not searched by reason."

                                  *  *  *  *

     As for the opinion and belief of the German Protestants, it w ill be
     known chiefly by the Augustan Confession, presented to Charles the
     Fifth by the Princes of the Empire, and other great persons. For
     they teach, that "not only the bread and wine, but the Body and
     Blood of CHIRIST, are truly given to the receivers;" or, as it is in
     another edition, that "the Body and Blood of CHRIST are truly
     present, and distributed to the communicants in the LORD'S
     Supper;" and refute those that teach otherwise. They also declare,
     "that we must so use the Sacraments, as to believe and embrace by
     faith, those things promised which the Sacraments offer and convey
     to us." Yet we may observe here, that faith makes not those things
     present which are promised; for faith, as it is well known, is more
     properly said to take and apprehend, than to promise or perform: but
     the Word and Promise of GOD, on which our faith is grounded, (and
     not faith itself,) make that present which is promised; as it was
     agreed at a conference at St. German, betwixt some Protestants and
     Papists; and therefore it is unjustly laid to our charge by some in
     the Church of Rome, as if we should believe, that the presence and
     participation of CHRIST, in the Sacrament, is effected merely by the
     power of faith.The Saxon Confession, approved by other churches,
     seems to be a repetition of the Augustan. Therein we are taught,
     that "Sacraments are actions divinely instituted; and that, although
     the same things or actions in common use, have nothing of the nature
     of Sacraments, yet when used according to the divine institution,
     CHRIST is truly and substantially present in the Communion, and His
     Body and Blood truly given to the receivers; so that He testifies
     that He is in them; as St. Hilary saith, ;these things taken
     and received make us to be in CHRIST, and CHRIST to be in us."'

     The Confession of Wittemberg, which in the year 1552, was propounded
     to the Council of Trent, is like unto this: for it teacheth that
     "the true Body and Blood of CHRIST are given in the Holy Communion;"
     and refutes those that say, "that the Bread and Wine in the
     Sacrament are only signs of the absent Body and Blood of CHRIST."

                                  *  *  *  *

     Luther was once of opinion, that the Divines of Basil and Strasbourg
     did acknowledge nothing in the LORD'S Supper besides Bread and
     Wine. To him Bucerus, in the name of all the rest, did freely
     answer; "That they all unanimously did condemn that error; that
     neither they, nor the Switzers, ever believed or taught any such
     thing; that none could expressly be charged with that error, except
     the Anabaptists; and that he also had once been persuaded, that
     Luther in his writings, attributed too much to the outward symbols,
     and maintained a grosser union of CHRIST with the bread than the
     Scriptures did allow; as though CHRIST had been corporally present
     with it, united into a natural substance with the bread; so that the
     wicked as well as the faithful were made partakers of grace by
     receiving the Element; but that their own doctrine and belief
     concerning that Sacrament was, that the true Body and Blood of
     CHRIST was truly presented, given, and received together with the
     visible signs of Bread and Wine, by the operation of our LORD, and
     by virtue of His institution, according to the plain sound and sense
     of His words; and that not only Zuinglius and OEcolampadius had so
     taught, but they also, in the public confessions of the Churches of
     the Upper Germany, and other writings, confessed it; so that the
     controversy was rather about the manner of the presence or absence,
     than about the presence or absence itself." All which Bucer's
     associates confirm after him. He also adds; "That the magistrates in
     their Churches had denounced very severe punishments to any that
     should deny the presence of the Body and Blood of CHRIST in the
     LORD'S Supper." Bucerus did also maintain this doctrine of the
     blessed Sacrament in presence of the Landgrave of Hesse, and
     Melancthon, confessing, "That together with the sacrament w e truly
     and substantially receive the Body of CHRIST." Also, "That the Bread
     and Wine are conferring signs, giving what they represent, so that
     together with them the Body of CHRIST is given and received." And to
     these he adds; "That the Body and Bread are not united in the
     mixture of their substance, but in that the Sacrament gives what it
     promiseth, that ii, the one is never without the other; and so they
     agreeing on both parts, that the Bread and Wine are not changed, he
     holds such a Sacramental Union." Luther having heard this, declared
     also his opinion thus; "That he did not locally include the Body and
     Blood of CHRIST with the Bread and Wine, and unite them together by
     any natural connexion; and that he did not make proper to the
     Sacraments that virtue u hereby they brought salvation to the
     receivers; but that he maintained only a sacramental union betwixt
     the Body of CHRIST and the Bread, and betwixt His Blood and the
     Wine; and did teach, that the power of confirming our faith, which
     he attributed to the Sacraments, was not naturally inherent in the
     outward signs, but proceeded from the operation of CHRIST, and was
     given by His SPIRIT, by His words, and by the Elements." And
     finally, in this manner he spake to all that were present; "If you
     believe and teach, that in the LORD'S Supper the true Body and
     Blood of CHRIST is given and received and not the Bread and Wine
     only; and that this giving and receiving is real and not imaginary,
     we are agreed, and we own you for dear Brethren in the LORD." All
     this is set down at large in the twentieth tome of Luther's
     Works, and in the English Works of Bucer.The next will be the
     Gallican Confession, made at Paris in a National Synod, and
     presented to King Charles IX. at the Conference of Poissy. Which
     speaks of the Sacrament on this wise; "Although CHRIST be in Heaven,
     where He is to remain until He come to judge the world, yet we
     believe that by the secret and incomprehensible virtue of His
     Spirit, He feeds and vivifies us by the substance of His Body and
     Blood received by faith. Now we say that this is done in a spiritual
     manner; not that we believe it to be a fancy and imagination,
     instead of a truth and real effect, but rather because that mystery
     of our union with CHRIST is of so sublime a nature, that it is as
     much above the capacity of our senses, as it is above the order of
     nature." Item; "We believe that in the LORD'S Supper God gives
     us really, that is, truly and efficaciously, whatever is represented
     by the Sacrament. With the signs we join the true profession and
     fruition of the thing by them offered to us; and so, that Bread and
     Wine which are given to us, become our spiritual nourishment, in
     that they make in some manner visible to us that the Flesh of CHRIST
     is our food, and His Blood our drink. Therefore those fanatics that
     reject these signs and symbols are by us rejected, our blessed
     SAVIOUR having said, ;this is My Body, and this cup is My
     blood."' This Confession hath been subscribed by the Church of
     Geneva.

                                  *  *  *  *

     Now because great is the fame of Calvin (who subscribed the Augustan
     Confession, and that of the Switzers), let us hear what he writ and
     believed concerning this sacred mystery. His words in his
     Institutions and elsewhere are such, so conformable to the style and
     mind of the Ancient Fathers, that no Catholic Protestant would wish
     to use any other. "I understand," saith he, "what is to be
     understood by the words of CHRIST; that He doth not only offer us
     the benefits of His Death and Resurrection, but His very Body,
     wherein He died and rose again. I assert that the Body of CHRIST is
     really (as the usual expression is), that is truly given to us in
     the Sacrament, to be the saving food of our souls." Also in another
     place; Item; "That word cannot lie, neither can it mock us; and
     except one presumes to call GOD a deceiver, he will never dare to
     say, that the symbols are empty, and that CHRIST is not in them.
     Therefore if by the breaking of the bread our SAVIOUR doth represent
     the participation of His Body, it is not to be doubted but that He
     truly gives and confers it. If it be true that the visible sign is
     given us, to seal the gift of an invisible thing, we most firmly
     believe that receiving the signs of the Body, we also certainly
     receive the Body itself. Setting aside all absurdities, I do
     willingly admit all those terms that can most strongly express the
     true and substantial Communication of the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     granted to the faithful with the symbols of the LORD'S Supper;
     and that, not as if they received only by the force of their
     imagination, or an act of their minds, but really, so as to be fed
     thereby unto Eternal Life." Again, "We must therefore confess that
     the inward substance of the Sacrament is joined with the visible
     sign, so that, as the bread is put into our hand, the Body of CHRIST
     is also given to us. This certainly, if there were nothing else,
     should abundantly satisfy us, that we understand, that CHRIST, in
     His Holy Supper, gives us the true and proper substance of His Body
     and Blood, that it being wholly ours, we may be made partakers of
     all His benefits and graces." Again, " The SON of GOD offers daily
     to us in the Holy Sacrament, the same Body which He once offered in
     sacrifice to His FATHER, that it may be our spiritual food." In
     these he asserts, as clearly as any one can, the true, real, and
     substantial Presence and Communication of the Body of CHRIST, but
     how, he undertakes not to determine. "If any one," saith he, "ask me
     concerning the manner, I will not be ashamed to confess that it is a
     secret too high for my reason to comprehend, or my tongue to
     express; or to speak more properly, I rather feel than understand
     it: therefore without disputing I embrace the truth of GOD, and
     confidently repose on it. He declares that His Flesh is the food,
     and His Blood the drink of my soul; and my soul I offer to Him to be
     fed by such nourishment. He kids me take, eat, and drink His Body
     and Blood, which in His holy Supper He offers me under the symbols
     of Bread and Wine: I make no scruple, but He doth reach them to me,
     and I receive them." All these are Calvin's own words.

     I was the more willing to be long in transcribing these things at
     large, out of Public Confessions of Churches, and the best of
     Authors; that it might the better appear, how injuriously Protestant
     Divines are calumniated by others unacquainted with their opinions,
     as though by these words, Spiritually and Sacramentally, they did
     not acknowledge a true and well-understood real Presence and
     Communication of the Body and Blood of CHRIST in the Blessed
     Sacrament; whereas, on the contrary, they do professedly own it, in
     terms as express as any can be used.


     CHAPTER III.

      How the Papists understand the Doctrine of the Spiritual Presence.

     HAVING now, by what I have said, put it out of doubt, that the
     Protestants believe a spiritual and true presence of CHRIST in the
     Sacrament, which is the reason, that according to the example of the
     Fathers, they use so frequently the term spiritual in this subject,
     it may not be amiss to consider, in the next place, how the Roman
     Church understands that same word. Now they make it to signify,
     "That CHRIST is not present in the Sacrament, either after that
     manner which is natural to corporal things, or that wherein His own
     body subsists in heaven, but according to the manner of existence
     proper to spirits, whole and entire in each part of the host: and
     though by Himself He be neither seen, touched, nor moved, yet in
     respect of the species or accidents joined with Him, He may be said
     to be seen, touched, and moved; and so the accidents being moved,
     the Body of CHRIST is truly moved accidentally, as the soul truly
     changeth place with the body; so that we truly and properly say,
     that the Body of CHRIST is removed, lifted up, and set down, put on
     the Paten, or on the Altar, and carried from hand to mouth, and from
     the mouth to the stomach; as Berengarius was forced to acknowledge
     in the Roman Council under Pope Nicholas, that the Body of CHRIST
     was sensually touched by the hands, and broken and chewed by the
     teeth of the Priest." But all this, and much more to the same
     effect, was never delivered to us, either by holy Scripture, or the
     ancient Fathers. And if souls or spirits could be present, as here
     Bellarmine teacheth, yet it would be absurd to say that bodies could
     be so likewise, it being inconsistent with their nature.

     Indeed Bellarmine confesseth with St. Bernard, that "CHRIST in the
     Sacrament is not given to us carnally, but spiritually;" and would
     to GOD he had rested here, and not outgone the holy Scriptures, and
     the doctrine of the Fathers. For endeavouring, with Pope Innocent
     III. and the Council of Trent, to determine the manner of the
     presence and manducation of CHRIST'S Body, with more nicety
     than was fitting, he thereby foolishly overthrew all that he had
     wisely said before, denied what he had affirmed, and opposed his own
     opinion. His fear was lest his adversaries should apply that word
     spiritually, not so much to express the manner of presence, as to
     exclude the very substance of the Body and Blood of CHRIST;
     "therefore," saith he, "upon that account it is not safe to use too
     much that of St. Bernard, ;the body of CHRIST is not corporally
     in the Sacrament', without adding presently the above mentioned
     explanation." How much do we comply with human pride, and curiosity,
     which would seem to understand all things! Where is the danger? And
     what does he fear, as long as all they that believe the Gospel, own
     the true nature, and the real and substantial presence of the Body
     of CHRIST in the Sacrament, using that explication of St. Bernard,
     concerning, the manner, which he himself, for the too great evidence
     of truth, durst not but admit? and why doth he own that the manner
     is spiritual, not carnal, and then require a carnal presence, as to
     the manner itself? As for us, we all openly profess with St.
     Bernard, that the presence of the Body of CHRIST in the Sacrament,
     is spiritual, and therefore true and real; and with the same
     Bernard, and all the Ancients, we deny that the Body of CHRIST is
     carnally either present or given. The thing we willingly admit, but
     humbly and religiously forbear to enquire into the manner.

     We believe a presence and union of CHRIST with our soul and body,
     which we know not how to call better than sacramental, that is,
     effected by eating; that while we eat and drink the consecrated
     Bread and Wine, we eat and drink therewithal the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST, not in a corporal manner, but some other way,
     incomprehensible, known only to GOD, which we call spiritual; for if
     with St. Bernard and the Fathers a man goes no further, we do not
     find fault with a general explication of the manner, but with the
     presumption and self-conceitedness of those who boldly and curiously
     inquire what is a spiritual presence, as presuming that they can
     understand the manner of acting of GOD'S Holy Spirit. We
     contrariwise confess with the Fathers, that this manner of presence
     is unaccountable, and past finding out, not to be searched and pried
     into by reason, but believed by faith. And if it seems impossible
     that the flesh of CHRIST should descend, and come to be our food,
     through so great a distance; we must remember how much the power of
     the Holy Spirit exceeds our sense and our apprehensions, and how
     absurd t would be to undertake to measure His immensity by our
     weakness and narrow capacity; and so make our faith to conceive and
     believe what our reason cannot comprehend.

     Yet our faith doth not cause or make that presence, but apprehends
     it as most truly and really effected by the word of CHRIST: and the
     faith whereby we are said to eat the flesh of CHRIST, is not that
     only whereby we believe that He died for our sins, (for this faith
     is required and supposed to precede the Sacramental Manducation,)
     but more properly, that whereby we believe those words of CHRIST,
     This is my Body; which was St. Austin's meaning when he said,
     "why dost thou prepare thy stomach and thy teeth? believe and thou
     hast eaten." For in this mystical eating by the wonderful power of
     the HOLY GHOST, we do invisibly receive the substance of
     CHRIST'S Body and Blood, as much as if we should eat and drink
     both visibly.

     The result of all this is, that the Body and Blood of CHRIST are
     sacramentally united to the Bread and Wine, so that CHRIST is truly
     given to the faithful; and yet is not to be here considered with
     sense or worldly reason, but by faith, resting on the words of the
     Gospel. Now it is said, that the Body and Blood of CHRIST are joined
     to the Bread and Wine, because, that in the celebration of the Holy
     Eucharist, the Flesh is given together with the Bread, and the Blood
     together with the Wine. All that remains is, that we should with
     faith and humility admire this high and sacred mystery, which our
     tongue cannot sufficiently explain, nor our heart conceive.


                                 CHAPTER IV.

                  The Popish Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

     IT is an Article of Faith in the Church of Rome, that in the blessed
     Eucharist the substance of the Bread and Wine is reduced to nothing,
     and that in its place succeeds the Body and Blood of CHRIST. . . . .
     The Protestants are much of another 1mind; and yet none of them
     denies altogether but that there is a conversion of the Bread into
     the Body, (and consequently the Wine into the Blood,) of CHRIST; for
     they know and acknowledge, that in the Sacrament, by virtue of the
     words and blessing of CHRIST, the condition, use, and office of the
     Bread is wholly changed, that is, of common and ordinary, it becomes
     our mystical and sacramental food; whereby, as they affirm and
     believe, the true Body of CHRIST is not only shadowed and figured,
     but also given indeed, and by worthy communicants truly received.
     Yet they believe not that the bread loseth its own, to become the
     substance of the Body of CHRIST; for the holy Scripture, and the
     ancient interpreters thereof for many ages, never taught such an
     essential change and conversion, as that the very substance, the
     matter, and form of the bread should be wholly taken away, but only
     a mysterious and sacramental one, whereby our ordinary is changed
     into mystic bread, and thereby designed and appointed to another
     use, end, and office than before. This change, whereby supernatural
     effects are wrought by things natural, while their essence is
     preserved entire, doth best agree with the grace and power of GOD.

     There is no reason why we should dispute concerning GOD'S
     Omnipotency, whether it can do this or that, presuming to measure an
     Infinite Power by our poor ability, which is but weakness. We may
     grant that He is able to do beyond what we can think or apprehend,
     and resolve His most wonderful acts into His absolute will and
     power, but we may not charge Him with working contradictions. And
     though GOD'S Almightiness were able in this mystery to destroy
     the substance of Bread and Wine, and essentially to change it into
     the Body and Blood of CHRIST, while the accidents of Bread and Wine
     subsist of themselves without a subject, yet we desire to have it
     proved that GOD will have it so, and that it is so indeed. For, that
     GOD doth it because He can, is no argument; and that He wills it, we
     have no other proof but the confident assertion of our adversaries.
     Tertullian against Praxeas declared "that we should not conclude GOD
     doth things because He is able, but that we should inquire what He
     hath done;" for GOD will never own that praise of His Omnipotency,
     whereby His unchangeableness and His truth are impaired, and those
     things overthrown and destroyed, which, in His Word, He affirms to
     be; for, take away the Bread and Wine, and there remains no
     Sacrament.

     They that say, that the matter and form of the Bread are wholly
     abolished, yet will have the accidents to remain. But if the sub
     stance of the Bread be changed into the substance of CHRIST'S
     Body by virtue of His words, what hinders that the accidents of the
     Bread are not also changed into the accidents of CHRIST'S Body?
     They that urge the express letter, should show that CHRIST said,
     "This is the substance of My body without its accidents." But He did
     not say, that He gave His Disciples a phantastic body, such a
     visionary figment as Marcion believed, but that very body which is
     given for us, without being deprived of that extension and other
     accidents of human bodies, without which it could not have been
     crucified; since the maintainers of transubstantiation grant that
     the Body of CHRIST keeps its quantity in heaven, and say it is
     without the same in the Sacrament; they must either acknowledge
     their contradiction in the matter, or give over their opinion.

     Protestants dare not be so curious, or presume to know more than is
     delivered by Scripture and antiquity, they firmly believing the
     words of CHRIST make the form of this Sacrament to consist in the
     union of the thing signified with the sign, that is, the exhibition
     of the Body of CHRIST with the consecrated Bread, still remaining
     bread; by divine appointment these two are made one; and though this
     union be not natural, substantial, personal, or local by their being
     one within another, yet it is so straight and so true, that in
     eating the blessed Bread, the true Body of CHRIST is given to us,
     and the names of the sign and thing signified are reciprocally
     changed, what is proper to the Body is attributed to the Bread, and
     what belongs only to the Bread, is affirmed of the Body, and both
     are united in time, though not in place. For the presence of CHRIST
     in this mystery is not opposed to distance but to absence, which
     only could deprive us of the benefit and fruition of the object.

     From what has been said it appears, that this whole controversy may
     be reduced to four heads; 1. Concerning the Signs; 2. Concerning the
     thing signified; 3. Concerning the union of both; and 4. Concerning
     their participation. As to the first, the Protestants differ from
     the Papists in this; that according to the nature of Sacraments, and
     the doctrine of the holy Scripture, we make the substance of Bread
     and Wine, and they accidents only to be signs. In the second, they
     not understanding our opinion, do misrepresent it, for we do not
     hold, (as they say we do,) that only the merits of the death of
     CHRIST are represented by the blessed Elements, but also that His
     very Body which was crucified, and His Blood which was shed for us,
     are truly signified and offered, that our souls may receive and
     possess CHRIST, as truly and certainly as the material and visible
     signs are by us seen and received. And so in the third place,
     because the thing signified is offered and given to us, as truly as
     the sign itself, in this respect we own the union betwixt the Body
     and Blood of CHRIST, and the Elements, whose use and office we hold
     to be changed from what it was before. But we deny what the Papists
     affirm, that the substance of Bread and Wine are quite abolished,
     and changed into the Body and Blood of our LORD in such sort, that
     the bare accidents of the Elements do alone remain united with
     CHRIST'S Body and Blood. And we also deny that the Elements
     still retain the nature of Sacraments when not used according, to
     divine institution, that is, given by CHRIST'S Ministers, and
     received by His people; so that CHRIST in the consecrated bread
     ought not, cannot be kept and preserved to be carried about, because
     He is present only to the communicants. As for the fourth and last
     point, we do not say, that in the LORD'S Supper we receive only
     the benefits of CHRIST'S death and passion, but we join the
     ground wish its fruits, that is, CHRIST with those advantages we
     receive from Him; affirming with St. Paul, "That the bread which we
     break is [koinonia] the Communion of the Body of CHRIST, and the cup
     which we bless, the Communion of His Blood," (1 Cor. x. 16.); of
     that very substance which He took of the blessed Virgin, and after
     wards carried into Heaven; differing from those of Rome only in
     this, that they will have our union with CHRIST to be corporal, and
     our eating of Him likewise; and we on the contrary maintain it to
     be, indeed as true, but not carnal or natural. And as he that
     receives unworthily, (that is, with the mouth only, but not with a
     faithful heart,) eats and drinks his own damnation; so he that doeth
     it worthily, receives his absolution and justification; that is, he
     that discerns, and then receives the LORD'S Body as torn, and
     His Blood as shed for the redemption of the world. But that CHRIST
     (as the Papists affirm) should give His Flesh and Blood to be
     received with the mouth, and ground with the teeth, . . . . . . this
     our words and hearts do utterly deny.

     So then, (to sum up this controversy by applying it to all that hath
     been said,) it is not questioned whether the Body of CHRIST be
     absent from the Sacrament duly administered according to his
     institution, which we Protestants neither affirm nor believe; for it
     being given and received in the Communion, it must needs be that it
     is present, though in some manner veiled under the Sacrament, so
     that of itself it cannot be seen. neither is it doubted or disputed
     whether the Bread and Wine, by the power of GOD and a supernatural
     virtue, be set apart and fitted for a much nobler use, and raised to
     a higher dignity than their nature bears; for we confess the
     necessity of a supernatural and heavenly change, and that the signs
     cannot become Sacraments but by the infinite power of GOD, whose
     proper right it is to institute Sacraments in His Church, being able
     alone to endue them with virtue and efficacy. Finally, we do not say
     that our Blessed SAVIOUR gave only the figure and sign of His body;
     neither do we deny a Sacramental Union of the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST with the sacred Bread and Wine, so that both are really and
     substantially received together: but (that we may avoid all
     ambiguity) we deny that after the words and prayer of Consecration,
     the Bread should remain bread no longer, but should be changed into
     the substance of the Body of CHRIST, nothing of the bread, but only
     the accidents continuing to be what they were before; and so the
     whole question is concerning the Transubstantiation of the outward
     Elements; whether the substance of the Bread be turned into the
     substance of CHRIST'S Body, and the substance of the Wine into
     he substance of His Blood; or, as the Romish Doctors describe their
     Transubstantiation, whether the substance of bread and wine doth
     utterly perish, and the substance of CHRIST'S Body and Blood
     succeed in their place, which are both denied by Protestants.

     The Church of Rome sings on Corpus Christi day, This is not bread,
     but GOD and Man my SAVIOUR. And the Council of Trent doth thus
     define it; "Because CHRIST our Redeemer said truly, that that was
     His Body, which he gave in the appearance of bread; therefore it was
     ever believed by the Church of GOD, and is now declared by this
     sacred Synod, that by the power of Consecration the whole substance
     of the bread is changed into the substance of CHRIST'S Body,
     and the whole substance of the wine into the substance of His Blood;
     which change it fitly and properly called Transubstantiation by the
     holy Catholic (Roman) Church. Therefore, if any one shall say, that
     the substance of Bread and Wine remains with the Body and Blood of
     our Saviour JESUS CHRIST, and shall deny that wonderful and singular
     con version of the whole substance of the Bread and Wine into the
     substance of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, the only appearance and
     outward form of the Bread and Wine remaining, which conversion the
     Catholic (Roman) Church doth fitly call Transubstantiation,---let
     him be accursed."

                                  *  *  *  *

     Now we leave inquiring what GOD is able to do, for we should first
     know His will in this matter, before we examine His power; yet thus
     much we say, that this Roman Transubstantiation is so strange and
     monstrous, that it exceeds the nature of all miracles. And though
     GOD by His Almightiness be able to turn the substance of bread into
     some other substance, yet none will believe that He doth it, as long
     as it appears to our senses, that the substance of the Bread doth
     still remain whole and entire. Certain it is, that hitherto we read
     of no such thing done in the Old or New Testament, and therefore
     this tenet, being as unknown to the Ancients as it is ungrounded in
     Scripture, appears as yet to be very incredible, and there is no
     reason we should believe such an unauthorised figment, newly
     invented by men, and now imposed as an article of Christian
     Religion. For it is in vain that they bring Scripture to defend this
     their stupendous doctrine; and it is not true, what they so often
     and so confidently affirm, that the Universal Church hath always
     constantly owned it, being it was not so much as heard of in the
     Church for many ages, and hath been but lately approved by the
     Pope's authority in the Councils of Lateran and Trent.

     OXFORD.

     The Feast of St. Matthias.

                              (To be continued.)
