                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                          THE SCRIPTURE VIEW OF THE
                            APOSTOLIC COMMISSION.

                                 [Number 24]
     __________________________________________________________________

     IN referring to the Epistles of the New Testament for proof of the
     duty of submission to Spiritual Authority, we are sometimes met by
     the objection that the case is very much altered since the days of
     the Apostles, and since the extraordinary gifts of the SPIRIT have
     been withdrawn from the Church. Now it will readily be admitted on
     all bands, that the state of the Church is very greatly altered
     since these miraculous powers have ceased; but at the same time we
     must not allow a general principle of this sort to set aside the
     authority of Holy Scripture, as far as regards our own practice,
     until, by a diligent and careful study of the Apostles'
     writings, we have found that the principle does really apply to the
     case in question; as, for instance, that the Apostolic Authority is
     grounded in Scripture upon the possession of miraculous powers, and
     therefore necessarily ceased when those powers were withheld. Let us
     then examine this point more particularly.

     Have we then considered, in reference to this matter, that the
     extraordinary gifts of the SPIRIT were not confined to the appointed
     teachers of the Church, but were shed abroad upon the congregation
     at large, upon the young and the old alike, upon the servants, and
     upon the hand-maidens? (Comp. Joel ii. 28, 29.) It was the promise
     of the Old Testament, that, under the dispensation of the New
     Covenant, GOD would write His Law in the hearts of His people, so
     that they should teach no more every man his neighbour, and every
     man his brother, saying; Know the LORD, "for they shall all know Me,
     from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the LORD."
     (Jer. xxxi. 33, 34.) This promise, we are told in the Epistle to the
     Hebrews, was fulfilled in the Gospel; and St. John, in his First
     General Epistle, expressly acknowledges the accomplishment of the
     Prophet's words. He says to his " little children," "Ye have an
     unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. I have not
     written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know
     it. These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce
     you. But the anointing which ye have received from Him abideth in
     you, and ye need not that any may teach you; but as the same
     anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie,
     and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in Him." (l John ii.
     20, 21. 27 ) Such general illumination by GOD'S Holy Spirit
     might seem to make any authoritative Apostolic declarations
     altogether unnecessary for the converts; but we still find St. John
     writing to them, and declaring his testimony to the Christian
     doctrine with much earnestness; and why? Let us hear his own words
     at the beginning of his Epistle; "That which we have seen and heard
     declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with US; and
     truly OUR fellowship is with the FATHER, and with His Son JESUS
     CHRIST. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be
     full." Here we have the object of the Apostle's affectionate
     address fully and clearly stated. He and his Fellow-Apostles, the
     witnesses of their Master's Life and Death and Resurrection,
     had received from Him a glorious revelation to communicate to the
     world: they had seen and did testify, that the FATHER sent the SON
     to be the Saviour of the world; upon this foundation they were
     commissioned to build the Christian Church; and it was their holy
     and blessed office to "stablish, strengthen, settle" the faith of
     their "little children" in the Gospel; to tell them how they might
     keep themselves from the spirit of error, and continuing "stedfast
     in the Apostles' doctrine and fellowship," might through them
     have fellowship with the FATHER and the Son, and so "rejoice with
     joy unspeakable and full of glory." We now see the full force of St.
     John's authoritative language. He was marking the lines of "the
     foundation of the Apostle and Prophets," in order that his disciples
     might duly be built upon their most holy faith into a temple meet
     for the habitation of God through the SPIRIT: they were GOD'S
     building, and the Apostle was one of the "wise master-builders,"
     whom CHRIST had appointed to build His Spiritual House. And this
     view of the matter will become still clearer, if we study well the
     prayer which CHRIST offered for His Church at the solemn moment when
     He was just about to purchase it to Himself by the shedding of His
     precious blood. We there find our Blessed LORD, having first
     declared that His work was finished on earth, and having earnestly
     besought the FATHER now to glorify Him, proceeds to pray for His
     Apostles, that His FATHER would preserve them in unity, and truth,
     and holiness. He says, "I have manifested Thy name unto the men
     which Thou gavest Me out of the world; I have given unto them the
     words that Thou gavest Me, and they have received them; Holy FATHER,
     keep through Thine own name those whom Thou hast given Me, that they
     may be one as We are. Sanctify them through Thy truth; Thy word is
     truth. As Thou hast sent Me into the world, even so have I also sent
     them into the world. And for their sakes I sanctify Myself, that
     they also might be sanctified through the truth." Thus did CHRIST
     lay the foundations of His One Holy, Catholic, Apostolic
     Church;---in the remainder of His prayer He intreats like
     blessings for all who should be built on this sure foundation, that
     they might be so joined together in unity of spirit by the
     Apostles' doctrine, as to be made a holy temple acceptable to
     GOD through Him. (Collect for St. Simon and St. Jude,) "Neither pray
     I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on Me
     through their word; that they all may be one, as Thou FATHER art in
     Me and I in Thee, that they also may be one in Us, that the world
     may believe that Thou hast sent Me." Accordingly, we read that when,
     on the day of Pentecost, three thousand were brought to believe on
     CHRIST through St. Peter's word, they were baptized into that
     holy communion, " and they continued stedfast in the Apostles'
     doctrine and fellowship according to a text already quoted,) and the
     LORD daily added fresh members to this Church. And in later times,
     when false teachers were gone abroad seducing the disciples, the
     Apostles wrote to them, declaring and reminding them what the
     Apostolic doctrine was, that they might have the joy fulfilled in
     themselves of knowing that they were in the unity of the Apostolic
     Church, one in CHRIST and in the FATHER. And so St. Paul explains
     why he wrote to the Corinthians, "not for that we have dominion over
     your faith, but are helpers of your joy; for by faith ye stand." (2
     Cor. i. 24.)

     St. Peter, again, in his Second Epistle, uses exactly the same
     language with St. John. He writes as "a servant and an Apostle of
     JESUS CHRIST, to them that have obtained like precious faith with
     US; according as His divine power bath given unto us all things that
     pertain unto life and godliness; exceeding great and precious
     promises, that by these ye might be partakers of the Divine nature:"
     i. e. he does not draw any line of difference between himself and
     his brethren, as if he had miraculous powers which they had not; but
     rests his teaching on the plain fact of his being commissioned, and
     commissioned with the simple object of communicating the doctrine
     which had been disclose-l to him. He addresses his converts just as
     St. John does, not as though they were ignorant or unmindful of the
     truth, but in order to strengthen their conviction of those holy
     facts and doctrines to which he and his brother-Apostles were
     commissioned to bear witness. "I will not be negligent," he says,
     "to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know
     them, and be established in the present truth. Yea, I think it meet,
     as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in
     remembrance. Moreover, I will endeavour that after my decease ye may
     have these things always in remembrance. For WE have not followed
     cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and
     coming of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, but were eye-witnesses of His
     Majesty, .... and this voice which came from heaven we heard, when
     we were with Him in the Holy Mount." Again he says, "This Second
     Epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I stir up your
     pure minds by way of remembrance, that ye may be mindful of the
     words which were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the
     commandment of us the Apostles of the LORD and SAVIOUR." For by
     adherence to the commandment of the Apostles, and the doctrine of
     the Prophets, it might be known that Christians were building
     themselves up on the only true foundation, even JESUS CHRIST.

     But it is in St. Paul's writings that we shall find the fullest
     and clearest view of Apostolical Authority; and it is well worthy of
     our observation, that the Church upon which the Apostle most
     strongly enforces that Authority, is the very Church which is most
     distinguished in the New Testament for the abundance of its
     Spiritual gifts; so that clearly it was not an exclusive possession
     of miraculous powers, which constituted the distinction between
     Apostles and private Christians He begins his First Epistle to the
     Corinthians by thanking GOD on their behalf "for the grace of GOD
     which was given them by JESUS CHRIST, that in every thing they were
     enriched by Him in all utterance and in all knowledge, so that they
     came behind in no gift." But the Apostle goes on immediately to
     reprove them for their want of unity; it bad been declared to him,
     that there were contentions among them. And how did these
     contentions arise?---in low views of Apostolical Authority. They
     had forgotten that there was but One Foundation; One Building of
     GOD; One Rule, according to which the several builders must carry up
     the structure which Apostles had founded. And how did the Apostle
     endeavour to drive out the spirit of schism?---by asserting and
     en forcing his own authority over them, as the one only father whom
     they had in the Gospel, (though they might choose for themselves ten
     thousand instructors,) and by sending Timothy to bring them into
     remembrance of his ways which were in CHRIST, as he taught every
     where in every Church. Thus were they to be brought back to the
     blessed unity of spirit of the One Catholic and Apostolic
     Church---And here, by the way, we have light thrown upon the
     doctrine contained in the Epistles of Ignatius. Remarkable and
     consolatory to the inquirer after truth as is the evidence therein
     afforded to the divine appointment of Episcopacy, perhaps there is
     mingled with his satisfaction some surprise at the earnestness and
     frequency with which the Holy Martyr urges the doctrine. But it is
     plain, what the Apostles are in St. Paul's Epistles, such the
     Bishops are in those of Ignatius centres of unity; and as St. Paul,
     when denouncing schism, magnifies the Apostolic Office, in just the
     same natural, or rather necessary way, does Ignatius oppose the
     varieties of opinion in his own day by the doctrine of
     Episcopacy.---To return: the same Apostle writes to the Church of
     Rome; "I myself am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are
     full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish
     one an other. Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly
     unto you in some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace
     that is given to me of GOD, that I should be the Minister of JESUS
     CHRIST to the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of GOD." (Rom. xv.
     14---16.) The passage which follows is worthy of especial notice,
     as showing that the Apostles marked out for themselves distinct
     provinces, so that each had his own Diocese, as it were, his own
     peculiar sphere of duty and authority. St. Paul tells us be strove
     to preach not where Christ was named, lest he should build upon
     another man's foundation (ibid. v. 20.). Each laid down for
     himself his own "measure," and would not stretch beyond it (2 Cor.
     x. 14.). And this will perhaps help to explain the fact, which early
     tradition hands down to us, of the wide dispersion of the Apostolic
     Body. At all events, it is certain from History, that the different
     Churches claiming Apostolic Descent, were very careful to maintain
     the practices which they had severally derived from their respective
     Founders. To the Church of Corinth accordingly St. Paul writes as
     its sole Founder and Father, claiming upon this ground Supreme
     Authority over it in the name of JESUS CHRIST. And with this Epistle
     before us, we cannot doubt of the conclusion which, we have already
     seen, may be clearly enough deduced from other Epistles of the New
     Testament, viz. that the Authority which the Apostles claim for
     themselves, they claim, not on the ground of high supernatural
     endowments, (for these were the possession of the Church at large,)
     but on the ground of "the Grace and Apostleship" which they had
     received from CHRIST, the Head of the Christian Church, "for
     obedience to the faith among all nations for His name." That is,
     they refer directly to their Commission, as His Apostles, to go into
     all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature; they refer to
     the authority with which He invested them, when He stood in the
     midst of them, and said unto them, "as MY FATHER hath sent Me, even
     so SEND I you," and bade them receive the HOLY GHOST, to be with
     them in the prosecution of their High and Holy Office. This point is
     very strikingly exhibited in the First Epistle to the Corinthians,
     because there the possession of extraordinary gifts, and the
     possession of Spiritual Authority, are brought into immediate
     contrast with each other. The Corinthians, proud of the gifts of new
     teachers, had raised parties in opposition to St. Paul, and
     questioned his authority. How then did he maintain it? not by
     claiming higher gifts and graces for himself, (though he spoke with
     tongues more than they all,) but by referring to his Office, as a
     Minister and an Apostle of CHRIST, whose One Spirit governs the
     whole body of the Church, appointing divers orders, and dividing to
     every man severally as He will. That he was an Apostle he proved by
     the fact, that he had been equally favoured with the Twelve; that he
     had seen our LORD JESUS CHRIST in the flesh: and bad received the
     doctrines of His Gospel, and grace to preach them to the world. This
     was the simple ground on which he claimed Authority; it was not
     because of the gifts or graces which he, as an individual,
     possessed; nor was it because he had laboured more abundantly than
     all the other Apostles; nor because of his signal labours and
     afflictions for CHRIST'S sake. He mentions these in his Second
     Epistle, to show that, if he chose to adopt the language of his
     adversaries, he had a better right than they to glory; but all the
     while he tells the Corinthians that he was "become a fool in
     glorying;" that they had compelled him; that he could show the signs
     of an Apostle, and needed no epistles of commendation. It was in
     right of his office that he claimed Authority; it was for the sake
     of that Office that he endeavoured to give no offence in any thing,
     but in all things to approve himself as the Minister of God.

     Now, perhaps some persons may be disposed to think that this
     Apostolical Authority would terminate with the Apostles them selves,
     with the favoured men who had been " eye-witnesses and ministers of
     the Word," and could declare to others what they had themselves
     heard and seen. This might appear probable, if we had only our own
     reasonings to go upon; but Scripture teaches us a very different
     lesson. When St. Paul felt that his time was now nearly come, he
     writes to Timothy, his "dearly beloved son," giving him his last
     solemn charge, as to one who was hence forth to occupy the post
     which hitherto he had himself maintained in the battles of his LORD.
     He earnestly commands him, "watch THOU in all things, endure
     afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy
     ministry. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of MY
     departure is at hand. I have fought the good fight, I have finished
     MY course, I have kept the faith." This faith, which St. Paul had so
     vigilantly kept was now to be committed to Timothy's care; he
     had already been put in trust with the Gospel by the HOLY GHOST and
     the imposition of the Apostle's hands; and now upon him was to
     devolve the solemn responsibility of being left in charge of the
     Apostle's testimony, and of handing it down to future ages. "Be
     not thou therefore ashamed' says the Apostle, "of the testimony
     of our LORD, nor of me his prisoner; Hold fast the form of sound
     words which thou hast heard of me in faith and love which is in
     CHRIST JESUS. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep,
     by the HOLY GHOST which dwelleth in us." And, in reminding him of
     this indwelling of the HOLY GHOST, the promise of CHRIST to His
     Ministers, the Apostle labours, with evident anxiety, to embolden
     Timothy, by filling him with a due sense of the authority and power
     committed to him. "I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the
     gift of GOD which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. For GOD
     hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and
     of a sound mind." "Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace
     that is in CHRIST JESUS. And the things that thou hast heard of me
     among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
     shall be able to teach others also. This last passage is very
     important, because it shows so clearly that the testimony which the
     Apostles bore to CHRIST did not cease with their ministry, but was
     to be transmitted along the sacred line of those whom they ordained,
     and so handed down to them that were to come after. And where does
     this line end? Blessed be GOD, it has not ended yet; and
     CHRIST'S promise gives us the comfortable assurance that it
     shall last "even to the end of the world." Down to our days, the
     Church has been "a witness and keeper of Holy Writ;" (Art. xx.) and
     so faithful a witness, and so watchful a keeper, that we can feel as
     certain of the facts of the Gospel History, and so of the glorious
     doctrines which they involve, as if we heard them from the
     Apostles' own lips. And how beautifully are we reminded of St.
     Paul's dying charge to Timothy, when we see the Fathers of our
     own Church laying their hands on the heads of their sons in the
     faith, bidding them receive the HOLY GHOST for their high office and
     work in the Church of GOD, and charging them to be faithful
     dispensers of the Word of GOD and His Holy Sacraments; and then
     delivering into their hands that Holy Book which the Church has
     transmitted, and giving them authority to preach it in the
     congregation! Thus is the testimony of the Apostles still handed
     down in the Church, which is "the pillar and ground of the truth;"
     and thus do their Successors declare it with authority, "GOD also
     bearing them witness," not indeed now "with signs, and wonders, and
     divers miracles," but still, according to His own most true promise,
     with invisible "gifts of the HOLY GHOST.

     Let us now return to see how St. Paul exercised his Apostolical
     Authority. He had been consulted by the Church of Corinth upon
     several questions which had caused difference of opinion among
     them;---how then does he decide these questions? In the first
     place, he draws a broad line of distinction between the points on
     which he had an express commandment of his LORD to go upon, and
     those on which he had to give his own judgment. In some cases he
     says, "I command;" in others, "not I, but the LORD As a Minister and
     Steward of CHRIST'S household, his first consideration was,
     whether, in the course of His ministry, his Master had left him any
     explicit commandment; if he found no such commandment, his next duty
     was to decide the question by the principles of CHRIST'S
     Gospel. In this case, he gave his "judgment, as one that had
     obtained mercy of the LORD to be faithful," as having been "allowed
     of God to be put in trust with the Gospel;" and in such decisions he
     felt assured that he had the SPIRIT of God. Accordingly, he says
     with confidence, "If any man think himself to be a Prophet or
     spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you
     are the commandments of the LORD;" referring at the same time to his
     Apostolical Authority, "What? came the word of God out from you? or
     came it unto you only?"---is it nothing to you that the Apostles
     have so ordained, and the Catholic Church so received and practised?
     (1 Cor. xiv. 36, 37.)

     And now I would ask, in conclusion, where is the essential
     difference between the Apostolic age and our own, as to the relation
     in which God's Ministers and His people stand to each other? I
     do not say that the Ministers of His word in these days can feel so
     sure as the Apostles could, that in the commandments which they give
     they have the SPIRIT of GOD; very far from it. But I do say, that
     neither can the people feel so sure as in those days of miraculous
     gifts, that they have the SPIRIT of GOD with them; and thus the
     relation between the two parties remains unaltered. Since the
     Apostolic times and the age of miracles, the City of GOD is, as it
     were, come down from heaven to earth; the scene is changed, but the
     city remains the same. The Corner-stone is the same, its foundations
     are the same: if it be not built up by the same heavenly rule, it
     will not be the city that is "at unity in itself," the city of Him,
     who "is not the Author of confusion, but of peace, as in all
     Churches of the Saints." His HOLY SPIRIT works at sundry times, in
     divers manners, according to His own Almighty wisdom; sometimes He
     descends upon His Ministers with an audible sound and in a visible
     form 1 and sometimes in visible, amidst the deep silence, and the
     prayers of His faithful congregation 2. Outward appearances may be
     changed, yet His Mighty Agency remains the same; and it will be our
     wisdom and our blessedness to feel and acknowledge His presence in
     the "still small voice," as well as in the "great and strong wind,"
     and in "the fire." For though miracles and tongues may have ceased,
     He has never ceased to send forth Apostles, and Prophets, and
     Evangelists, and Pastors, and Teachers; nor will He cease to send
     them until the work of their ministry is accomplished in "the
     edification of the body of CHRIST;" "till we all come in the unity
     of the faith, and of the knowledge of the SON of GOD, of CHRIST.

     The question to which these few observations refer, is one, it must
     be allowed, of great importance. Our blessed LORD declares to His
     Apostles, "AS MY FATHER hath sent Me, even so send I you." Again He
     says, "He that heareth you, heareth Me; and he that despiseth you,
     despiseth Me." It becomes then a grave question, to whom did Christ
     address these words? To the Twelve Apostles exclusively, or to them
     and their successors to the end of the world? It is surely worth our
     while carefully to search the Scriptures with a view to ascertain
     this point. And while we do this, let us bear constantly in mind
     that slight intimations of our LORD'S Will are in their degree
     as much binding upon us as express commands; that he who knows what
     probably his LORD'S will is, will be judged as one who had
     probability to guide him; that he who knew not through negligence or
     slothfulness, will have his negligence or slothfulness to answer
     for. It will not be a sufficient excuse for us, that we thought all
     that was said in the New Testament of Apostolical Authority could
     only apply to the Apostolic age. Let us remember, as a solemn
     warning to us, how it came to pass that the Jews despised and
     rejected CHRIST. They saw no sign from heaven, and therefore thought
     He could not be the Prophet like unto Moses. Their fault was, that
     they did not humbly and heartily "search the Scriptures."

     OXFORD,
     The Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul
