                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                           THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN.

                                 [Number 49]
     __________________________________________________________________

     In referring to Scripture for the proof of points relating to the
     doctrine of the Church, we sometimes find the force of our arguments
     evaded by the objection that, although the texts and passages we
     refer to seem to prove the points for which they are cited, we still
     appear to be giving them an undue prominence in our system. It is
     admitted, for instance, that the Epistles to Timothy and Titus prove
     an Episcopal form of Church government: that certain passages in the
     First Epistle to the Corinthians indicate the existence of a certain
     order of Church service, &c.; but then these passages are thought to
     occupy a subordinate place in the records of the New Testament,
     while our doctrine of the Church would put them prominently forward.
     This is, doubtless, a point to be well considered; for the apostolic
     rules of Scripture teaching and interpretation, must be faithfully
     observed: "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God,"
     or "prophesy," let him prophesy "according to the proportion (or
     analogy) of faith."

     Now, to meet this difficulty, let it be considered that the
     restoration of a doctrine so evidently important in its bearings as
     that of the Church, must necessarily produce a great change upon a
     system out of which it has been lost. We have been accustomed to a
     Ptolemaic theory of our spiritual system; we have made our own
     little world the centre, and have ranged the doctrines of Scripture
     around it, according to the relation they seem severally to bear to
     our own individual profit. We find ourselves called upon to adopt an
     opposite theory; to take for the centre of our system a body which
     we had been used to regard as a mere satellite attending upon our
     own orb. No wonder if we feel our notions deranged; if every thing
     seems put into a new place; that which before was primary, now made
     subordinate; and vice versa. This is no more than we might naturally
     expect: the only question for us to settle is this: does the theory
     which is proposed for our acceptance bring facts to support it? The
     maintainer of the Copernican theory, perhaps, directs our attention
     principally, or even exclusively, to objects which we had else
     comparatively neglected, or entirely overlooked. But this is no
     fatal objection to his views. The satellites of Jupiter might seem
     to hold a subordinate place in the solar system, and their eclipses
     to be comparatively uninteresting phenomena: and yet the examination
     of them led, we know, to great and important discoveries. Just so,
     some apparently insignificant text, lying in the depth of Scripture,
     far removed, as we think, from the centre light of Christian
     doctrine, may be the means of suggesting to us most important
     consideration,--of impressing upon us the conviction that we have
     been going upon a false theory, and leading us to a truer notion of
     the system in which we are placed. We do well, indeed, to weigh
     carefully the meaning of the texts which are brought before us, and
     to examine the deductions which are founded upon them, whether they
     follow naturally from the premises. But we do not well if we allow
     ourselves to be prejudiced against the evidence which is brought
     from Scripture, merely because it is contrary to our pre-conceived
     notions; because it seems to put us in a strange country, exalting
     the valleys, and making low the mountains and hills, turning Lebanon
     into a fruitful field, and causing the fruitful field to be counted,
     in comparison, as a forest. This is not to inquire after truth in
     the spirit of true philosophers, or, which is the same thing, of
     little children. And for such only is knowledge in store; "of such"
     only "is the kingdom of heaven."

     For illustration of these remarks I would refer to the passages in
     St. Matthew's Gospel, which are first pressed upon our notice, when
     our attention is turned to the evidence of Scripture respecting the
     nature and office of the Christian Church. First and foremost, of
     course, is the well known promise to St. Peter, (chap. xvi. 18.)
     "Upon this rock will I build my Church." It is argued by the
     Churchman, that the obvious sense of the word Ekklesia (Assembly),
     as it would strike an unprejudiced reader, is that of a visible
     body; and that this sense is confirmed by the use of the term in
     chap. xviii. 17. Again, we are referred to the remarkable passage,
     (chap. xxiv. 45-51.) "Who then is that faithful and wise servant,
     whom his Lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them
     their portion of meat in due season. Blessed is that servant whom
     his Lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing,: &c. It is asked,
     whether we do not find traces here of a line of ministry to continue
     in Christ's "Church" and "household" until His coming again. And we
     are bidden to compare with this passage that final promise of our
     Lord to His Apostles, with which the Gospel concludes, (chap.
     xxviii. 20.) "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
     world," as confirming the proof of an uninterrupted succession of
     the Apostolical ministry. From these passages, then, put together,
     we seem to derive some idea of the Church as a Visible Spiritual
     Society, formed by Christ himself; a household over which He has
     appointed his servants to be stewards and rulers to the end. But
     then this view is drawn from what might seem a few insulated
     passages, occurring in a Gospel which we have been accustomed to
     look to for what we think more practical truths. And how do they
     affect us? We do not like to have our minds called off to such
     external relations. The interpretation offered us of these passages,
     seems, indeed, correct, and the argument grounded on them
     legitimate: but after all they are but a few scattered passages,
     referring to points which we consider of inferior importance, and
     not entitled to have so much stress laid upon them, or to be made
     foundations of a system.

     But now, discarding prejudice and theory, let us calmly and
     teachably take up the Gospel of St. Matthew, in the hope, by
     diligently comparing of spiritual things with spiritual, to obtain
     an insight into its true meaning. Let us take the passage first
     referred to. The promise is made to St. Peter: it may be well,
     therefore, to look through the Gospel, and collect the scattered
     notices of this Apostle. We shall thus ascertain whether the promise
     would seem to have been made to St. Peter individually, as the
     Romanist would argue, or whether, as Churchmen in England would say,
     it was made to him as the representative of the Apostolic body, and
     so the type of the Christian ministry. Or, on the other hand, we
     shall see whether the mention of St. Peter in this passage, and the
     prominent place which seems in it to be given him, stand so
     completely alone that it cannot be wrought into any thing like a
     regular system.

     Now if we look carefully into St. Matthew's Gospel, we seem to find,
     throughout, a peculiar place occupied by St. Peter. In chap. xiv, we
     have the narrative of the strength and weakness of his faith, in
     walking on the water to go to Jesus; a circumstance not related by
     any other of the Evangelists. In the next chapter we find Peter
     asking for an explanation of our Saviour's "parable" respecting the
     things which defile a man, and the "blind leaders of the blind," who
     had been offended at the saying (xv. 15.). In chap. xvi. is the
     promise under our consideration, and the offense which so soon
     followed, and called down upon him his Master's displeasure. In
     chap. xvii. we have the store of the tribute money, and that
     discourse of our Lord with St. Peter which seems to have given rise
     to the disciples' question, "Who is the greatest in the kingdom of
     heaven?" Again, in chap. xviii, when our Lord has been explaining to
     his disciples how the offending brother is to be dealt with by "the
     Church," (ver. 17.) and has confirmed to them the solemn declaration
     before made to St. Peter, (which shows in what sense it was made in
     the first instance to St. Peter,) "Verily, I say unto you,
     Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven," &c.,
     we read, "Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my
     brother sin against me, and I forgive him?" In chap. xix. we find
     him anxiously inquiring of his Lord, what reward should be given to
     himself and his fellow-apostles, who had forsaken all and followed
     Him. The answer is the remarkable and solemn promise to the Twelve,
     which this Evangelist alone records in this place: "Verily, I say
     unto you, that ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when
     the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall
     sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."
     Throughout St. Matthew's Gospel, St. Peter seems to be put forward
     in a very peculiar manner, of which, however, we are scarcely aware,
     until we compare the other Evangelists, and observe the difference
     between them in their selection and arrangement of the events they
     record. This is, however, too extensive a subject to enter upon at
     present. Our only object is to suggest the inquiry, whether there is
     not something more than casual in the prominent place which St.
     Peter occupies in St. Matthew's Gospel, and whether this peculiarity
     does not imply the existence of some deeper meaning than we should
     at first sight attach to several apparently insulated passages, in
     the centre of which stands the noble confession in the sixteenth
     chapter, and the gracious and glorious promise which was founded
     upon it.

     In that promise, made by our Lord to St. Peter, it is said, "I will
     give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven." Here we find an
     expression which is of very common occurrence in St. Matthew, and
     peculiar to his Gospel: no other Evangelist employs the phrase, "the
     kingdom of heaven." Here again we shall do well to collect together
     the various passages in which the expression is used; and then we
     shall see that the doctrine of the Church and its Ministers,
     unfolded in the promise to St. Peter, is no insulated and
     subordinate point in St. Matthew's Gospel. In the beginning of the
     Gospel we find the Baptist preaching and saying, "Repent ye, for the
     kingdom of heaven is at hand;" and the ministry of our blessed Lord,
     taking up the Baptist's message, opens with the same announcement.
     "From that time (the time that John was cast into prison) Jesus
     began to preach and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at
     hand." (iv. 17.) We read of his going about all the synagogues of
     Galilee, "preaching the Gospel of the kingdom" (iv. 23.); and in His
     Sermon on the Mount we hear Him declaring who they are to whom that
     kingdom belongs, (v. 3, &c.) "The kingdom of heaven" was to be a
     fulfilment of the earlier dispensation, the law and the prophets;
     "whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,"
     says our blessed Lord, "and shall teach men so, the same shall be
     called the least in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do
     and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of
     heaven. For I say unto you, that except your righteousness shall
     exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in
     no case enter into the kingdom of heaven." (v. 17-19.) This, with
     other parallel passages, seems to give us a clue to the view of the
     Gospel dispensation as unfolded by St. Matthew. Our Lord appears in
     the character of a prophet, like Moses, raised up to be the Giver of
     a new law, and the Founder of a new Kingdom or Polity. The Scribes
     and Pharisees were corrupt expounders of the Divine law, they were
     unfaithful stewards of the mysteries of the kingdom: other servants
     were therefore to be chosen into their place, who should be the true
     "light of the world;" faithful rulers over God's household, giving
     to every one of their portion meat in due season. The Scribes and
     Pharisees were to be deposed from Moses' seat; St. Peter and his
     fellow apostles were to be exalted in their room. They had "the keys
     of knowledge" committed to them, to open the kingdom of heaven unto
     men; but they had abused their trust, and they were to be deprived
     of their sacred office. Thus does our Lord pass sentence upon them:
     "Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye shut up the
     kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves,
     neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in." And thus, in
     terms strictly corresponding, as it would appear, is their bishopric
     given for another to take: "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona; and I
     say unto thee, that thou art Peter; and I will give unto thee the
     keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on
     earth, shall be loosed in heaven. " The kingdom of heaven, of which
     the keys were thus taken away from the Scribes and Pharisees, and
     given to St. Peter and his brethren, was that everlasting kingdom
     prepared from the foundation of the world, which had been committed
     to the Son by the Almighty Father. To Him of proper right it
     belongs; of Him alone it is properly said, that "He openeth, and no
     man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth." "The law and the
     prophets were until John," He himself declares: since that time the
     kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it. "From
     the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven
     suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force." (Luke xvi.
     16. Matt. xi. 12.) For the baptism of repentance for the remission
     of sins was then first preached to sinners. The Son of Man had power
     on earth to forgive sins (ix. 6.); and He had also power to retain
     them: He was empowered to gather the wheat into his garner, and to
     burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire (iii. 12.). But when, as
     the Messenger of the Covenant, He came, in fulfilment of prophecy,
     to visit His temple, and to punish the priests who had corrupted the
     covenant, and been partial in the law, He came, at the same time, to
     "purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver," that
     they might "offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." Let
     us bear this prophecy in mind when we turn to St. Matthew's Gospel,
     and let us see whether the long vista of God's dispensations in
     reference to his elder "church" and household, the covenant made
     with his ministers, the promises given to them, their unfaithfulness
     and corruption, will not throw a new light on many passages of the
     Gospel, which seemed before dark and uninteresting. We might, for
     instance, put side by side the discourses of our blessed Lord with
     the Pharisees, and those which He held with His own disciples; we
     might see the one cavilling against the truth, and laying snares for
     Him who came to try and prove them, until at length He gave them
     over to their blindness, and denounced a fearful catalogue of woes
     upon their heads: we might watch the other, gradually weaned from
     prejudice and carnal-mindedness, instructed in "the mysteries of the
     kingdom of heaven," as they were able to learn them, until they were
     fit to be left alone in the world, with the Spirit of their departed
     Master to be with them to the end of their ministry, while they made
     disciples of all nations, and taught them to observe the things
     which he had commanded them. We should then trace, with no careless
     feeling, in the sixteenth chapter, the lines of the Christian
     Church. When we see the faithless Pharisees, leagued with their
     bitterest enemies, to tempt the Great Prophet of the Church; when we
     hear Him affectionately reproving His own disciples for their want
     of faith; and warning them to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees
     and Sadducees; when we then hear the solemn question put to the
     twelve, and the bold and undoubting answer of St. Peter, we shall
     see a depth and fulness of meaning in our Saviour's blessing, which
     perhaps we never saw before, and feel that "blessed" indeed are we
     too, unto whom, through the covenant made with Simon, the son of
     Jonah, the blessed Chieftain of a blessed company, it has been
     revealed of the Father which is in heaven, that Jesus is "the
     Christ, the Son of the living God."

     Or, let us turn to the passage in the eighteenth chapter, in which
     the name of "the Church" occurs again, and the promise made to St.
     Peter is incidentally confirmed to the whole Apostolic body. Our
     Blessed Lord is there teaching His disciples how we are to deal with
     our brethren when they offend us, and how oft to forgive them. "If
     thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
     between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained
     thy brother; but if he will not hear three, then take with thee two
     or three more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
     word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell
     it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be
     unto thee as an heathen man and as a publican. Verily, I say unto
     you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven;
     and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven."
     In this passage, taken by itself, we must understand by the term
     ekklesia, as has been observed, a visible body: but let us look at
     it again in its connection with the series of passages in which we
     have seemed to trace the idea of "the kingdom of heaven" as the
     fulfilment of that elder visible church, which was established by
     the ministry of Moses. The repetition of the promise before made to
     St. Peter connects this passage closely with that in chap. xvi,:
     there the power of the keys was promised by our Lord; here the
     principles and rules are given for its exercise. For these our
     blessed Lord refers to the spirit of the Mosaic law. The first step
     to be taken towards an offending brother breathes the general spirit
     of the Mosaic law, and closely agrees with the injunction specially
     given, "Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shalt in
     any wise rebuke thy brother, and not suffer sin upon him" (Lev. xix.
     17). The next step is in exact fulfilment of the command in Deut.
     xvii. 6: "At the mouth of two witnesses or three witnesses shall he
     that is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one
     witness shall he shall not be put to death." And the final rejection
     of the brother that "will not hear the church," is in no less strict
     accordance with the spirit of the Mosaic denunciation: "And the man
     that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest
     (that standeth to minister there before the Lord thy God), or unto
     the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put away the evil
     from Israel" (Deut xvii. 12.). The Christian "Church" seems thus to
     come into the place of the congregation of Israel; the Apostles,
     into the office of the Levitical priest and judge; and since their
     Master came to fulfil the law, they were to "do and teach" that law
     in his spiritual meaning. Now "the end of the commandment is
     charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
     unfeigned; from which some have swerved," says the Apostle, "have
     turned aside unto vain jangling; desiring to be teachers of the law,
     understanding neither what hey say, nor whereof they affirm." (1
     Tim. i. 5-7). This description of false apostles, the rivals of the
     true apostles of Christ, is equally applicable to those whom they
     were appointed to supersede. If we look to our Lord's Sermon on the
     Mount, we find how the Scribes "swerved" from the commandment in its
     true "end" and object; their explanations of the sixth and sevenths
     commandments show how little they understood of the spirit of the
     law of love. In that Sermon Christ's disciples are instructed how
     they are to fulfil the commandments: they are now directed how, as
     faithful ministers of God's word, they are to "do and teach" them,
     viz. by governing the Church of God according to the spirit of true
     brotherly love. Why had Levi been so grievously rebuked by the
     ministry of the last of the prophets? (Mal. ii. 1-9). Why was not
     "the offering of Judah and Jerusalem pleasant unto the Lord, as in
     the days of old, and as in former years?" (Mal. iii. 4. comp. ii.
     13.) They had forgotten the brotherly covenant which bound Israel
     together as children of one earthly parent, and one Father in
     heaven, who had a care for his "little ones," and would not that one
     of them should perish. "Have we not all one Father? hath not one God
     created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his
     brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers? Judah hath dealt
     treacherously, covering the altar of God with tears, and with crying
     out, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or
     receiveth it with good-will at your hand. (Mal. ii. 10-13). But,
     when the sons of Levi had been duly purified, that they might offer
     unto the Lord an offering in righteousness--the true righteousness
     of the law, perfect brotherly love--then would the Lord again return
     to his temple, renew with Levi this "covenant of life and peace,"
     and bless the sacred service of his holy congregation. "Verily, I
     say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
     heaven," &c. Again, "I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree
     as touching any thing that they shall ask on earth, it shall be done
     for them of my Father which is in heaven. For where two or three are
     gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them." Can
     we doubt the meaning of this solemn promise? and is it not full of
     comfort to faithful members of Christ's holy catholic and apostolic
     church? Does it not teach us, that upon us truly "the ends of the
     world are come;" that we are the children of a long line of
     spiritual ancestry, the heirs, highly blessed and favoured indeed,
     of a rich and glorious inheritance?

     It would be easy to follow out, to an almost indefinite extent, the
     line of illustration, of which a few points have been traced. Other
     similar lines might also be drawn, throwing much light upon separate
     passages of the same Gospel; as, for instance, the comparison of
     "the kingdom of heaven" to a householder, which might be traced
     through many parables, &c. throwing light upon the remarkable
     passage already referred to in the twenty-fourth chapter. Or again,
     in illustration of the fearful outline, which is there set before
     us, of the misconduct and punishment of the "wicked servant," we
     might draw out the intimations, which our Lord's words, on several
     occasions, give us, of unfaithful ministers and stewards, who were
     in after days to abuse the power committed to them, to lord it over
     their fellow servants, to eat and drink and to be drunken: or, still
     further, we might borrow from the condemnation of the Scribes and
     Pharisees a fearful light on the character of the "hypocrites," with
     whom his portion is assigned.

     But enough, perhaps, has been said for our present purpose, which
     has been, not to urge for exclusive adoption a particular
     interpretation of certain passages, nor even to recommend any
     particular idea as supplying the only clue to their meaning; but
     simply to meet an objection, which it is believed, indisposes the
     minds of many thoughtful readers of Holy Scripture to receiving the
     evidence which is drawn from its records, in support of the doctrine
     of "the Church." To such persons it is here suggested, that their
     difficulty arises from prejudice in favour of a particular theory.
     Scripture may be viewed from other points that that which they have
     chosen: and the theory which a different view suggests may perhaps
     be found to explain more phenomena, and unfold deeper mysteries,
     than theirs. The expression, or incident, or agreement, which they
     overlook, and cast aside, may, to another, serve as a clue to a
     mysterious volume, and give "thoughts which do often lie too deep
     for tears." Only let not persons be startled and offended at finding
     truths in Scripture which they had entirely overlooked, or thought
     practically unimportant, assuming a prominent place in the system
     which is recommended to their consideration. This must be the case
     at first. If the interpretation given of a passage of Scripture
     seems agreeable to the natural sense of the words, to the context,
     or to other parts of Scripture; if it seems to give more meaning to
     passages or portions than they had in our eyes before; let this be
     enough for us for the present: let us thankfully admit it, not
     lightly or hastily starting objections, or caring for its effect
     upon our pre-conceived opinions. "Every word of God is pure" (Prov.
     xxx. 5); and if we are bidden not to "add to His words," lest He
     reprove us, and we be found liars (v. 6); we are also warned, in the
     most mysterious, and to many readers, apparently unpractical, book
     of the New Testament, "If any man shall take away from the words of
     the prophecy of this book, God shall take away his part out of the
     holy city, and from the things which are written in this book."
     (Rev. xxii. 19.) Surely we may incur the risk of thus taking away
     from the words of prophecy, without literally mangling its sacred
     page. We may settle with ourselves, that it is an external matter,
     and not important to our individual interests. Rather let us humbly
     receive the very crumbs which fall from the Master's table, "laying
     aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies and envies, and all
     evil speakings, if so be we have tasted that the Lord is gracious."
     (1 Pet. ii. 1. 3.) The scattered limbs of sacred truth, which are
     presented to our view, may seem to us at first sight like the dry
     bones, which the prophet saw in the vision: but the word of prophecy
     may yet bring them together, may cover them with sinew, and flesh,
     and skin, and fill them with a living spirit; the breath from the
     four winds may breathe upon the slain, and they may "stand up" upon
     their feet, before our eyes, "an exceeding great army." "And when
     this cometh to pass, then shall they know that there hath been a
     prophet among them:" "for I have poured out my Spirit upon the house
     of Israel, saith the Lord God." Wherefore, "now be strong, O
     Zerubbabel, saith the Lord God: and be strong, O Joshua, son of
     Josedech the high priest, and be strong all ye people of the land,
     and work, for I am with you, saith the Lord of Hosts. According to
     the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt so my
     Spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not." (Haggai ii. 4, 5.) "Go ye
     therefore, and make disciples of all nations, teaching them to
     observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am
     with you always, even unto the end of the world."

     OXFORD,

     The Feast of the Nativity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
