                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                                ON PURGATORY.

                       (Against Romanism.---No. 3.)

                                 [Number 79]
     __________________________________________________________________

     THE extract from Archbishop Ussher's Answer to a Jesuit,
     contained in Tract 72, on the subject of the ancient Commemorations
     for the Dead in Christ, may fitly be succeeded by an inquiry as to
     what degree and sort of proof remains for the Roman tenet of
     Purgatory, after deducting from the evidence those usages or
     statements of the early Church, which are commonly supposed, but, as
     Ussher shows, improperly, to countenance it. Ussher's
     explanations have had the effect, it is presumed, of cutting away
     the prima facie evidence, on which the doctrine is usually rested;
     and it now remains to see what is left when it is withdrawn. With
     this view it is proposed in the following pages to draw out in
     detail the evidence alleged by the Romanists in behalf of their
     belief, with such remarks as may be necessary, in order to form a
     fair estimate of it. A plain statement of the doctrine itself; and
     of its rise, shall be also attempted, as not unseasonable at a time
     when the strength of Romanism rests in no small degree in its
     opponents mistaking the points in debate, and making or refuting
     propositions which but indirectly or partially bear upon the errors
     which they desire to combat.

     Before commencing, it is necessary to warn the reader against
     estimating the magnitude or quality of any of those errors by its
     apparent dimensions in the theory. What seems to be a small
     deviation from correctness in the abstract system, becomes
     considerable and serious when it assumes a substantive form. This is
     especially the case with all doctrinal discussions, in which the
     undeveloped germs of many diversities of practice and moral
     character, lie thick together in small compass, and as if
     promiscuously and without essential differences. The highest truths
     differ from the most miserable delusions by what appears to be a few
     words or letters. The discriminating mark of orthodoxy, the
     Homoousion, has before now been ridiculed, however irrationally, as
     being identical, all but the letter i, with the heretical symbol of
     the Homoiousion. What is acknowledged in the Arian controversy, must
     be endured without surprise in the Roman, in whatever degree it
     occurs. We may be taunted as differing from the Romanists only in
     phrases and modes of expression; and we may be taunted, or despised,
     according to the fate of our Divines for three centuries past, as
     taking a middle, timid, unsatisfactory ground, neither quite
     agreeing nor quite disagreeing with our opponents. We may be charged
     with dwelling on trifles and niceties, in a way inconsistent with
     plain, manly good sense; but in truth it is not we who are the
     speculatists, and unpractical controversialists, but they who forget
     that hae nugae seria ducunt in mala.

     But again there is another reason, peculiar to the Roman
     controversy, which occasions a want of correspondence between the
     appearance presented by the Roman theology in theory, and its
     appearance in practice. The separate doctrines of Romanism are very
     different, in position, importance, and mutual relation, in the
     abstract, and when developed, applied, and practised. Anatomists
     tell us that the skeletons of the most various animals are formed on
     the same type; yet the animals are dissimilar and distinct, in
     consequence of the respective differences of their developed
     proportions. No one would confuse between a lion and a bear; yet
     many of us at first sight would be unable to discriminate between
     their respective skeletons. Romanism in the theory may differ little
     from our own creed; nay, in the abstract type, it might even be
     identical, and yet in the actual framework, and still further in the
     living and breathing form, it might differ essentially. For
     instance, the doctrine of Indulgences is, in the theory, entirely
     connected with the doctrine of Penance; that is, it has relation
     solely to this world, so much so that Roman apologists sometimes
     speak of it without even an allusion to its bearings elsewhere: but
     we know that in practice it is mainly, if not altogether, concerned
     with the next world,---with the alleviation of sufferings in
     Purgatory.

     And further still, as regards the doctrine of Purgatorial suffering,
     there have been for many ages in the Roman Church gross corruptions
     of its own doctrine, untenable as that doctrine is even by itself.
     The decree of the Council of Trent, which will presently be
     introduced, acknowledges the fact. Now we believe that those
     corruptions still continue; that Rome has never really set herself
     in earnest to eradicate them. The pictures of Purgatory so commonly
     seen in countries in communion with Rome, the existence of
     Purgatorian societies, the means of subsistence accruing to the
     clergy from belief in it, afford a strange contrast to the simple
     wording and apparent innocence of the decree by which it is made an
     article of faith. It is the contrast between poison in its lifeless
     seed, and the same developed, thriving, and rankly luxuriant in the
     actual plant.

     And lastly, since we are in no danger of becoming Romanists, and may
     bear to be dispassionate and (I may say) philosophical in our
     treatment of their errors, some passages in the following account of
     Purgatory are more calmly written than would satisfy those who were
     engaged with a victorious enemy at their doors. Yet, whoever be our
     opponent, Papist or Latitudinarian, it does not seem to be wrong to
     be as candid and conceding as justice and charity allow us. Nor is
     it unprofitable to weigh accurately how much the Romanists have
     committed themselves in their formal determinations of doctrine, and
     how far by GOD'S merciful providence they had been restrained
     and overruled; and again how far they must retract, in order to make
     amends to Catholic truth and unity.
       _______________________________________________________________

     ÃY 1. STATEMENT OF THE ROMAN DOCTRINE CONCERNING PURGATORY

     ÃY 2. PROOF OF THE ROMAN DOCTRINE CONCERNING PURGATORY.

     ÃY 3. HISTORY OF THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF PURGATORY, AND OPINIONS
     IN THE EARLY CHURCH CONCERNING IT.

     ÃY 4. THE COUNCIL OF FLORENCE.
       _______________________________________________________________

         ÃY 1. STATEMENT OF THE ROMAN DOCTRINE CONCERNING PURGATORY.

     THE Roman doctrine is thus expressed in the Creed of Pope Pius IV.

     Constanter teneo Purgatorium esse, animasque ibi detentas fidelium
     suffragiis juvari.

     "I hold without wavering that there is a Purgatory, and that souls
     there detained are aided by the suffrages of the faithful."

     The words of this article are taken from the degree of the Council
     of Trent on the subject, (Sess. 25,) which runs as follows:

     "Whereas the Church Catholic, fully instructed by the Holy Ghost,
     hath from the sacred Scriptures and ancient tradition of the
     Fathers, in sacred Councils, and last of all in this present
     Oecumenical Synod, taught that there is a Purgatory, and that souls
     there detained are aided by the suffrages of the living, and above
     all by the acceptable sacrifice of the Altar, this holy Synod
     enjoins on Bishops, to make diligent efforts that the sound doctrine
     concerning Purgatory, handed down from the holy Fathers and sacred
     Councils, be believed, maintained, taught, and everywhere proclaimed
     by the disciples of Christ. At the same time, as regards the
     uneducated multitude, let the more difficult and subtle questions,
     such as tend not to edification nor commonly increase piety, be
     excluded from popular discourses. Moreover let them disallow the
     publication and discussion of whatever is uncertain or suspicious;
     and prohibit whatever is of a curious or superstitious nature, or
     savours of filthy lucre, as the scandals and stumbling-blocks of
     believers. And let them provide, that the suffrages of believers
     living, that is, the sacrifices of masses, prayers, alms, and other
     works of piety, which believers living are wont to perform for other
     believers dead, be performed according to the rules of the Church,
     piously and religiously; and whatever are due for them from the
     endowments of testators, or in other way, be fulfilled, not in a
     perfunctory way, but diligently and accurately by the Priests and
     Ministers of the Church, and others who are bound to do this
     service."

     Such is the Roman doctrine; and taken in the mere letter there is
     little in it against which we shall be able to sustain formal
     objections. Purgatory is not spoken of at all as a place of pain; it
     need only mean, what its name implies, a place of purification.
     There is indeed much presumption in asserting definitively that
     there is such a place, and assuredly there is not only presumption,
     but very great daring and uncharitableness in including belief in
     it, as Pope Pius' Creed goes on to do, among the conditions of
     salvation; but if we could consider it as confined to the mere
     opinion that that good which is begun on earth is perfected in the
     next world, the tenet would be tolerable. The word "detentas" indeed
     expresses a somewhat stronger idea; yet after all hardly more than
     that the souls in Purgatory would be happier out of it than in it,
     and that they cannot of their own will leave it; which is not much
     to grant. Further, that the prayers of the living benefit the dead
     in Christ, is, to say the least, not inconsistent, as Ussher shows
     us, with the primitive belief. So much as to the letter of the
     decree; but it is not safe to go by the letter: on the contrary, we
     are bound to take the universal and uniform doctrine taught and
     received in the Roman Communion, as the real and true interpreter of
     words which are in themselves comparatively innocent. What that
     doctrine is, may be gathered from the words of the Catechism of
     Trent, in which the spirit of Romanism, not being bound by the rules
     which shackle it in the Council, speaks out. The account of
     Purgatory which that formulary supplies, shall here be taken as our
     text, and Cardinal Bellarmine's Defence shall be used as a
     comment upon it.

     The Catechism then speaks as follows:

     "Est Purgatorius ignis, quo piorum animae ad definitum tempus
     cruciatae
     expiantur, ut eis in aeternam patriam ingressus patere possit, in
     quam nillil coiquinatum ingreditur."---Part i. De Symb. 5.

     "There is a Purgatorial fire, in which the souls of the pious are
     tormented for a certain time, and cleansed, in order that an
     entrance may lie open to them into their eternal home, into which
     nothing defiled enters."

     In like manner Bellarmine says,

     "Purgatory is a certain place in which, as if in a prison, souls are
     purged after this life, which have not been fully purged in it, in
     order, (that is,) that thus purged they may be enabled to enter
     heaven, which nothing defiled shall enter."

     A painful light is at once cast by these comments on the Synodal
     Decree. "There is a Purgatory" in the Decree, is interpreted by
     Bellarmine "there is a sort of prison;" and by the Catechism, "there
     is a Purgatorial fire." And whereas the Decree merely declares that
     souls are "detained there," the Catechism says they are "tormented
     and cleansed." Moreover, both the Catechism and Bellarmine imply
     that this is the ordinary mode of attaining heaven, inasmuch as no
     one scarcely can be considered, and no one can be surely known, to
     leave this world "fully purged;" whereas the Decree speaks vaguely
     of "the souls there." So much at first sight; now to consider the
     persons with which Purgatory is concerned, the sins, condition of
     souls, place, time, punishment, and remedies; Bellarmine likening it
     to a carcer, the Catechism saying that the "animae piorum ad
     definitum tempus cruciatae expiantur purgatorio igne."

                1. The Persons who are reserved for Purgatory.

     THE Roman Church holds that Christians or believers only are tenants
     of Purgatory, as for Christians only are offered their prayers,
     alms, and masses. The question follows whether all Christians ? not
     all Christians, but such as die in GOD'S favour, yet with certain
     sins unforgiven. Some Christians die simply in GOD'S favour with all
     their sins forgiven; others die out of His favour. as the
     impenitent, whether Christians or not; but others, and that the
     great majority, die, according to the Romanists, in GOD'S favour,
     yet more or less under the bond of their sins. And so far we may
     unhesitatingly allow to them, or rather we ourselves hold the same,
     if we hold that after Baptism there is no plenary pardon of sins in
     this life to the sinner, however penitent, such as in Baptism was
     once vouchsafed to him. If for sins committed after Baptism we have
     not yet received a simple and unconditional absolution, surely
     penitents from this time up to the day of judgment may be considered
     in that double state of which the Romanists speak, their persons
     accepted, but certain sins uncancelled. Such a state is plainly
     revealed to us in Scripture as a real one, in various passages, to
     which we appeal as well as the Romanists. Let the case of David
     suffice. On his repentance Nathan said to him, "The Lord also hath
     put away thy sin; thou shalt not die; howbeit, because by this deed
     thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the LORD to
     blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die."
     2 Sam. xii 13, 14. Here is a perspicuous instance of a penitent
     restored to GOD'S favour at once, yet his sin afterwards visited;
     and it needs very little experience in life to be aware that such
     punishments occur continually, though no one takes them to be an
     evidence that the sufferer himself is under GOD'S displeasure, but
     rather accounts them punishments even when we have abundant proofs
     of his faith, love, holiness, and fruitfulness in good works. So far
     then we can not be said materially to oppose the Romanists. They on
     the other hand agree with us in maintaining that CHRIST'S death
     might, if GOD so willed, be applied for the removal even of these
     specific punishments of sins which they call temporal punishments,
     as fully as it really is for the acceptance of the soul of the
     person punished, or the removal of eternal punishment. Further both
     parties agree, that in matter of fact it is not so applied; the
     experience of life shows it; else every judgment might be taken as
     evidence of the person suffering it being under GOD'S wrath. The
     death of the disobedient prophet from Judah would, in that case,
     prove that he perished eternally, which surely would be utterly
     presumptuous and uncharitable. As far as this then we have no
     violent difference of principle with the Romanists; but at this
     point we separate from them; they say these temporal punishments on
     sin are inflicted on the faults incurring them, in a certain fixed
     proportion; that every sin of a certain kind bas a definite penalty
     or price; in consequence, that if it is not fully discharged in this
     life, it must be hereafter; and that Purgatory is the place of
     discharging it.

           2. The sins for which persons are confined in Purgatory.

     The next question is, what are the sins which are thus punished? not
     all sins of Christians, for some incur an eternal punishment. There
     are sins, it is maintained, which in themselves merit eternal
     damnation, are directly opposed to love or charity, quench grace,
     and throw the doer of them out of GOD'S favour. These in consequence
     are called mortal; such as murder, adultery, or blasphemy. Such sins
     do not lead to Purgatory; hell is their portion if unrepented of.
     But all but these, all but unrepented mortal sins are in the case of
     Christians punished in Purgatory. Of these it follows there are two
     kinds, sins though repented of, and sins though not mortal;
     concerning which a few words shall be said.

     1. Mortal sins, though repented of, and though the offender cease to
     be under GOD'S displeasure, yet have visibly their own punishment in
     many cases, as in the instance of David. But the Romanists consider
     that these sins have their penalty assigned to them as if by weight
     and measure; moreover, that we can ourselves take part in
     discharging it, and by our own act anticipate and supersede GOD'S
     judgment, according to the text: "If we would judge ourselves, we
     should not be judged." This voluntary act on our part is called
     Penance, and is said to expiate the sin, that is, to wash away its
     temporal effects. Should we die before the full temporal punishment,
     or satisfaction, has been paid for all our mortal sins, we must pay
     the rest hereafter, i. e. in Purgatory.

     2. Sins which are not mortal, are called venial, and are such as do
     not quench grace, or run counter to love. Bellarmine thus contrasts
     them:

     "Mortal sins are they which absolutely turn us from GOD, and merit
     eternal punishment; Venial those which somewhat impede our course to
     Him, but do not turn it, and are with little pains blotted out. The
     former are crimes, the latter sins....Mortal sin is like a deadly
     wound, which suddenly kills; Venial is a slight stroke, which does
     not endanger life, and is easily healed. The former fights with
     love, which is the soul's life; the latter is rather beside than
     against love."---De Amiss. Grat. i. 2.

     Venial sin differs from Mortal in two ways, in kind and degree. An
     idle word, excessive laughter, and the like, are sins in kind
     distinct from perjury or adultery. Again, anger is a venial sin when
     slight and undesigned, but when indulged interferes with love and is
     mortal; a theft of a large sum may be mortal, of a small venial.

     Venial sins, being such, are considered by Romanists not to deserve
     so much as eternal punishment,---to be pardonable not merely by
     an express and immediate act of GOD'S mercy, or again through
     the virtue of our state of regeneration, but to be intrinsically
     venial, to offend GOD, but not so as to alienate Him. They rest this
     doctrine upon such passages as the following: "Sin, when it is
     finished, bringeth forth death," James i. 15.; therefore, before it
     is finished or perfected, it has no such fearful power. Still they
     say it requires some punishment; which it receives in the next
     world, should it not receive it in this, that is, in Purgatory.

     Such then are the sins of GOD'S true servants, penitent believers,
     for which, according to the Romanists, they suffer in Purgatory;
     mortal sins repented of, and those sins of infirmity which befall
     them so continually and so secretly, that they cannot repent of them
     specifically if they would, and which do not deserve eternal
     punishment, though they do not. They consider the Purgatorial
     punishment of venial sins to be meant by the Apostle, when he speaks
     of those who, building on the true foundation "wood, bay, and
     stubble," are "saved so as by fire;" and the punishment for mortal
     sins, in our SAVIOUR'S declaration that certain prisoners shall not
     go out till they have "paid the very last mite." Luke xii. 59. It
     may be added, that Martyrdom is supposed to be a full expiation of
     whatever guilt of sin still rests on the Christian undergoing it;
     and therefore to stand instead of Purgatory. Martyrs then are at
     once admitted to the Beatific Vision, which is the privilege in
     which Purgatory terminates.

     From this account of the inmates of Purgatory, and the causes why
     they are there detained, we gather what has already been hinted,
     that the one main or rather sole reason of the appointment, is a
     satisfaction to GOD'S justice. The persons concerned are
     believers destined for bliss eternal; but before they pass on from
     earth to heaven, the course of their existence is, as it were,
     suspended, and they are turned aside to discharge a debt; how they
     effect it, or in what length of time, or with what effect on
     themselves, being questions as beside the mark, as if they were used
     with reference to the payment of a charge in worldly matters. It is
     an appointment altogether without bearing upon their moral character
     or eternal prospects; and after it is over, is wiped out as though
     it had never been.

                3. The moral condition of souls in Purgatory.

     Bellarmine well illustrates the supposed mental state of believers
     while in Purgatory by comparing them to travellers who come up to a
     fortified town after nightfall, and have to wait at the gates till
     the morning. Such persons have come to the end of their journey;
     they are not on the way, they have attained; they are sure of
     admittance, which is a matter of time only. Accordingly the
     Romanists hold that souls in Purgatory be come neither better or
     worse, neither sin nor add to their good works; they are one and all
     perfect in love, and ready for heaven, were it not for this debt,
     which hangs about them as so much rust or dross, and cannot be
     purged away except by certain appointed external remedies. They
     support this view of the stationary condition of the soul in
     Purgatory by such texts as, the following: "The night cometh, when
     no man can work." "Where the tree falls, there it shall be." "We
     must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every one
     may receive the things done in his body." John ix. 4. Eccles. xi. 3.
     2 Cor. v. 10.

     Next, with the exception of some few theologians, they consider that
     souls in Purgatory are comforted with the assurance that their
     eternal happiness is secured to them. Their state in consequence is
     thus described by Bellarmine (ii. 4.).

     "You will object that they may be in doubt whether they are in hell
     or in purgatory. Not so; for in hell GOD is blasphemed, in Purgatory
     He is praised; in hell there is neither habit of faith, nor hope,
     nor love of GOD, in Purgatory all of these. A soul then which shall
     understand that it hopes in GOD, praises and loves GOD, will clearly
     know it is not in hell. But perhaps it will fear it is to be sent to
     hell, though not there yet; neither can this be, for the same faith
     remains in it, which it had here. Here it believed according to the
     plain word of Scripture, that after death none can become of good
     bad, or of bad good, and none but the bad are to be sent into hell.
     When then it perceives that it loves God, and is therefore good, it
     will not fear damnation."

                     4. The place and tame of Purgatory.

     On this subject the Church has not formally determined any thing;
     but the common opinion of the Schoolmen is that it is one of four
     prisons or receptacles, which are situated in the heart of the
     earth, Hell for the damned, the Limbus Puerorum for children dying
     without Baptism, the Limbus Patrum for the just who died before the
     passion of CHRIST, and who since that time have all been transferred
     from it to heaven, and Purgatory for believers under punishment. In
     other words, whereas all punishment is either for a time or eternal,
     either positive (poena sensus), or negative (poena damni), that of
     good men before CHRIST'S coming, was the poena damna, or
     absence of GOD'S light and joy for a time, that of unbaptized
     infants is the poena damni for ever, that of Purgatory the poena
     sensus for a time, that of Hell the poena sensus for ever. To these
     some Romanists have added a fifth, that is, of faithful souls, who
     without being yet admitted into heaven, are yet secured against all
     pain; but these according to Bellarmine, as at least enduring the
     poena damni, are to be considered in Purgatory, though in the most
     tolerable place in it, as being but in the condition of the old
     Fathers before CHRIST came.

     The time of Purgatory depends of course upon the state of the debt
     which is to be liquidated in each case, and varies consequently with
     the individual. Martyrs, as has been above stated, are supposed to
     satisfy it in the very act of Martyrdom, others will not be released
     till the day of judgment. Again, the period of suffering depends
     upon the exertions of survivors, by prayers, alms, and masses, which
     have power not only to relieve but to shorten the pain.

                       5. The nature of the Punishment.


     Here the Roman Church has defined nothing; its catechism, as we have
     seen, and its theologians in accordance, consider it to be material
     fire, but in the Council of Florence, the Greeks would not do more
     than subscribe to the existence of Purgatory; they denied that the
     punishment was fire; the question accordingly remains open, that is,
     it is not determined either way de fide. The difficulty, how
     elementary fire or any thing of a similar nature can affect the
     disembodied soul, is paralleled by St. Austin by the mystery of the
     union of soul and body.

     The pains of Purgatory are considered to be horrible and far
     exceeding any in this life; "Poenas Purgatorii esse atrocissimas; et
     cum illis nullas poenas hujus vitae comparandas, docent constanter
     Patres," says Bellarmine (ii. 14.), and proceeds to refer to Austin,
     Pope Gregory, Bede, Anselm, and Bernard. Yet on this point
     theologians differ. Some consider the chief misery to consist in the
     poena damni, or absence of GOD'S presence, which to holy souls,
     understanding and desiring it, would be as intolerable as extreme
     thirst or hunger to the body; and in this way seem to put all
     purgatorial pain on a level, or rather assign the greater pain to
     the more spiritually minded. Others consider the poena damni to be
     alleviated by the certainty of heaven and of the continually
     lessening term of their punishment. With them then the poena sensus,
     or the fire, is the chief source of torment, which admits of degrees
     according to the will of GOD.

               6. The efficacy of the suffrages of the Church.

     By suffrages are meant, co-operations of the living with the dead;
     prayers, masses, and works, such as alms, pilgrimages, fastings, &c.
     These aids which individuals can supply, alms, prayers, &c., only
     avail when offered by good persons; for he who is not accepted
     himself, cannot do acceptable service for another. Moreover these
     aids may be directed either to the benefit of all souls in Purgatory
     indiscriminately, or specially to the benefit of a certain soul in
     particular. There is one other means of escaping the penalties due
     to sin in Purgatory, which may briefly be mentioned, viz. by the
     grant of indulgences; these are dispensed on the following theory.
     Granting that a certain fixed temporal penalty attached to every act
     of sin, in such case, it would be conceivable that, as the multitude
     of Christians did not discharge their total debt in this life, so
     some extraordinarily holy men might more than discharge it. Such are
     the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Ascetics, and the like, who have
     committed few sins, and have undergone extreme labours and
     sufferings, voluntary or involuntary. This being supposed, the
     question rises, what becomes of the overplus; and then there seems a
     fitness that what is not needed for themselves, should avail for
     their brethren who are still debtors. It is accordingly stored,
     together with CHRIST'S merits, in a kind of treasure house, to
     be dispensed according to the occasion, and that at the discretion
     of the Church. The application of this treasure is called an
     Indulgence, which stands instead of a certain time of penance in
     this life, or for the period, whatever it be, to which that time is
     commuted in Purgatory. In this way, the supererogatory works of the
     Saints are supposed to go in payment of the debts of ordinary
     Christians.

           ÃY 2. PROOF OF THE ROMAN DOCTRINE CONCERNING PURGATORY.

                   1. Proofs from supernatural appearances.

     THE argumentative ground, on which the belief in Purgatory was
     actually introduced, would seem to lie in the popular stories of
     apparitions witnessing to it. Not that it rose in consequence of
     them historically, or that morally it was founded on them; only that
     when persons came to ask themselves why they received it, this was
     the ultimate ground of evidence on which the mind fell back; viz.
     the evidence of miracles, not of Scripture, or of the Fathers.

     Bellarmine enumerates it as one of the confirmatory arguments. With
     this view he refers in particular to some relations of Gregory of
     Tours, A.D. 573; of Pope Gregory, A.D. 600; of Bede, A.D. 700; of
     Peter Damiani, A.D. 1057; of St. Bernard, A.D. 1100, and of St.
     Anselm, A.D. 1100. The dates are worth noticing, if it be true, as
     is here assumed, that such supernatural accounts as then were put
     forth, are really the argument on which the doctrine was and is
     received; for it would thence appear, first that the doctrine was
     not taught as divine before the end of the sixth century, next that
     when it was propagated, it was so on an (alleged) new revelation.
     The following miraculous narratives are found in a Protestant
     Selection from Roman writers, published in 1688, and entitled
     "Purgatory proved by Miracles."

     "St. Gregory, the great, writes that the soul of Paschasius appeared
     to St. Germanus, and testified to him, that he was freed from the
     pains of Purgatory for his prayers.

     "When the same St. Gregory was abbot of his Monastery, a monk of
     his, called Justus, now dead, appeared to another monk, called
     Copiosus, and advertized him, that he had been freed from the
     torments of Purgatory, by thirty Masses, which Pretiosus, Prefect of
     the Monastery by the order of St. Gregory, had said for his soul, as
     is recounted in his life.

     "St. Gregory of Tours writes of a holy damsel, called Vitaliana,
     that she appeared to St. Martin, and told him she had been in
     Purgatory for a venial sin which she had committed, and that she had
     been delivered by the prayers of the Saint.

     "Peter Damiani writes, that St. Severin appeared to a clergyman, and
     told him, that he had been in Purgatory, for not having said the
     Divine Service at due hours, and that afterwards GOD had delivered
     him, and carried him to the company of the blessed.

     "St. Bernard writes, that St. Malachy freed his sister from the
     pains of Purgatory by his prayers; and that the same sister had
     appeared unto him, begging of him that relief and favour.

     "And St. Bernard himself by his intercession freed another, who had
     suffered a whole year the pains of Purgatory; as William, Abbot,
     writes in his life."---Flowers Of the Lives of the Saints, p.
     830.

     These instances among others are adduced by Bellarmine; and he adds,
     "plura similia legi possunt apud, &c..........sed quae attulimus,
     sunt magis authentica."---i. 11.

                  2. Proofs from the Old and New Testaments.

     Bellarmine adduces the following texts from the Old and New
     Testaments; in doing which he must not be supposed to mean, that
     each of them contains in itself the evidence of its relevancy and
     availableness, or could be understood without some authoritative
     interpretation; only, if it is asked, "is Purgatory the doctrine of
     Holy Scripture, and where?" he would answer, that in matter of fact
     it as taught in the following passages, according to the
     explanations of them found in various writers of consideration.

     1. 2 Macc. xii. 42---45. "Besides that noble Judas exhorted the
     people to keep themselves from sin, forsomuch as they saw before
     their eyes the things that came to pass for the sins of those that
     were slain. And when he had made a gathering throughout the company
     to the sum of two thousand drachms of silver, he sent it to
     Jerusalem, to offer a sin offering, doing therein very well and
     honestly, in that he was mindful of the Resurrection; for if he had
     not hoped that they that were slain should have risen again, it had
     been superfluous and vain to pray for the dead. And also, in that he
     perceived that there was great favour laid up for those that died
     godly, it was an holy and good thought. Whereupon he made a
     reconciliation for the dead, that they might be delivered from sin."

     2. Tob. iv. 17. "Pour out thy bread on the burial of the just, but
     give nothing to the wicked;" that is, at the burial of the just,
     give alms; which were given to gain for them the prayers of the
     poor.

     3. 1 Sam. xxxi. 13. "And they took their bones," [of Saul and his
     sons,] "and buried them under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven
     days." Vid. also 2 Sam. i. 12. iii. 35. This fasting was an offering
     for their souls.

     4. Ps. xxxviii. 1. "O Lord, rebuke me not in Thy wrath; neither
     chasten me in Thy hot displeasure." By wrath is meant Hell; by hot
     displeasure, Purgatory.

     5. Ps. lxvi. 12. "We went through fire and through water, but Thou
     broughtest us out into a wealthy place," (refrigerium.) Water is
     Baptism; fire is Purgatory.

     6. Is. iv. 4. "When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the
     daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from
     the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of
     burning."

     7. Is. ix. 18. "Wickedness burneth as the fire; it shall devour the
     briars and thorns."

     8. Mic.vii. 8,9. "Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; when I fall,
     I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light
     unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
     sinned against Him, until He plead my cause, and execute judgment
     for me: He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold His
     righteousness."

     9. Zech. ix. 11. "As for Thee also, by the blood of Thy covenant, I
     have sent forth Thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water."
     This text is otherwise taken to refer to the Limbus Patrum.

     10. Mal. iii. 3. "He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver;
     and He shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and
     silver," &c.

     From the New Testament he adduces the following texts:

     1. Matt. xii. 32. "Whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it
     shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the
     world to come:" that means, "neither in Purgatory," for in hell the
     very supposition of forgiveness is excluded.

     2. 1 Cor. iii. 15. "He himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire."

     3. l Cor. xv. 29. "Else what shall they do, which are baptized" i.e.
     who undergo the baptism of tears and humiliation, who pray, fast,
     give alms, &c. "for the dead, if the dead rise not at all?"

     4. Matt. v. 25, 26.---Luke xii. 58, 59. "Agree with thine
     adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him; lest at any
     time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver
     thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. Verily, I say
     unto thee, thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast
     paid the uttermost farthing." By the way, is meant this present
     life; by the adversary, the Law; by the Judge, our Saviour; by the
     officer, or executioner, the Angels; by the prison, Purgatory.

     5. Matt. v. 22. "Whosoever is angry with his brother with out a
     cause, shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say
     to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the Council; but
     whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire."
     Here are three kinds of punishments spoken of Hell belongs to the
     next world; therefore also do the other two. Hence there are in the
     next world, besides eternal punishment, punishments short of
     eternal.

     6. Luke xvi. 9. "Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of
     unrighteousness, that, when ye fail, they may receive you into
     everlasting habitations." To fail, is to die; the friends are the
     Saints in glory, and they receive us, i.e. from Purgatory, in
     consequence of their prayers.

     7. Luke xxiii. 42. "Lord, remember me, when Thou comest into Thy
     kingdom." That is, there is a remembrance and a remission of sin,
     not only in this life, but after it, in Christ's future
     kingdom.

     8. Acts ii. 24. "Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains of
     death (inferi); because it was not possible that He should be-holden
     of it." Christ Himself was released from no pains on being raised,
     nor were the ancient Fathers in the Limbus, nor were lost souls
     released at all. Therefore the pains which God loosed, were those of
     souls in Purgatory.

     9. Phil. ii. 10. "That at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow,
     of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
     earth." Vid. also Rev. v. 3. "And no man in heaven, nor in earth,
     neither under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look
     thereon."

     Now as to many of these texts, we who have not been educated in the
     belief of Purgatory, may well wonder how they come to be enlisted in
     support of Purgatory at all. This may be explained in some such way
     as the following,---which may be of use in helping us to
     understand the state of mind under which the Romanists view them. It
     is obvious, as indeed has been already remarked, that they do not of
     themselves prove the doctrine, nor are they chosen by Bellarmine
     himself, but given on the authority of writers of various times.
     Could indeed competent evidence be brought from other quarters, that
     the doctrine really was true and Apostolical, we should not
     unreasonably have believed that some of them did allude to it;
     especially if writers of name, who might speak from tradition, so
     considered. We could not have taken upon ourselves to say at first
     sight that it certainly was not contained in them, only we should
     have waited for evidence that it was. Some of the texts in question
     are obscure, and seem to desiderate a meaning; and so far it is a
     sort of gain when they have any meaning assigned them, as though
     they were unappropriated territory which the first comer might
     seize. Again, the coincidence of several of them in one and the same
     mode of expression, implies that they have a common drift, whatever
     that drift is,---that there is something about them which seems
     to have reference to secrets untold to man. Amid these dim and
     broken lights, the text in the Apocrypha first quoted, comes as if
     to combine and steady them. All this is said by way of analysing how
     it is that such a class of texts, though of so little cogency
     critically, has that influence with individuals, which it certainly
     sometimes has. The reason seems to be that the doctrine of Purgatory
     professes to interpret texts which God's word has left in
     obscurity. Yet, whatever be the joint force of such arguments from
     Scripture, in favor of the doctrine, it vanishes surely, at once and
     altogether, before one single clear text, such as the following:
     "Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea,
     saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours." Or again,
     if any one is destined to endure Purgatory for the temporal
     punishment of sins, one should think it would be persons
     circumstanced as the thief on the cross,---a dying penitent; yet
     to him it is expressly said, "Verily I say unto thee, to day shalt
     thou be with me in Paradise."

                          3. Proofs from Antiquity.

     After Scripture, Bellarmine brings the testimony of early Churches
     in Council, as follows:

     1. The African Church: "Let the Altar Sacrament be celebrated
     fasting; if, however, there be any Commendation of the Dead made in
     the afternoon, let prayers only be used."---Conc. Carth. IV. c.
     79.

     2. The Spanish enjoins that suicides should not be prayed for,
     &c.---Conc. Bracar. I. c. 39.

     3. The Gallic: "It has seemed fit, that in all celebrations of the
     Eucharist, the Lord should be interceded with in a suitable place in
     Church, for the spirits of the dead."---Conc. Cabilon.

     4. The German defines, (Conc. Wormat. c. 10.) that prayers and
     offerings should be made even for those who are executed.

     5. The Italic declares (Conc. VI. under Symmachus) that it is
     sacrilege to defraud the souls of the dead of prayer, &c.

     6. The Greek in like manner.

     Moreover, the Liturgies of St. James, St. Basil, &c. all contain
     prayers for the dead. Now these professed instances are here
     enumerated in order to show how plainly and entirely they fall short
     of the point to be proved. Not one of them implies the doctrine of
     Purgatory; or goes beyond the doctrine which Archbishop Ussher (vide
     Tract 72.) has shown to have existed in the early Church, that the
     Saints departed were not at once in their full happiness, and that
     prayers benefited them. One of these instances indeed is somewhat
     remarkable, the allowing prayers for malefactors executed; but all
     were the subject of prayer who were not excluded from hope, and
     malefactors are, even by us, admitted to Holy Communion, and are
     allowed the Burial Service. To pray for them was merely the
     expression of hope.

     Next, Bellarmine appeals to the Fathers, of whom I shall only cite
     those within the first five hundred years; viz. Tertullian, Cyprian,
     Eusebius, Cyril of Jerusalem, Gregory Nazianzen, Ambrose, Jerome,
     Chrysostom, Paulinus, Augustine, Theodoret, and one or two others.
     Now in order to keep the point in controversy clearly in view, let
     it be recollected that we are not disputing the existence in the
     Ritual of the Church, of the custom of praying for the dead in
     Christ; but why prayer was offered was a question in dispute, a
     point unsettled by any Catholic tradition, but variously treated by
     various Doctors at various times. There is no thing contrary to the
     genius of religion, natural and revealed, that duties should be
     prescribed, yet the reasons for them not told us, as Bishop Butler
     has abundantly showed; and the circumstance that the ancients do
     agree in the usage, but differ as to the reasons, shows that the
     reasons were built upon the usage, not the usage on the reasons. And
     while this variety of opinions in the early Church, as to the
     meaning of the usage, forfeits for any one of these any claim to be
     considered apostolical, of course it deprives the doctrine of
     Purgatory of authority inclusively, even supposing for
     argument's sake it was received by some early writers as true.
     Purgatory is but a violent hypothesis to give meaning to a usage,
     for which other hypotheses short of it and very different from it,
     and equally conjectural with it, may be assigned, nay, and were
     assigned before it, and far more extensively. Let it be remembered
     then, when the following list of passages, professedly in behalf of
     Purgatory, is read, that, what we have to look for, is, not evidence
     of a certain usage, which we grant did exist, but of an opinion, of
     a particular opinion explaining it; not of Prayer for the dead
     simply, nor of the opinion that Prayer for the dead profits, but
     that such Prayer is intended and tends to rescue them from a state
     of suffering. Further what we look for is not the testimony of one
     or two writers to the truth of this opinion, even if one or two
     could be brought, but an agreement of all in its favour. If however
     it be said that the usage of Prayer in itself tends to the doctrine
     of Purgatory, I answer, that so far from it, in its primitive form
     it included prayers for the Virgin Mary and Apostles, which while
     retained were an indirect but forcible standing witness against the
     doctrine.

     Tertullian, in his de Corona, ÃY 3. speaks of "oblationes pro
     defunctis," offerings for the dead.

     Again, "Let her" [the widow] "pray for the soul of" [her deceased
     husband] "and ask for him a place of refreshment in the interval
     before the judgment, and a fellowship in the first resurrection, and
     let her offer on the anniversary of his falling to sleep."---De
     Monogam. ÃY 10. Vid. also de Pudicit.

     Cyprian. "The Bishops our predecessors . . . decreed that no one
     dying should nominate clerics as guardians or executors, and if any
     one had done this, no offering should be made for him, or sacrifice
     celebrated for his sleeping well."---Epist. i. 9. et infra.

     Eusebius (vid. Constant. iv.) says that Constantine had wished to be
     buried in a frequented Church, in order to have the benefit of many
     prayers. On his death they offered the Holy Eucharist over his
     remains.

     Cyril of Jerusalem. "We pray for all our community who are dead,
     believing that this is the greatest benefit to those souls for whom
     the offering is made."---Mystagog. 5.

     Gregory Nazianzen. "Let us commend to GOD our own souls, and the
     souls of those who, as men more advanced on the same road, have
     arrived before us at their resting place."---Orat. in Caesar.
     fin.

     Ambrose. "Therefore she is, I think, not so much to be lamented as
     to be followed with your prayers; she is not to be mourned over with
     your tears, but rather her soul is to be commended to God by your
     oblations."---Ep. ii. 8. ad Faustinum. Vid. also de ob. Theod.,
     &c. &c.

     Jerome. "Other husbands scatter on their wives' graves violets,
     roses, lilies, and purple flowers; but our Pammachius waters her
     holy ashes and reverend relics with the balsams of almsgiving; with
     such embellishments and perfumes he honours the sleeping remains,
     knowing what is written, ' As water quenches fire, so doth alms
     sin.'"---Ad Pammach.

     Chrysostom. "The dead is aided not by tears, but by prayers, by
     supplications, by alms ..Let us not weary in giving aid to the dead,
     offering prayers for them."---Hom. 41. in 1. ad Cor.

     Again. "Not without purpose has it been ordained by the Apostles,
     that in the awful Mysteries a commemoration should be made of the
     dead; for they know that thence much gain accrues to them; much
     advantage."---Hom. 69. ad pop. Vid. also Hom. 32. in Matt. In
     Joan. Hom. 84. In Philipp. 3. In Act Apost. 21.

     Paulinus, writing to Delphinus, Bishop of Bordeaux: "Do thy
     diligence that he may be granted to thee, and that from the least of
     thy sacred fingers the dews of refreshment may sprinkle his soul."

     Augustine. "We read in the book of Maccabees that sacrifice was
     offered for the dead; but, though it were not even found in the old
     Scriptures, the authority of the universal Church is not slight,
     which is explicit as to this custom viz. that in the Priests'
     prayers which are offered to the LORD GOD at His altar, the
     commendation of the dead is included."---De Cur. pro mortuis. c.
     ii. et alibi.

     Theodoret (Hist. v. 26.) mentions that Theodosius the younger fell
     down at the tomb of St. John Chrysostom, and prayed for 1he souls of
     his parents, then dead, Arcadius and Eudoxia.

     Isidore. "Unless the Church Catholic believed that sins are remitted
     to the dead in Christ, she would not do alms or offer sacrifice to
     GOD for their spirits."---De off. div. i. 18.

     Gregory the Great. "Much profiteth souls even after death the sacred
     oblation of the lifegiving Sacrifice, so that the souls of the dead
     themselves sometimes seem to ask for it."---Dial. iv. 55.

     Again: "They who are not weighed down by grievous sins, are profited
     after death by burial in the Church, because that their relatives,
     whenever they come to the same sacred places, remember their own kin
     whose tombs they behold, and pray to the LORD for them."

     It is evident that the above passages go no way to prove the point
     in debate, being nothing more in fact than Ussher allows to be found
     in the early Fathers. They contain the musings of serious minds
     feeling a mystery, and attempting to solve it, at least by
     conjecture. They state that prayers benefit the dead in Christ, but
     how is either not mentioned, or vaguely, or hesitatingly, or
     discordantly. Accordingly, Bellarmine begins anew, and draws out a
     series of authorities for the doctrine of Purgatory expressly; and
     this certainly demands our attention more than the former. It
     contains such as the following:---

     For instance, Origen says that "he who is saved, is saved by fire,
     that if he has any alloy of lead, the fire may melt and separate it,
     that all may become pure gold."---Hom. 6. in Exod.

     Tertullian speaks of our being "committed into the prison beneath,
     which will detain us till every small offence is expiated, during
     the delay of the resurrection."---De Anim. 17.

     Cyprian contrasts the being purged by torment in fire, and by
     martyrdom.---Epist. iv. 2.

     Gregory Nazianzen speaks of the last Baptism being "one of fire, not
     only more bitter, but longer than the first Baptism."--- In
     Sancta lum. circ. fin.

     Ambrose speaks of our being "saved through faith, as if through
     fire," which will be a trial under which grievous sinners will fall,
     while others will pass safe through it.---In Ps. xxxvi.

     Basil speaks of the "Purgatorial fire," in cap. ix. Isa.

     Gregory Nyssen, of "our recovering our lost happiness by prayer and
     religiousness in this life, or after death by the purgatorial
     fire."---Orat. pro Mort. Elsewhere too he speaks of the
     Purgatorial fire.

     Eusebius Emissenus uses such determined words, as to require
     quoting. "This punishment under the earth will await those, who,
     having lost instead of preserving their Baptism, will perish for
     ever; whereas those who have done deeds calling for temporal
     punishments, shall pass over the fiery river and that fearful water
     the drops of which are fire."

     Hilary declares that we have to undergo "that ever-living fire,
     which is a punishment of the soul in cleansing of sin."---In Ps.
     cxviii. Lactantius speaks to the same effect.---Div. Inst. vii.
     21.

     Jerome contrasts the eternal torments of the devil, and of atheists
     and infidels, with "the judgment tempered with mercy, of sinners and
     ungodly men, yet Christian, whose works are to be tried purified in
     the fire."---In fin. comment. in Is. In another place in a like
     contrast he speaks of Christians, if overtaken in a fault, being
     saved after punishment.---Lib. i. in Pelag.

     Augustine has various passages in point, such as Civ. Dei xxi. 24,
     where speaking of believers who die with lighter sins, he says, "It
     is certain that these being purified before the day of judgment by
     means of temporal punishment, which their souls suffer, are not to
     be given over to eternal fire." Pope Gregory the first expresses the
     same doctrine, as do some others.

     These instances are at first sight to the point, and demand serious
     consideration. Yet there is nothing in them really to alarm the
     inquirer whither he is being carried. I say this, that no one may be
     surprised at the deliberateness and over-patience with which I may
     seem to loiter over the explanation of them. First, then, let it be
     observed, were they ever so strong in favour of something more than
     we believe, it does not therefore follow that they take that very
     view which the Romanists take, nay, it does not necessarily follow
     that they take any one view at all, or agree with each other. Now it
     so happens neither the one or the other of these suppositions is
     true as regards those passages, though they ought both to hold, if
     the Roman doctrine is to be satisfactorily maintained. These
     Fathers, whatever they teach, do not teach Purgatory, they do not
     teach any one view at all on the subject. Romanists consider
     Purgatory to be an article of faith, necessary to be believed in
     order to salvation; or in Bellarmine's words, "Purgatory is an
     article of faith, so that he who disbelieves its existence, will
     never have experience of it, but will be tormented in hell with
     everlasting fire." Now it can only be an article of faith, supposing
     it is held by Antiquity, and that unanimously. For such things only
     are we allowed to maintain, as come to us from the Apostles; and
     that only (ordinarily speaking) has evidence of so originating,
     which is witnessed by a number of independent witnesses in the early
     Church. We must have the unanimous "consent of Doctors," as an
     assurance that the Apostles have spoken; and much less can we
     tolerate their actual disagreement, in a case where unanimity was
     promised us. Now as regards Purgatory, not only are early writers
     silent as to the modern view of Rome, but they do not agree with
     each other; which proves they knew little more about the matter than
     ourselves, whatever they might conjecture; that they possessed no
     Apostolic Tradition, only at most entertained floating opinions on
     the subject. Nay, it is obvious, if we wished to believe them, we
     could not; for what is it we are to believe? If, as I shall show,
     various writers speak various things, which of their statements is
     to be taken? If this or that, it is but the language of an
     individual: if all of them at once, a doctrine results, discordant
     in its details, and in general outline, if it have any, vague and
     imperfect at the best.

     Now as to the passages quoted by Bellarmine, it will be observed
     that in the number are extracts from the works of Origen, St.
     Ambrose, St. Hilary, St. Jerome, and Lactantius. He introduces the
     list with these words, "Sunt apertassima loca in Patribus, ubi
     asserunt Purgatorium, quorum pauca quaedam afferam," i. 10. "There
     are most perspicuous passages in the Fathers, in which they assert
     Purgatory, of which I will adduce some few." Will it be believed
     that in his second book these Fathers, nay, for the most part the
     very extracts, which he has given in proof of the doctrine, are
     enumerated as at variance with it, and mistaken in their notion of
     it? He quotes a passage of Origen, (not the same) the very same two
     passages from St. Ambrose, the very same passage from St. Hilary,
     the very same from Lactantius, and a passage (not the same) from St.
     Jerome. Then he says, "Haec sententia, accepta ut sonat, manifestum
     errorem continet; for" (he proceeds) "it is defined in the Council
     of Florence, &c." ii. 1. Next he observes, "Adde, quod Patres
     adducti, Origene excepto videntur sano modo intelligi posse." At
     length, after he has given the two most favourable explanations
     assignable to their words, he adds of one of the two, "Sane hanc
     sententiam [quae docet omnes transituros per ignem, licet non omnes
     laedendi sint ab igne] nec auderem pro vera asserere, nec ut errorem
     improbare." "The only alleviation of this strange inconsistency,"
     says a work which has recently appeared, "is that he quotes not the
     very same sentences both for and against his Church, but adjoining
     ones." The work referred to, thus comments on Bellarmine's conduct,
     as throwing light upon the state of feeling under which Romanists
     engage in controversy. "A Romanist," the writer says, "cannot really
     argue in defence of his doctrines. He has too firm a confidence in
     their truth, if he is sincere in his profession, to enable him
     critically to adjust the due weight to be given to this or that
     evidence. He assumes his Church's conclusion as true; and the facts
     or witnesses he adduces, are rather brought to receive an
     interpretation than to furnish a proof. His highest aim is to show
     the mere consistency of his theory, its possible adjustment, with
     the records of antiquity. I am not here inquiring how much of high
     but misdirected moral feeling is implied in this state of mind;
     certainly as we advance in perception of the truth, we all of us
     become less fitted to be controversialists. If this, however, be a
     true explanation of Bellarmine's strange error, the more it tends to
     exculpate him, the deeper it criminates his system. He ceases to be
     chargeable with unfairness, only in proportion as the notion of the
     infallibility of Rome is admitted to be the sovereign and engrossing
     tenet of his communion, the foundation stone, or (as it may be
     called) the fulcrum of its theology. I consider then, that when he
     first adduces the aforementioned Fathers in proof of Purgatory, he
     was really but interpreting them; he was teaching what they ought to
     mean, what in charity they must be supposed to mean, what they might
     mean as far as the very words went, probably meant considering the
     Church so meant, and might be taken to mean, even if their authors
     did not so mean, from the notion that they spoke vaguely, and, as
     children, really meant something besides what they formally said,
     and that after all, they were but the spokesmen of the then existing
     Church, which, though silent, held the same doctrine which Rome has
     since defined and published. This is to treat Bellarmine with the
     same charity with which he has on this supposition treated the
     Fathers, and it is to be hoped, with a nearer approach to the matter
     of fact. So much as to his first use of them; but afterwards, in
     noticing what he considers erroneous opinions on this subject, he
     treats them, not as organs of the Church infallible, but as
     individuals, and interprets their language by its literal sense or
     by the context....How hopeless then is it to contend with Romanists,
     as if they practically agreed to our foundation, however much they
     pretend to it! Ours is antiquity: theirs the existing Church. Its
     infallibility is their first principle; belief in it is a deep
     prejudice, quite beyond the reach of any thing external. It is quite
     clear that the combined testimonies of all the Fathers, supposing
     such a case, would not have a feather's weight against a decision of
     the Pope in Council, nor would matter at all, except for their sakes
     who had by anticipation opposed it. They consider that the Fathers
     ought to mean what Rome has since decreed, and that Rome knows their
     meaning better than they themselves did. That venturesome Church has
     usurped their place, and thinks it merciful, only not to banish
     outright the rivals she has dethroned. By an act, as it were, of
     grace she has determined, that, when they contradict her, though of
     no authority yet, as living in times of ignorance, they are not
     guilty of heresy but are only heterodox; and she keeps them around
     her, to ask their advice when it happens to agree with her own.

     "Let us then understand the position of the Romanists towards us;
     they do not really argue from the Fathers, though they seem to do
     so. They may affect to do so on our behalf, happy if by an innocent
     stratagem they are able to convert us; but all the while in their
     own feelings, they are taking a far higher position. They are
     teaching, not disputing or proving. They are interpreting what is
     obscure in antiquity, purifying what is alloyed, correcting what is
     amiss, perfecting what is incomplete, harmonizing what is various.
     They claim and use all its documents as ministers and organs of that
     one infallible Church, which once forsooth kept silence, but since
     has spoken, which by a divine gift must ever be consistent with
     itself, and which bears with it its own evidence of divinity."

     Leaving Bellarmine then, let us proceed to inquire what the opinion
     of the Fathers in the foregoing passages really is.

           ÃY 3. HISTORY OF THE RISE OF THE DOCTRINE OF PURGATORY,

               AND OPINIONS IN THE EARLY CHURCH CONCERNING IT.

     The argumentative ground of the doctrine of Purgatory as far as the
     Infallibility of the Church has not superseded any, has ever been, I
     conceive, the report of miracles and visions attesting it; but the
     historical origin is to be sought elsewhere, viz. in the anxious
     conjectures of the human mind about its future destinies, and the
     apparent coincidences of these with certain obscure texts of
     Scripture

     These may be supposed to have operated as follows; as described in
     the work already cited. "HOW ALMIGHTY GOD will deal with the mass of
     Christians, who are neither very good nor very bad, is a problem
     with which we are not concerned, and which it is our wisdom and may
     be our duty, to put from our thoughts. But, when it has once forced
     itself upon the mind, we are led in self-defence, with a view of
     keeping ourselves from dwelling, unhealthily on particular cases,
     which come under our experience and perplex us, to imagine modes,
     not by which GOD does, (for that would be presumptuous to
     conjecture,) but by which he may solve the difficulty. Most men to
     our apprehensions, are too unformed in religious habits either for
     heaven or for hell, yet there is no middle state when CHRIST comes
     to judgment. In consequence it is obvious to have recourse to the
     interval before His coming, as a time during which this
     incompleteness might be remedied; a season, not of changing the
     spiritual bent and character of the soul departed, whatever that be,
     for probation ends with mortal life, but of developing it in a more
     determinate form, whether of good or of evil. Again, when the mind
     once allows itself to speculate, it will discern in such a provision
     a means, whereby those, who not without true faith at bottom yet
     have committed great crimes, or those who have been carried off in
     youth while still undecided, or who die after a barren though not an
     immoral or scandalous life, may receive such chastisement as may
     prepare them for heaven, and render it consistent with GOD'S justice
     to admit them thither. Again, the inequality of the sufferings of
     Christians in this life, compared one with another, leads the
     unguarded mind to the same speculations, the intense suffering, e.
     g. which some men undergo on their death-bed, seeming as if but an
     anticipation in their case of what comes after death upon others,
     who without greater claim on GOD'S forbearance, live without
     chastisement and die easily. I say, the mind will inevitably dwell
     upon such thoughts, unless it has been taught to subdue them by
     education or by the experience of their dangerousness.

     "Various suppositions have, accordingly, been made, as pure
     suppositions, as mere specimens of the capabilities, (if one may so
     speak) of the Divine Dispensation, as efforts of the mind reaching
     forward and venturing beyond its depth into the abyss of the divine
     counsels. If one supposition could be produced, sufficient to solve
     the problem, ten thousand others are conceivable, unless indeed the
     resources of GOD'S Providence are exactly commensurate with man's
     discernment of them. Religious men, amid these searchings of heart,
     have naturally gone to Scripture for relief, to see if the inspired
     word anywhere gave them any clue for their inquiries. And hence, and
     from the speculations of reason upon what was there found, various
     notions have been hazarded at different times; for instance, that
     there is a certain momentary ordeal to be undergone by all men after
     this life, more or less severe according to their spiritual state;
     or that certain gross sins in good men will be thus visited, or
     their lighter failings and habitual imperfections; or that the very
     sight of divine perfection in the invisible world will be in itself
     a pain, while it constitutes the purification of the imperfect but
     believing soul; or that, happiness admitting of various degrees of
     intensity, penitents late in life may sink for ever into a state,
     blissful as far as it goes, but more or less approaching to
     unconsciousness; infants dying after baptism may be as gems paving
     the courts of heaven, or as the living wheels of the Prophet's
     vision; while matured Saints may excel in capacity of bliss, as well
     as in dignity, the highest Archangels. Such speculations are
     dangerous when indulged; the event proves it; from some of these in
     fact seems to have resulted the doctrine of Purgatory.

     "Now the texts to which the minds of the early Christians seem to
     have been principally drawn, and from which they ventured to argue,
     were these two: 'The fire shall try every man's work,' &c.; and
     ' He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.' These
     texts, with which many more were found to accord, directed their
     thoughts one way, as making mention of 'fire,' whatever was meant by
     the word, as the instrument of trial and purification; and that, at
     some time between the present time and the judgment, or at the
     judgment. And accordingly without perhaps having any definite or
     consistent meaning in what they said, or being able to say whether
     they spoke literally or figuratively and with an indefinite
     reference to this life, as well as to the intermediate state, they
     sometimes named fire as the instrument' of recovering those who had
     sinned after their baptism. That this is the origin of the notion of
     a Purgatorial fire, I gather from these circumstances, first that
     they do frequently insist on the texts in question, next, that they
     do not agree in the particular sense they put upon them. That they
     quote them shows they rest upon them; that they vary in explaining
     them, that they had no Catholic sense to guide them. Nothing can be
     clearer, if these facts be so, than that the doctrine of the
     Purgatorial fire in all its senses, as far as it was more than a
     surmise, and was rested on argument, was the result of private
     judgment exerted in defect of Tradition, upon the text of Scripture

     "As the doctrine, thus suggested by certain striking texts, grew in
     popularity and definiteness, and verged towards its present Roman
     form, it seemed a key to many others. Great portions of the books of
     Psalms, Job, and the Lamentations, which express the feelings of
     religious men under suffering, would powerfully recommend it by the
     forcible and most affecting and awful meaning which they received
     from it. When this was once suggested, all other meanings would seem
     tame and inadequate.

     "To these must be added various passages from the Prophets, as that
     in the beginning of the 3rd chapter of Malachi, which speaks of fire
     as the instrument of judgment and purification when CHRIST comes to
     visit His Church.

     "Moreover there were other texts of obscure and indeterminate
     bearing, which seemed on this hypothesis to receive a profitable
     meaning; such as our LORD'S words in the Sermon on the Mount,
     "Verily, I say unto thee, thou shalt by no means come out thence
     till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing;" and St. John's
     expression in the apocalypse, that "no man in heaven, nor in earth,
     neither under the earth, was able to open the book."

     "Further, the very circumstance that no second instrument of a
     plenary and entire cleansing from sin was given after Baptism, such
     as Baptism, led Christians to expect that that unknown means, when
     accorded, would be of a more painful nature than

     that which they had received so freely and instantaneously in
     infancy, and confirmed, not only the text already cited, "He shall
     baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire," but also St. Paul's
     announcement of the "judgment and fiery indignation" which awaits
     those who sinned [sin] after having been once "enlightened," and by
     CHRIST'S warning to the impotent man to sin no more lest a worse
     thing come unto him.

     "Lastly, the universal and apparently apostolical custom of praying
     for the dead in CHRIST, called for some explanation, the reason for
     it not having come down to posterity with it. Various reasons may be
     supposed quite clear of this distressing doctrine, but it supplied
     an adequate and a most constraining motive for its observance to
     those who were not content to practice it in ignorance."

     Should any one for a moment be startled by any thing that is here
     said, as if investing the doctrine with some approach to
     plausibility, I would have him give GOD thanks for the safeguard of
     Catholic Tradition, which keeps us from immoderate speculation upon
     Scripture or a vain indulgence of the imagination, by
     authoritatively declaring the contents and the limits of the Creed
     necessary to salvation and profitable to ourselves.

     There seem, on the whole, to be two chief opinions on the subject,
     embraced in the early Church. One of these is Origen's, which I
     shall first exhibit in the language of St. Ambrose, being the very
     passage referred to by Bellarmine. The notion is this, that the fire
     at the day of Judgment will burn or scorch every one in proportion
     to his remaining imperfections. St. Ambrose then thus comments on
     Psalm xxxvii. (38) 14.

     "'Thou hast proved us by fire,' says David; therefore we shall all
     be proved by fire, and Ezeklel (Malachi) says, 'Behold the LORD
     ALMIGHTY cometh, and who may abide the day of His coming?
     &c.......for He is like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap; and
     He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver and He shall purify
     the Sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, &c.' Therefore
     the Sons of Levi will be purged by fire; by fire Ezekiel, by fire
     Daniel. But these, though proved by fire, yet shall say, 'We passed
     through fire and water,' (Ps. lxvi. 12.) Others shall remain in the
     fire; and the fire shall be as dew to them, (Song of Three Children,
     27.) as to the Hebrew Children who were exposed to the fire of the
     burning furnace. But the Ministers of impiety shall be consumed in
     the avenging flame. Woe is me should my work be burned, and I suffer
     this worsting of my labour! Although the Lord will save His
     servants, we shall be saved by faith, but so saved as by fire.
     Although we shall not be consumed, yet we shall be burned. But how
     some remain in the fire, others escape through it, learn from
     another Scripture. The Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea, the
     Israelites passed over; Moses escaped to land, Pharaoh sank, for his
     heavy sins drowned him. In like manner the irreligious will sink in
     the lake of burning fire."

     It is plain that St. Ambrose, so far from imagining a Roman
     Purgatory, definite in period, place, and subjects, speaks of an
     ordeal by fire which all Christians must undergo at the last day,
     and grounds it on the solemn text already referred to, 1 Cor. iii
     12---15. which whether rightly so interpreted or not, a point we
     cannot determine, since it is an [hapax legomenon] in Scripture, yet
     at least may be so understood without violence to the wording. "If
     any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
     wood, hay, stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest; for the
     Day shall declare it, because it (the Day) shall be revealed in
     fire; and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If
     any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive
     a reward. If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss;
     but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire." Now it would seem
     plain that in this passage the searching process of final Judgment,
     essaying our works oft righteousness, is described by the word fire.
     Not that we may presume to limit the word fire to that meaning, or
     on the other hand to say it is a merely figurative expression
     denoting judgment; which seems a stretching somewhat beyond our
     measure. Doubtless there is a mystery in the word fire, as there is
     a mystery in the words day of judgment. Yet it any how has reference
     to the instrument or process of judgment. And in this way the
     Fathers seem to have understood the passage; referring it to the
     last Judgment, as Scripture does, but at the same time religiously
     retaining the use of the word, fire, as not affecting to interpret
     and dispense with what seems some mysterious economy, lest they
     should be wiser than what is written.

     Next let us turn to the same Father's 20th Sermon on Ps. cxix. which
     is also referred to by Bellarmine.

     "As long as the Israelites were in Egypt, they were in the iron
     furnace, that is, in the furnace of temptation, in the furnace of
     affliction, when they were afflicted by cruel tyranny. Whence also
     it is written, 'I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from
     the iron furnace.' The furnace was iron, because, while the people
     was yet in Egypt, no one's works were illuminated by holiness, no
     one's gold had been there assayed, no one's lead of iniquity burned
     away. It was a cruel furnace, a furnace of perpetual death, which
     none could escape, which consumed every one, in which pain and
     sorrow dwell only. But the furnace, in which Ananias, Azarias, and
     Misael sang their hymn to the Lord, was a golden furnace, not an
     iron; by means of which wisdom hath shown forth in the faith of true
     obedience all over the world. It was indeed in Babylon, where
     spiritual gold was not, unless perchance in captivity, for 'the Lord
     led captivity captive.' This is the gold in God's saints who were
     captives among the Babylonians in body, but in spirit were freemen
     with God, delivered from the chains of human captivity, and bearing
     the yoke of spiritual grace. And perchance the same furnace would be
     iron to the unstable, and gold to those who persevere.

     "All must be proved through fire, as many as desire to return to
     paradise; for it is not said for nothing, that, when Adam and Eve
     were expelled from Paradise, God placed at the outlet a fiery sword
     which turned every way. All must pass through the flames, whether he
     be John the Evangelist, whom the Lord so loved as to say to Peter of
     him, 'If I wish him to tarry, what is that to thee? Follow thou me.'
     Some have doubted of his death; of his passage through the fire we
     cannot doubt, for he is in Paradise, not separated from Christ. Or
     whether he be Peter; he who received the keys of the kingdom of
     Heaven, who walked upon the sea, must still say, 'We passed through
     fire and water, and Thou broughtest us out into a place of
     refreshment.' But the fiery sword will soon be turned by St. John,
     for iniquity is not found in him, whom righteousness itself loved.
     Whatever human defect was in him, Divine Love melted it away; for
     her wings are as the wings of fire. (Cant. viii. 6.)

     "He who possesses this fire of love, will have no cause to fear
     there the fiery sword. To Peter, who so often exposed his life for
     Christ, He will say, 'Go and sit down to meat.' But he shall say,
     'Thou hast tried us with fire, as silver is tried; for, when many
     waters do not drown love, how can fire consume then?' But he shall
     be tried as silver, I as lead; I shall burn till the lead melts
     away. If no silver be found in me, ah me! I shall be plunged down
     into the Iowest pit, or consume entire as the stubble. Should ought
     of gold or silver be found in me, not for my works, but through the
     mercy and grace of Christ, by the ministry of the priesthood, I
     shall peradventure say, 'They that hope in Thee, shall not be
     ashamed.'

     "The fiery sword then shall consume iniquity, which is placed on the
     leaden scale. One only could not feel that fire, Christ the
     Righteousness of God, who did no sin; for the fire found nought in
     Him which it might consume."

     It is now sufficiently clear what St. Ambrose's belief was. The only
     point of approximation between it and the doctrine of Purgatory is
     this; that he conceived that for all but the highest saints, in whom
     love dissolved all remaining dross whatever, some transient
     suffering, more or less in duration, was in store in the day of
     judgment. And hence the force of the ordinary prayers of the early
     Church, as based on Scripture, (and described at length by
     Archbishop Ussher, in Tract, No. 72,) that departed believers might
     have "a merciful trial at the last day."

     St. Hilary is another witness, whom Bellarmine, in his former book
     quotes, in his latter surrenders. He, too, will be found to hold
     this same view of the purgatorial nature of the fire of the fast
     judgment.

     "The prophet [the Psalmist] observes, that it is difficult and most
     perilous to human nature, to desire God's judgments: For, since no
     one is clean in His sight, how can His judgment be desirable?
     Considering we shall have to give account for every idle word, shall
     we long for the day of judgment, in which we must undergo that
     ever-living fire, and those heavy penalties for cleansing the soul
     from its sins? Then will a sword pierce through the soul of Mary,
     that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. If that Virgin
     which could compass God is to come into the severity of the
     judgment, who shall dare desire to be judged of God? Job, when he
     had finished his warfare with all calamities of man and had
     triumphed, who,.when tempted, said, 'The Lord gave,' and confessed
     himself but dust and ashes when he heard God's voice from the cloud,
     and determined that he ought not to speak another word. And who
     shall venture to desire God's judgmnents, whose voice from heaven
     neither so great a Prophet endured, nor the Apostles again, when
     they were with the Lord in the Mount ?"---Tract, in Ps. cxviii.
     (cxix.) lit. 3. ÃY 12. vid. also ÃY 5.

     Again,

     "He [John the Baptist] marks the season of our salvation and
     judgment in the Lord, saying, 'He shall baptize you with the Holy
     Ghost and with fire; for to those who are baptized in the Holy
     Ghost, it remains to be perfected in the fire of
     judgment."---Comm. in Matt. ii. ÃY 4.

     Let us now proceed to Origen, who is historically the first who has
     put forward the theory under review. Even Origen, be it remembered,
     is at first alleged by Bellarmine, though afterwards absolutely
     relinquished. His words, as quoted by that author himself, are as
     follows:

     "I consider that even after the resurrection from the dead, we need
     a sacrament to wash us throughly and cleanse us; for no one will
     rise without dross upon him, nor can the soul be found which at once
     is free from all defects." ---Hom. 14 in Luc.

     Again,

     "We must all come to that fire, be we Paul or Peter," in Ps. xxxvii.

     Lactantius expresses the same, or almost the same doctrine in the
     following passage, as referred to by Bellarmine.

     "Moreover, when He shall have judged the just, He will also try them
     in the fire. Then they whose sins prevail in weight or number, will
     be tortured in the fire and partially burned; but they, who are
     mature in righteousness and ripeness of virtue, shall not feel that
     flame; for they have somewhat of God within them, to repel and throw
     of the force of the flame. Such is the force: of innocence, that
     from it that fire recoils without mischief, as having received this
     property from God to burn the irreligious, to recede from the
     righteous."--- Div. Inst. vii. 21.

     Two more writers may be mentioned, as holding the same view, both of
     whom are quoted by Bellarmine in his favour. St. Jerome, as referred
     to by him, speaks as follows:

     "The fire," he says, commenting on Amos vii. 4, "being called for
     judgment, devours first the deep; that is, all kinds of sins, wood,
     hay, stubble, and afterwards consumes also a part, that is, reaches
     to his saints, who are accounted the Lord's portion."

     St. Paulinus of Nola is the other, who thus writes to Severus:

     "If we attain by these works to be citizens with the saints, our
     work shall not be burned; and that sagacious fire will, on our
     passing its ordeal, surround us with no severe heat of punishment;
     but as if we were commended to its care it will play around us with
     a kind caress, so that we may say, 'We have passed through fire and
     water,' &c."---Ep. 28. (9.)

     To these passages, others similar might be added from St. Basil and
     St.Gregory Nazianzen.

     So much on this speculation or foreboding, concerning the fire of
     the last judgment. Before proceeding to consider the second notion
     of a Purgatory, which existed in the early Church, I stop to make a
     remark. What has been said will illustrate what is meant by Catholic
     Tradition, and how it may be received without binding us to accept
     every thing which the Fathers say. It must be Catholic to be of
     authority; that is, all the writers who mention the subject, must
     agree together in their view of it, or the exceptions, if there be
     any, must be such as probare regulam. And again, they must profess
     it is Traditionary teaching. For instance, supposing all the Fathers
     agreed together in their interpretation of a certain text, I
     consider that agreement would invest that interpretation with such a
     degree of authority, as to make it at first sight most rash (to say
     the very least) to differ from them; yet it is conceivable that on
     some points, as the interpretation of unfulfilled prophecy, they
     might be mistaken. It is abstractedly conceivable, that a modern
     commentator might on certain occasions plausibly justify his dissent
     from them:---this is conceivable, I say, unless they were
     explaining a doctrine of the creed, which is otherwise known to come
     from the Apostles,---or professed, (which would be equivalent)
     that such an interpretation had ever been received in their
     respective Churches as coming from the Apostles. Catholic Tradition
     is something more than Catholic teaching. Great as is the authority
     of the latter, (and we cannot well put it too high,) Tradition is
     something beyond it. This remark is in point here, for it might be
     objected that so many Fathers agree together in the notion of a
     last-day Purgatory, that, were it not for the accident of others
     speaking differently, we should certainly have received it as
     Catholic Tradition. I answer, no; whatever the worth of so many
     witnesses would have been,---and it certainly for safety's sake
     ought to have been taken for very much,---still, Origen, Hilary,
     Ambrose, and the rest, do not approximate in their remarks to the
     authoritative language in which they would speak of the Trinity or
     the benefits of Baptism. They do not profess to be delivering an
     article of the Faith once delivered to the saints.---Now, to
     consider the second theory in the early Church on the subject of
     Purgatory.

     While the Greek Churches, and thence the Italian held the doctrine
     of a judgment Purgatory, a doctrine far more like the Roman is found
     from an early age in the African Church; at the same time, it was so
     far from being considered as a necessary article of faith, that even
     St. Austin, who brings it out most fully, expresses his doubt about
     its truth. It was in fact only an opinion or conjecture.

     Tertullian speaks thus, when discussing the question, whether souls
     suffer in the intermediate state, or wait till the resurrection of
     the body:

     "In short, considering we understand that prison, which the gospel
     discloses, to be the places under the earth (inferos), and explain
     the very last farthing to mean, that every slightest fault is then
     to be washed away in the interval before the resurrection, no one
     will doubt that the soul pays something in those nether places
     without intrenching on the fulness of the resurrection also through
     the flesh."---De Anim. fin.

     Next comes St. Cyprian. Cyprian is arguing in favor of readmitting
     the lapsed, when penitent, and his argument seems to be, that, it
     does not follow we absolve them simply, by restoring them to the
     Church; we do but admit them to present privileges, the judgment
     being reserved in God's hands. He thus writes to Antonianus.

     "Neither suppose, dearest brother, that the virtue of the brethren
     will be impaired, or martyrdoms fail, though penitence be indulged
     to the lapsed, and hope of reconciliation set before the penitent.
     Strength unmoveable abides with those who have true faith; and to
     those who fear and love God with their whole heart, integrity
     endures in firmness and in courage. Even to adulterers a period of
     penitence is granted by us, and reconciliation allowed; yet not on
     that account does virginity decline in the Church, or the glorious
     resolve of continence languish through the sins of others. The
     Church is still embellished by the crown of so many virgins, and
     chastity and purity are as glorious as before; nor, though the
     adulterer is indulged with penitence and pardon, is the vigour of
     continence relaxed. It is one thing to stand for pardon, another to
     arrive safe at glory; one to be sent to prison, there to remain till
     the last farthing be paid; another to receive at once the reward of
     faith and virtue; one thing to be tormented for sin in long pain and
     so to be cleansed, and to be purged a long while in the fire,
     another to have washed away all sin in martyrdom; one thing in
     short, to wait for the Lord's sentence in the day of judgment,
     another at once to be crowned by Him."---Ep. 65. ad Antonian.

     Rigaltius, Faber, and some others understand this passage to refer
     to the penitential discipline of the Church which was imposed on the
     penitent; and, as far as the context goes, certainly no sense could
     be more apposite. Yet, if I may venture on an opinion apart from
     such high authorities, the words in themselves seem to go beyond any
     mere ecclesiastical, though virtually divine censure, especially
     "missum in carcerem," and "purgari diu igne."

     Further, the passage in Tertullian, weak in itself, for it was
     perhaps written after he was a Montanist, fixes a sense, though it
     rests for authority, on Cyprian's language. Tertullian explains
     Cyprian, Cyprian sanctions Tertullian. It should be recollected,
     moreover, that Cyprian used to call Tertullian his Master; and the
     inference deducible from all this is greatly strengthened, when we
     come to consider the views of St. Austin, another African. At the
     same time it is worth noticing, the occasion and manner of St.
     Cyprian's statement, whatever it means. He will be found to speak
     conjecturally, and as if in disputation. He is accounting for a
     difficulty; as if he said,---"You suppose that, should the lapsed
     be received, this makes it all one as if they had never fallen. Far
     from it; they do not receive an absolute pardon; they are reserved
     to the judgment of the great day. Had they endured and suffered
     martyrdom, they would have had their pardon sealed at once; as it
     is, it is uncertain, and who knows but in God's judgments such a
     recompense is in store for them as will allow the Church to be
     merciful to them without God's ceasing to be just?"

     St. Austin is lastly to be mentioned; who speaks neither in one
     uniform way, nor with one and the same degree of certainty.
     Sometimes he seems to hold the Greek opinion of the final
     purgatorial conflagration. In the following passage, after alluding
     to Abraham's sacrifice, (Gen. xv.) in which the beasts were divided
     but not the birds, and "when the sun went down,'' "a smoking furnace
     and a burning lamp passed between those pieces," and interpreting
     the birds of the spiritual members of the Church, and the beasts of
     carnal men, some of whom are within, some outside the Church, he
     says,

     "The smoking furnace will come; for Abraham sat there till the
     evening, and then comes the great terror of the day of judgment. For
     the evening is the end of the world, and the furnace is the coming
     day of judgment. It went between those things, which were already
     divided, separating them to the right and left. Thus there are
     certain carnal men who are yet in the Church's bosom, living
     according to their own way, who are in danger of seduction from
     heretics. While they remain carnal, they are divisible; He did not
     divide the birds, but the carnal are divided. ' I could not speak
     unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal.....Whoso shall
     remain such, and in a way of life suitable to the carnal, and yet
     has not receded from the bosom of the Church, not been seduced by
     heretics, so as to be divided off the other way, the furnace will
     come, nor will he be able to stand on the right without undergoing
     it. If then he would escape that furnace, let him be changed now
     into the turtle-dove and pigeon. Let him receive it who can. But if
     not, but he shall have built on the foundation wood, hay, stubble;
     that is, if he has heaped over the foundation of his faith worldly
     likings,---yet if Christ be there, so as to have the first place
     in his heart, above all other objects, such are endured, are
     suffered. The furnace shall come, and shall burn the wood, hay, and
     stubble; and 'he shall be saved, yet so as by fire.' This will the
     furnace do; separating off some to the left,---others it will in
     a manner strain off unto the right: but it did not divide the
     birds."---In Ps. civ. Serm. iii. and de Civ. Dei. xvi. 24. vid.
     also, in Ps. vi de Civ. Dei. xx. 2S; xxi. 16, and in Gen. contr.
     Man. ii. 20. fin.

     This is one notion St. Austin had of Purgatory; another was, that it
     would be of a certain duration, in proportion to the sins of each
     individual. Without asserting that this view is plainly inconsistent
     with the former, it fairly may be called a distinct one. The
     following passage will be found to contain it:

     "Some suppose that those who do not renounce the name of Christ, and
     are baptized in his font in the Church, nor are cut off therefrom by
     any schism or heresy, whatever be their crimes, though neither
     washed away by penitence nor ransomed by alms, but persevered in
     obstinately to the last day of life, will yet be saved by fire,
     punished indeed according to the greatest of their excesses and
     wickednesses, but not with eternal fire .. But since those clear and
     positive apostolical testimonies to the contrary (James ii. 14. 17.
     1 Cor. vi. 9, &c.) cannot be false, the former obscure text
     concerning those who build on this foundation, which is Christ, not
     gold, silver, precious stones, but wood, hay, stubble, .... must be
     so explained as not to contradict passages which are clear. Wood,
     then, hay, stubble, may naturally mean such desires of lawful things
     of this world as cannot be forgone without some pain of mind. But
     when that pain burns, if Christ abides in the heart as a foundation,
     so that nothing is preferred to him, and the man who feels the fire
     of that pain, had rather lose the things which he so loves than
     Christ, he is saved through fire. . . . The trial of tribulation is
     a certain fire, of which Scripture speaks plainly in another place.
     ' Earthen vessels are proved by the furnace, and righteous men by
     the trial of tribulation.' That fire fulfils the Apostle's words in
     this life; for instance, should it befall two Christians, one caring
     for the things of God, how he may please God; that is, building upon
     the foundation of Christ, gold, silver, precious stones; the other
     caring for the things of the world, how he may please his wife, that
     is, building on the same foundation wood, hay, stubble; the work of
     the former is not burned away, for he has not loved things, the loss
     of which would distress him; but the other's work is burned
     away, since those things are not lost without suffering which are
     possessed with enjoyment. But since, when an alternative comes, he
     had rather lose them than Christ, nor from apprehension of losing
     such things renounces Christ, though he may feel a pain during the
     loss, yet he is 'saved so as by fire;' for, though the loss of what
     he loved is a burning pain, yet it does not subvert or consume one
     who is secured by the firmness and indestructibility of his
     foundation. Such a suffering too, it is not impossible may happen
     after this life; and it is a fair question, whether it can be
     settled or not; viz. that some Christians, according to their love
     of the perishing goods of this world, attain salvation more slowly
     or speedily through a certain purgatorial fire; not such, however,
     of whom it is said, 'that they shall not inherit the kingdom of
     God,' unless they repent suitably, and gain remission of their
     crimes."---Enchirid. 68. 69. vid. also ad Dulcitium, ÃY
     6---13. de Fide et Operib. ÃY 16.

     In his de Civatate Dei, after speaking (as above noticed) of the
     fire at the judgment, he goes on to change its position in the
     course of the Divine Economy, and places it between death and the
     resurrection; yet, still he observes his hesitating and conjectural
     tone.

     "After the death of the body, until the arrival of that last day of
     condemnation and reward after the resurrection [of the body], should
     it be said that in this interval the spirits of the dead suffer a
     fire, such as they do not feel who had not habits and likings in the
     life of this body, which requires their wood, hay, and stubble to be
     burned up, but they feel who have not carried with them the like
     worldly tabernacles, whether these only, or how and then, or not
     then because here, though they experience the fire of transitory
     tribulation rescuing venial offences from damnation by consuming
     them, I do not oppose, for perchance it is true."

     He then proceeds to speak, as before, of the other senses of the
     word fire, as used in the text, which affords matter for his
     inquiry.

     And now the reader has before him the whole extent of Augustine's
     much-talked of admissions in behalf of Purgatory; and he may see how
     hesitating and incomplete they are. It is remarkable that the
     passages on which Bellarmine chiefly relies, are rejected by the
     Benedictines as not Augustine's; so that Romanists, if they would
     use this celebrated Father in the controversy, must betake
     themselves to such as the two extracts last quoted, in which
     Augustine speaks but doubtfully, and which (it is remarkable)
     Bellarmine introduces, not in his own favour, but on an opponent's
     challenge, to explain, as if from their conjectural tone rather
     making against him. It really would appear, as if in the African
     Church, there had been no advance in definiteness of doctrine in
     this matter since the days of Cyprian; but that what was a
     speculation then, remained as little insisted on or settled when St.
     Austin wrote.

     If it were necessary to add any other evidence, how little the
     Fathers knew on this mysterious subject, I might mention, that in
     one place St. Austin implies that the impenitent are in Purgatory;
     and that St. Jerome seems to say, all baptized persons, however they
     suffer in Purgatory, are eventually saved.

     I have now finished my account of what the early Fathers said about
     Purgatory; but very imperfect justice is done to the subject, till
     the reader is put into possession of those decisive testimonies of
     the Fathers the other way, (that is, in favour of the peace and rest
     of the intermediate state to true believers,) which will reduce the
     opinions already described to a mere conjecture, pious indeed and
     solemnly made, yet received one moment, and abandoned the next.
     Without determining whether the strict wording of the following
     passages be such as necessarily to exclude the doctrine of
     Purgatory, which is a poor way of seeking after what the fact really
     was, simply consider whether persons who practically held that
     doctrine, who kept it simply before them as the whole truth and
     acted upon it, could possibly have written them.
     Cyprian, on occasion of the famous plague of A. D. 252,

     "Let him fear death, who has never been born anew of water and the
     Spirit, and is sold over to the flames of hell; him, who has not
     been given an interest in the cross and passion of Christ; who is to
     pass from temporal to the second death; whose departure from the
     world will be followed by the torments of eternal dame of
     punishment; who by a longer delay gains but a longer respite from
     pangs and groans. Many of our people are dying in this pestilence,
     that is, are delivered from the world; and what is truly a plague to
     Jews, heathen and enemies of Christ, is to God's servants an end
     bringing salvation. That you witness righteous and wicked dying
     together without any distinction of man from man, is no reason for
     your supposing that destruction is common to good and evil; the
     righteous are called to a place of refreshment, the wicked are
     hurried to punishment, shelter is promptly afforded to the
     believing, punishment to infidels. We are undiscerning and
     ungrateful, well beloved brethren, in return for God's benefits, nor
     do we recognize the mercy vouchsafed us. Lo the virgins depart in
     peace safe, and with their glory secured, without the dread of the
     threats, the seductions, and the impurities of approaching
     Anti-Christ; youths escape the perils of their anxious age, and
     happily receive the prize of continence and chastity; the delicate
     matron no more fears the tortures, the fury of persecution, the
     violent hands and the cruelties of the executioner, receiving the
     gain of a speedy death. By fear of the pestilence the lukewarm are
     kindled, the languid are braced, the slothful are roused, deserters
     are driven back, the heathen are constrained to believe; the
     multitude of those who are already believers is called to peace;
     recruits are collected in abundance and with increased strength,
     prepared to fight without fear of death, when the action comes on,
     as having joined in a season when death was busy."---De Mortal.
     9.

     "Our brethren should not cause us sorrow, whom the Lord's call has
     delivered from the world, knowing as we do that they are not lost to
     us but sent before us, they do not recede, but precede: we should
     behave as towards men going a journey or a voyage, regret but not
     deplore them, nor go into mourning for those who have already put on
     white raiment," &c---Ibid. 14.

     "It is not an exit, but a passage, a travelling to things eternal,
     when time has been journeyed through. Who would not hasten to what
     is better?"---Ibid. 15.

     That in this last passage St. Cyprian is speaking of heavenly
     felicity after the resurrection, is certain from the context; but it
     is as plain that he looks upon the intermediate state as the
     beginning of it, or the out-post, which he could not do, unless he
     thought that at least, on the whole, and to the generality, it was a
     state of rest and peace.

     St. Ambrose;

     "Death is in every way a good; because it puts away those principles
     in us which war against each other, and because it is a sort of
     harbour for those who, after tossing on the wide sea of this life,
     seek for an anchorage of secure peace; and because it puts an end to
     the chance of deterioration, but, as it finds a man, in that
     condition it consigns him to the future judgment, and comforts him
     with the rest itself, and withdraws him from such present goods as
     raise envy, and quiets him with the expectation of the
     future."---De Bono Mortis. 4.

     "Unwise persons fear death as the greatest of ills; but the wise
     desire it, as if a rest after toil, and the end of ills."---Ibid.
     8.

     "Relying on these considerations, let us betake ourselves
     courageously to our Redeemer Jesus; courageously to the council of
     Patriarchs, to our father Abraham, when our day shall arrive;
     courageously to that holy assembly and congregation of the just. We
     shall go to our fathers, to our preceptors in the faith, so that,
     though our works fail us, our faith may succour us, our birthright
     plead for us. We shall go where holy Abraham opens his arms to
     receive the poor, as he received Lazarus; where they rest who in
     this life have endured heavy and sharp inflictions ..... We shall go
     to those, who sit down in the kingdom of God with Abraham, Isaac,
     and Jacob, because when asked to supper they did not excuse
     themselves. We shall go thither, where there is a paradise of
     delight, where Adam, who fell among thieves, has forgotten to lament
     his wounds, where too the thief himself rejoices in the fellowship
     of the kingdom of heaven; where are no clouds, where no thunder, no
     lightning, no storm of wind, no darkness, no evening, no summer, no
     winter will vary the seasons. There will be no cold, hail, rain, nor
     the presence of this sun, moon, or stars; but the brightness of
     Light will alone shine forth."---Ibid. 12.

     St. Hilary.

     "The vengeance of hell overtakes us at once; and immediately we
     depart from the body, if we have so lived, we 'perish from the right
     way.' The rich and poor man in the gospel show us this: the one
     placed by angels in the abode of the blessed and in Abraham's bosom,
     the other at once received into the place of punishment. So quickly
     did punishment come upon the dead, that even his brothers were still
     alive. There is no deferring or delaying there. For, as the day of
     judgment is the eternal award either of bliss or punishment, so the
     time of death orders the interval for every man by its own laws,
     committing every one to Abraham or to punishment till the
     judgment."---In Psalm ii. ÃY48.

     Nazianzen thus speaks on the death of his father:---

     "There is but one life, to look forward towards life; and one death,
     even sin, which is the destruction of the soul. Whatever else men
     exult in, is but a vision in sleep in mockery of realities, and a
     phantom seducing the soul. If these be our feelings, O my Mother, we
     shall neither exult in life, nor be much distressed at death. What
     heavy misfortune has befallen us, if we have passed hence to the
     true life, released from meat and drink, from dizzinesses, from
     surfeiting, from base money-getting, and placed amid stable not
     transitory possessions, as lesser flights, circling in festive dance
     round the Great Luminary ?"---Orat. 19 fin.

     Macarius, in answer to the question what shall become of those who
     have two principles, of sin and grace, within them, answers that
     they will go to that place on which their heart is stayed: for

     "The Lord, beholding thy mind, that thou fightest and lovest Him
     with thy whole soul, separateth death from thy soul in one hour,
     (for it is not for him to do so,) and receiveth thee unto His bosom
     and to light. For He snatcheth thee in an hour's turn from the
     mouth of darkness, and forthwith translates thee into His kingdom.
     For to God all things are easy to do in an hour's turn, so that thou
     hast the love of Him."---Hom. 26.

     The hour's space spoken of seems to imply that the hour of death
     would supply the necessary purification of the soul from sin; but,
     whatever it means, the passage is quite irreconcilable with the
     Roman tenet, for the state of the dead is made one of bliss, and
     that "forthwith" upon death. The following passage is to the same
     effect; after saying that the guilty soul is upon death carried away
     by the devil, he proceeds,

     "When they" (the righteous) "depart from the body, the choirs of
     angels receive their souls to their own place, to the pure world,
     and so bring them to the Lord."---Hom. 22.

     St. Jerome;

     "Let the dead be bewailed, but it must be he whom hell receives,
     whom the pit swallows up, for whose punishment the everlasting fire
     is in motion. We, whose departure a crowd of angels accompanies,
     whom Christ goes out to meet, let us rather feel distress, if we
     have longer to dwell in this tabernacle of death, for as long as we
     delay here, we are pilgrims from the Lord."---Ep. 25.

     So much on the theology of the first five hundred years. But it may
     be shown that not even Pope Gregory at the end of that period, held
     the doctrine of Purgatory in the modern Roman form of it. He seems
     to have gone little further than maintain the Greek notion of the
     fire of judgment, as above explained, but, from the circumstance of
     his considering the end of the world close at hand he so expressed
     himself as to give it a different character. Nothing has been more
     common in every age than to think the day of judgment approaching;
     and perhaps it was intended that the Church should ever so suppose.
     Perhaps so to suppose is even a mark of a Christian mind; which at
     least will ever be on its watch-tower to see whether it be coming or
     no, from desire of its Saviour's return. But any how, as at other
     times, so in St. Gregory's case, this expectation prevailed; and, as
     thinking that the end was all but arrived' he seems to have fancied
     that "fire upon earth" was almost "kindled," that last judicial and
     purgatorial trial, which the Greeks and some of the Latins had made
     attendant upon it. If then he speaks of Purgatory in language since
     adopted by Romanism, it was not as intending thereby to sanction the
     idea to which it is appropriated in that theology, viz. that of a
     regular and ordinary system of fiery cleansing in the intermediate
     state; but, because he imagined the world was on the eve and under
     the incipient symptoms of an extraordinary crisis, when the sun was
     to be darkened, and the earth dissolved, and the graves opened, and
     all souls to be judged which were in earth and under the earth. He
     says

     "As, when night is ending and day beginning, before the sun rises
     there is a sort of twilight, while the remains of the departing
     darkness are changing perfectly into the radiance of the day which
     succeeds, so the end of this world is already mingling with the
     commencement of the next, and the very gloom of what remains has
     begun to be illuminated with the incoming of things spiritual."
     ---Dial. iv. 41.

     To the same effect he says:

     "Why is it, I ask, that in these last times so many things begin to
     be clear about souls which before were hidden; so that by open
     revelations and disclosures the age to come seems forcing itself on
     us and to be dawning?"---Ibid. 40.


     Conformably with this view, he considered the pains of Purgatory to
     be diverse and various in their modes and circumstances, in this
     earth as well as under the earth, and consisting in other torments
     as well as those of fire, being but the pangs and shudderings of
     intellectual natures, when their judge was approaching, and
     disclosing themselves in a supernatural agony parallel to that
     trembling of the earth or the failing of the sun, which will precede
     the dissolution of the physical world. Occasion has already been
     taken to speak of the belief in visions and miracles, as occurring
     in attestation of the doctrine, and of the predispositions of the
     popular mind to receive it. The state of the evidence, of the
     popular feeling, and of the doctrine itself, is strikingly set
     before the reader in the following passage of Bishop Jeremy Taylor,
     though perhaps with somewhat less of considerateness in the wording
     of it, than such a subject might bear.

     "The people of the Roman Communion have been principally led into
     belief of Purgatory by their fear, and by their credulity; they have
     been softened and enticed into this belief, by perpetual tales and
     legends, by which they loved to be abused. To this purpose, their
     priests and friars have made great use of the apparition of St.
     Jerome, after death, to Eusebius, commanding him to lay his sack
     upon the corpse of three dead men, that they, arising from death,
     might confess Purgatory, which formerly they had denied. The story
     is written in an epistle imputed to St. Cyril; but the ill luck of
     it was, that St. Jerome outlived St. Cyril, and wrote his life, and
     so confuted that story; but all is one for that, they believe it
     nevertheless; but these are enough to help it out; and if they be
     not firmly true, yet, if they be firmly believed, all is well
     enough. In the Speculum Exemplorum it is said, that a certain
     priest, in an ecstacy, saw the soul of Constantinus Turritanus in
     the eaves of his house, tormented with frosts and cold rains, and
     afterwards climbing up to heaven upon a shining pillar. And a
     certain monk saw some souls roasted upon spits, like pigs, and some
     devils basting them with scalding lard; but a while after, they were
     carried to a cool place, and so proved Purgatory. But Bishop
     Theobald standing upon a piece of ice to cool his feet, was nearer
     Purgatory than he was aware, and was convinced of it, when he heard
     a poor soul telling him, that under that ice he was tormented: and
     that he should be delivered if for thirty days continual he would
     say for him thirty masses. And some such thing was seen by Conrade
     and Udelric in a pool of water; for the place of Purgatory was not
     yet resolved on, till St. Patrick had the key of it delivered to
     him; which, when one Nicholas borrowed of him, he saw as strange and
     true things there, as ever Virgil dreamed of in his Purgatory, or
     Cicero in his dream of Scipio, or Plato in his Gorgias, or Phaedo,
     who indeed are the surest authors to prove Purgatory. But, because
     to preach false stories was forbidden by the Council of Trent, there
     are yet remaining more certain arguments, even revelations made by
     angels, and the testimony of St. Odilio himself, who heard the devil
     complain .... that the souls of dead men were daily snatched out of
     his hands, by the alms and prayers of the living; and the sister of
     St. Damianus being too much pleased with hearing of a piper, told
     her brother, that she was to be tormented for fifteen days in
     Purgatory.

     "We do not think that the wise men in the Church of Rome believe
     these narratives; for, if they did, they were not wise; but this we
     know, that by such stories the people were brought into a belief of
     it, and having served their turn of them, the master builders used
     them as false arches and centries, taking them away when the parts
     of the building were made firm and stable by authority. But even the
     better sort of them do believe them; or else they do worse, for they
     urge and cite the Dialogues of St. Gregory, &c."---Dissuasive
     from Popery, part i. ch. i. ÃY 4.

     Yet not even after Pope Gregory's times was the doctrine
     unhesitatingly received. Ussher (Answer ch. vi.) quotes the words of
     the Council of Aix la Chapelle in Charlemagne's time, near 250 years
     after Gregory, to the effect that there are "three ways in which
     sins are punished; two in this life, and the third in the life to
     come; that of the former one is the punishment with which the
     sinner, God inspiring, by penitence, takes vengeance on himself, the
     other the punishment which ALMIGHTY GOD indicts; and that the third
     is that of everlasting fire. He also quotes the author of the tracts
     de Vanitate Saeculi, and de Rectitudine Catholicae Conversationis,
     wrongly ascribed to St Austin; the former of which says, "Know that
     when the soul is separated from the body, presently it is either
     placed in paradise for its good works, or plunged into the bottom of
     hell for its sins;" and the latter, "The departing soul, which is
     invisible to eyes of flesh, is received by the angels, and placed
     either in Abraham's bosom, if it be faithful, or, if a sinner, in
     the keeping of the prison beneath, till the appointed day arrive for
     it to receive its own body again and give account of its works
     before the judgment seat of CHRIST, the true Judge."Even in the days
     of Otto Frisingensis, A. D. 1146, the doctrine of Purgatory was
     considered but a private opinion, not an article of faith
     universally received; for he writes, "Some affirm there is in the
     unseen state a place of Purgatory, in which those who are to be
     saved are either troubled with darkness only, or are refined by the
     fire of expiation."

     However, without entering further into the history of the gradual
     reception of the doctrine, which, if the circumstances of its rise
     be clear, is unnecessary, even could it be given, I conclude this
     head of the subject with one or two 'avowals on the part of
     Romanists confirmatory of what has been said. As to the text of
     Scripture, we have the candid admission of the celebrated M.
     Trevern, present Bishop of Strasburgh, that it is silent as regards
     this doctrine, at least so Mr. Faber understands him.

     "Instead of vainly labouring to establish the doctrine on some one
     or two misinterpreted texts of the New Testament, he fairly and
     honestly confesses, that we have received no revelation concerning
     it from JESUS CHRIST. Hence he judiciously wastes not his time in
     adducing passages of Holy Writ, which are altogether irrelevant. '
     Had it been necessary for us, says he, 'to be instructed in such
     questions, JESUS would doubtless have revealed the knowledge of
     them. He has not done so. We can, therefore, only form conjectures
     on the subject more or less probable."'

     It seems then the doctrine is not taught in Scripture. The silence
     of Antiquity concerning it is avowed by Fisher, Bishop of Rochester,
     Alphonsus a de Castro, and Polydore Virgil.

     Of these the celebrated Cardinal Fisher speaks as follows:

     "It weighs perhaps with many, that we lay such stress upon
     indulgences, which are apparently of but recent usage in the Church,
     not being found among Christians till a very late date. I answer,
     that it is not clear from whom the tradition of them originated.
     They are said not to be without precedent among the Romans from the
     most ancient times; as may be understood from the numerous stations
     in that city. Moreover Gregory the First is said to have granted
     some in his own time. We all indeed are aware, that by means of the
     acumen of later times many things both from the Gospels and the
     other Scriptures are now more clearly developed and more exactly
     understood than they once were; whether it was that the ice was not
     yet broken by the ancients, and their times were unequal to the task
     of accurately sounding the open sea of Scripture, or that it will
     ever be possible in so extensive a field, let the reapers be ever so
     skilful, to glean somewhat after them. For there are even now a
     great number of obscure passages in the Gospel, which I doubt not
     posterity will understand much better. Why should we despair of it
     when the Gospel is given for this very purpose) to be understood
     thoroughly and exactly? Seeing then that the love of CHRIST towards
     His Church continues not less strong now than before, nor His power
     less, and that the Holy Ghost is her perpetual guardian and
     restorer, whose gifts flow into her as unceasingly and abundantly as
     from the beginning, who can question that the minds of posterity
     will be enlightened unto the clear knowledge of those things which
     remain still unknown in the Gospel?"

     After a sentence or two he adds:

     "Whoever reads the commentaries of the ancient Greeks, will find no
     mention, as far as I see, or the slightest possible concerning
     Purgatory. Nay, even the Latins did not all at once, but only
     gradually enter into the truth of this matter ..... For a while it
     was unknown, at a late date it was known, to the Church Universal.
     Then it was believed by some, by little and little, partly from
     Scripture, partly from revelations."---Assert. Luther Confutat.
     18.

     It will be observed how accurately Bishop Fisher's words bear out,
     as far as they go, our foregoing account. First, he candidly gives
     up the Greek Church, and almost gives up the Latin. He says it was
     gradually introduced, that at length it became universal. What can
     we desire more in disproof of the Roman doctrine? He implies too,
     that the doctrine, though not suggested by the plain text of
     Scripture, was recommended by it, when once suggested in whatever
     way; as if what it did,was just what has been above supposed, viz.
     bring out; in a touching way a certain possible deep sense which the
     sacred text could not be said to teach but might contain; else why
     should it be understood only after a long delay? Further, he
     illustrates and confirms what has above been observed, that the
     Church of Rome, relying on its supposed gift of enunciating the
     truth, cares not to prove its doctrines ancient, and rather
     interprets the Fathers by its present teaching than thinks it
     necessary to depend upon them. And lastly, he is a witness that, as
     far as Rome has cared to argue in this matter, she has rested the
     doctrine on revelations;---a true and honest account of the
     matter of fact, but decidedly opposed to the more accurate, though
     inapplicable, theory established after his death at Trent, which is
     this, that the revelation was concluded once for all in the
     Apostles, that all that the Church does is to discriminate and
     define their doctrine, and that he is Anathema, though an angel from
     heaven, who adds to it. "That alone is matter of faith," says
     Bellarmine, "which is revealed by GOD either mediately or
     immediately; but divine revelations are partly written, partly
     unwritten. The decrees of Councils, and Popes, and the consent of
     Doctors, . . . then only make a doctrine an article of faith, when
     they explain the Word of God or deduce any thing from it."

     Polydore Virgil appeals to Fisher's statement as above given, and
     adds, "Moreover by the Greeks, even to this day, the doctrine is not
     believed." Alphonsus de Castro says, "Concerning Purgatory there is
     scarcely any mention, especially among the Greek writers; for which
     reason, even to this day, it is not believed by the Greeks."

     Lastly, the following is the avowal of the Benedictine Editor of St.
     Ambrose's Works in his preface to the de Bono Mortis, on certain
     passages concerning the state of the dead, some of which have been
     above extracted in the course of these remarks.

     "If we interpret the words of our author strictly and literally, we
     must plainly confess that in his judgm'ent souls are kept shut up in
     certain dwellings, till the general resurrection:, and there wait
     the award due to their deeds, which will not however be paid them
     before the last day; meanwhile that they are visited with some good
     or punishment, according as each of them has deserved. Lastly, the
     joy of the righteous is dispensed according to certain ranks.

     "It is not surprising that Ambrose should have written in this way
     concerning the state of souls; but what might seem almost
     incredible, is, the uncertainty and inconsistency of the Holy
     Fathers on the subject from the very times of the Apostles down to
     the Pontificate of Gregory XI., and the Council of Florence, that
     is, for nearly the whole of fourteen centuries. For, not only do
     they differ one from the other, as commonly happens in such
     questions not yet defined by the Church, but they are not even
     consistent with themselves, sometimes appearing to grant that those
     souls enjoy the clear sight of the divine nature, of which at other
     times they deprive them."

                        ÃY 4. THE COUNCIL OF FLORENCE.

     It remains to give a brief notice of the Council of Florence by
     which the doctrine of Purgatory was first made an article of faith.
     With it I shall bring this paper to an end.

     The Council of Constance, which had been summoned principally with a
     view to the reformation of the clergy, terminated in April 1418,
     without having taken any effectual measures for their object. Five
     years afterwards the remonstrance which the existing state of things
     occasioned, obliged the then Pope Martin V. to summon another,
     which, in consequence of his sudden death, eventually opened at
     Basle, 23d of July, 1431, in the pontificate of Eugenius, under the
     presidency of Cardinal Julian Caesarini. Basle, as being across the
     Alps, was removed from the influence of the Roman see; and the
     Fathers assembled at once applied themselves to determine a.
     question, which had already been agitated at Constance, the
     superiority, viz. of a General Council to the Pope. They passed a
     decree that the jurisdiction of the representatives of the Church
     Catholic in Council Assembled was supreme and universal, and that
     they could not be dissolved, prorogued or transferred without their
     own consent. They proceeded to summon, threaten and censure
     Eugenius; and at length when he. resisted their proceedings, they
     suspended him from all his powers unless he submitted to them within
     60 days. In these acts they were supported by the Emperor and other
     chief powers of Europe, as well as by the clergy; and the Pope was
     forced to submit.

     They next attempted to reconcile the Greeks to the Latin Church. At
     this time Constantinople was much pressed by the Turkish arms; and
     the Emperor John Palaeologus, the second of that name, after the
     example of his father, hoped by holding out the prospect of a union
     of the Churches to gain succours from the West. The Fathers of Basle
     invited: him to attend their meeting with the Patriarch and other
     chief ecclesiastics of his division of Christendom; but, on his
     objecting to a journey across the Alps, an opening was afforded to
     Eugenius, who was not slow to avail himself of it, to propose to the
     Greeks to transfer the seat of the Council from the Rhine to Italy.
     In spite of the opposition of the Fathers at Basle, Eugenius was
     successful in his overtures. The Greek Emperor and ecclesiastics
     accepted the place of meeting which he proposed, which was Ferrara,
     and proceeded thither, that is, besides Palaeologus himself, the
     Patriarch, and twenty chief bishops, among whom were the
     metropolitans of Heraclea, Cyzicus, Nice, Nicomedia, Ephesus, and
     Trebizond; representatives also attended from Alexandria, Antioch,
     and Jerusalem; and the Primate of Russia. Such were the members of
     the Greek Church present at this Council, who, however, high in
     station as they were, evidently were too few to express the voice of
     the East. It is well known that on the ancient principle of
     Councils, decisions were made not by authority, but by the
     independent and concordant testimony of all the Bishops of
     Christendom, or what was virtually all, to the doctrines declared.
     On the side of the Latins there were but five archbishops, eighteen
     bishops, and ten abbots, the greater part of whom were subjects or
     countrymen of the Pope. This scanty representation however of the
     Latin Church received, as it happened, a considerable reinforcement
     from Basle; for a reaction taking place there in the Pope's favour,
     some chief members of the rival Council coming over to him, the
     whole number of subscribers which he at last obtained to the
     synodical decree amounted to eight cardinals, two patriarchs, eight
     archbishops, fifty-two bishops, and forty-five abbots. After all,
     however, these are at first sight scarcely to be considered
     representatives of the whole of Christendom; yet such was the
     composition of the assembly, known in history as the Council of
     Florence, (whither a plague had driven it from Ferrara) which
     established the doctrine of Purgatory.

     This is a sketch of its external history: but the point to be
     considered is the part taken by the Greeks in its proceedings. At
     the first glance here is this circumstance, almost in itself
     decisive against its authority, that the Greeks were actuated by
     motives of interest and at least by the influence and the presence
     of a Sovereign. Were they in number fifty times as many, they would
     not have appeared in Italy at all, had not the Ottomans been at the
     gates of Constantinople. Next they were unprotected in a strange
     country, depending even for their daily food on the bounty of those
     who were bent upon the reconciliation of the Churches; and they were
     detained by delays which, whether necessary or not, were sufficient
     to alarm them, and to make them impatient to bring their dispute to
     a termination. After the first session of the Council at Ferrara,
     the public proceedings were adjourned about six months. The Greek
     ecclesiastics were allowed each three or four gold florins a month;
     at one time there was an arrear of four months in the payment, at
     another of three, and at the time of their agreeing to unite with
     the Latins of five and a half. Besides, even had they the means,
     their withdrawal from the Council was absolutely forbidden:
     passports were required at the gates of Ferrara, the Venetian
     Government had engaged to intercept all fugitives, and civil
     punishment awaited them at Constantinople. Their condition is
     vividly described by Syropulus or Sguropulus, the ecclesiarch or
     preacher, who was present at the Council as one of the Patriarch's
     five attendants, and whose history of its proceedings is extant.
     Some extracts shall be introduced from his work; which, besides
     proving what I have said about the position of the Greeks, will
     introduce us in particular to the course taken in their discussions
     on the subject of Purgatory. There were four points of difference
     between the Churches: the use of leaven in the Eucharistic bread,
     the supremacy of the Pope, the nature of Purgatory, and the double
     procession of the Holy Ghost. Concerning the subject which alone
     here concerns us, Syropulus says,

     "At our fourth meeting the bishop of Ephesus said, 'In our last
     meeting, venerable Fathers, you laid before us four heads for
     discussion, out of which we might take our choice .... Julian (the
     legate of Eugenius at Basle) said .... it seems to us best, to treat
     first of the purgatorial fire, that our own minds may be cleared by
     the discussion. Let us then now dispute upon this subject. The
     Bishop of Ephesus answered, Be it so as you have decided; but tell
     us first whence has your Church her traditions about it, and when
     did she receive and profess it, and what is her exact doctrine on
     the subject. These inquiries will help us forward. This was agreed
     to and we separated.

     "'Meanwhile our allowance of provisions was demanded but not given
     us. Though we made frequent demands on account of our need, it was
     not given, until we came into the proposed conditions. When we had
     come round, we received the second monthly allowance on the 12th of
     May.

     "'While we were so circumstanced, serious news kept coming that
     Amurath was preparing an attack upon Constantinople. The Venetians
     sent the despatches to our Emperor and the Patriarch; afterwards
     came letters from the City itself, intimating the same, and begging
     them to do their utmost to gain succours. On hearing this we were
     sadly afflicted, were sick of life, prayed to God for help, took it
     to heart, and with groans and tears begged for some escape from so
     great a calamity .... The Emperor had much talk with the Cardinals
     on this subject, and made representations through them to the Pope.
     We, indignant at their unbecoming conduct, betook ourselves to such
     private friends as we might have among them. When some of us had
     intreated in this way brother Ambrose, he said to them, 'Be not out
     of heart, hut do your utmost to bring about a union, and then we
     shall make great preparations, and will send a formidable force to
     Constantinople.'

     "'Meanwhile some of our company said, that if a subscription for
     raising forces was proposed to our Archbishops, they would be ready
     according to their power. The Emperor catching at this, immediately
     went to the Patriarch, and called us all together, and made us a
     speech concerning contribution, saying that he himself had set the
     pattern by borrowing money to fit out a vessel of his own, that he
     felt Confident the Pope would send some also, and that it was a duty
     in the case of those who had the means to be liberal in the service
     of their country. To this the principal Archbishops made answer,
     that were they in Constantinople, they would contribute even more
     than they could well afford; but, being at present in a foreign
     land, and not knowing what was coming upon them, they felt it
     necessary to keep what they had, even supposing some among them had
     any thing left;.....however, under the necessity, they would each
     give something. Accordingly four of them promised 50 aspers apiece.

     "'The Bishop of Nicea (the celebrated Bessarion) said, 'I have no
     ducats, but I have three urns, of which I will contribute two.' The
     Bishop also who came next said, 'I have no ducats, but I have two
     woollen cloaks, and I give one of them.' The Emperor on hearing as
     far as this, gave up the attempt as vain, for he had reckoned that
     the Archbishops together might have almost fitted out one vessel
     ....'

     "In the fifth meeting, Julian began to discuss the subject of
     Purgatory, and said that the Roman Church, even from the very first
     had received and held this doctrine, from the time of the Holy
     Apostles, receiving it from St. Peter and St. Paul, ..... and then
     from the Doctors of the Church who succeeded them."

     To complete the imbecility of the Greek party, they were at variance
     with each other, Bessarion of Nicea inclining to the Latins, Gregory
     the Penitentiary taking either side as it happened, and both
     opposing Mark of Ephesus, the resolute defender of the Greek
     doctrines. The Latins having put their argument on paper, the Greeks
     had to do the same, and the Emperor commanded Mark to draw it up,
     who declined the office, unless it was understood that what he
     should present would be accepted. The following childlish scene
     ensued, which is here introduced merely to show that the Greek cause
     was not fairly represented in that Council, since it was in the
     hands, as will be seen, of two rival Bishops and an Emperor as
     umpire, and not as if to imply that a Council must be composed of
     none but superior men in order to come to a right conclusion.

     "It appeared proper that some among ourselves should stay with the
     Bishop of Ephesus, and that the paper should be drawn in our
     presence and hearing, and with our assistance, if it happened to be
     needed. Accordingly the Bishop of Nicea, the great Ecclesiarch" (the
     writer) "Gregory the Penitentiary, the Secretary of the Holy
     Consistory, met him. The Bishop of Nicea began to converse
     carelessly, and to digress into a variety of subjects. The
     Penitentiary followed, and rivalled him in the irrelevancy of his
     discourse. They took up each other, and emulated each other in
     wasting time on trifles and impertinences.I at intervals begged them
     to spare words and attend to the writing, but they persisted; when
     good part of the day was thus wasted, the Bishop of Ephesus said,
     'At this rate I shall not be able to write a word: leave me with the
     Secretary of the Consistory and I will draw up something. Afterwards
     you shall look over it, and correct any thing that is amiss?' On
     this we left the room. Then the Bishop of Ephesus began to write;
     but the Bishop of Nicea did the same, at the suggestion of the
     Penitentiary, who praised what he drew up to the Emperor, and wished
     him to send it to the Latins, as more striking in style, and more
     eloquent. At his command both compositions were brought to him and
     read in the presence of select judges. Then the Emperor said to the
     Bishop of Ephesus, 'Your composition is good; it has many strong
     points. But it has some things too which will give advantage to the
     Latins, such as the story of St. Macarius asking the skull (of an
     idolator) and receiving an answer; for you can bring no
     unexceptionable testimony to this, and they will at once put it
     aside, and some other arguments also. Better let alone what can be
     easily met, and urge a little and strong than a parade of arguments,
     some of which may be easily overset, for your opponent will fix on
     your weak points, and if he masters you on one or two, he will
     appear to the many, or rather he will be heralded forth as having
     defeated you altogether. Therefore put out these passages.' ....Then
     turning to the Bishop of Nicea, he remarked, 'You too have your own
     faults, you begin by saying, 'O men of Latium;' this is unsuitable.
     It is more becoming to say, 'Venerable Fathers,' or something of the
     same respectful and acceptable nature; you have other mistakes too.'
     He ended by saying that the proem and previous statements of the
     Bishop of Nicea were the better, but the course of the argument, the
     proofs, and collateral remarks stronger in the paper of the Bishop
     of Ephesus; and that it seemed advisable to take the commencement of
     the former, and any other serviceable passages, and the body of the
     latter." . . . .

     The reply thus compounded by two men of discordant sentiments was
     submitted to the Latins, and an answer drawn up to it in due form. A
     reply followed, and the discussion became animated.

     "Meanwhile in private conversations the Latins begged the Bishop of
     Ephesus to propound plainly the doctrine which our Church holds
     concerning souls departed hence. But he did not state it, being
     hindered by the Emperor. And in proportion as they perceived him
     resisting, and not wishing to set forth our Church doctrine on the
     matter, so much the more did they press him, and intreat him, and
     remonstrate with him, and asked what he meant by his reserve, saying
     that every regular member of any Church was bound, when asked what
     was the Church's view on any question, at once to give it without
     hesitation or ambiguity. But the Bishop had his mouth stopped by the
     royal command."

     John, a Spanish Bishop, then entered into a discussion with the
     Bishop of Ephesus with great dialectic skill, and Bessarion deserted
     to the Latins; at length, however the Emperor consented to Mark's
     speaking out' and he put the Latins into full possession of the
     Greek notions on the subject of Purgatory. The next sentences run as
     follows:---

     "Our allowance was expended, and nothing more was given us in spite
     of our frequent demands: but, when we yielded to their demand and
     told them our Church's opinion on the question in discussion, then
     they gave us three months' allowance on the 30th of June, 689
     florins." 5. ÃY. 18.

     This was all that passed on the subject of Purgatory, before the
     final decree, which, as in other points, so in this, was overruled
     by the determination of the Latins and the need of the Emperor. But
     here let me instance another hardship inflicted on the Greeks, for
     which I have already prepared the reader.

     "We sat down in sorrow, not only because of existing and expected
     perils, but for the loss of our liberty, for we were shut up as
     slaves. And when three months and more were passed, and all were
     indignant at our dependence upon strangers, the straits we were in,
     and our want of provision, ..... three clerics, under the spur of
     necessity, found an escape....... But the Patriarch learning it, and
     being indignant at it, wrote at once to the Doge of Venice, who
     found out the men and sent them to him."

     After many months discomfort from the causes that have been
     enumerated, the Greeks came to an understanding with the Latins:
     indeed, from the first, they had very little trust or attachment to
     their view. Their doctrine is said to have been, that the souls of
     imperfect Christians went to a place of darkness and sadness, where
     they were for some time in affliction and deprived of the light of
     God's countenance, in which state they were benefited by Eucharistic
     offerings and by alms; to this the Latins wished to add, that souls
     without stain enter at once into heavenly glory, while those who
     have repented of sin but have not had time to complete the necessary
     penance, are consigned for a longer or shorter time to purgatorial
     fire. This was the difference between the Churches, and they
     compromised the matter thus: the Latins did not press the doctrine
     of fire, and the Greeks gave up---not a word, but a
     truth,---they allowed, contrary to the belief with which they had
     come to the Council, that those who are not in Purgatory are
     immediately beatified, and enjoy the sight of God.

     It may be objected, and readily admitted, that the narrative of
     which the above are extracts, is drawn up by a writer unfriendly and
     unfair to the Latins. But it would seem to prove as much as this,
     viz. what was the popular view in Greece on the subject of these
     discussions and their termination, immediately upon it

     A high ecclesiastic, as Syropulus was, would hardly have ventured to
     have set himself against a recent and solemn act of his own Church
     sanctioned by the Court, unless he had had a strong feeling with
     him. The very fact of his opposition proves that the conduct of the
     Greeks at Florence was but the act of a party at most in the Church;
     while the line of the history, their sufferings and compelled
     decision, is too clearly guaranteed to us as true by the known
     circumstances of the case. But we need not thus painfully deduce the
     real dissatisfaction of the Greek Church with the articles imposed
     upon its delegates at Florence. On their return home, they had to
     encounter so general an indignation and resentment at their conduct,
     that they were obliged at once to recant and confess their weakness,
     and throw themselves on the mercy of their brethren. Mark of Ephesus
     had not signed the decree, and became a rallying point for all who
     held by the popular religion; while the successor of the Patriarch
     was deserted even by his cross-bearers, and presided in an empty
     Cathedral. The feeling spread north and south; the patriarchs of
     Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem assembled a numerous Council, and
     disowned the acts of their representatives in Italy; and Isidore,
     the Primate of Russia, on returning to his country, was synodically
     condemned and imprisoned in a monastery.

     Again, it may be objected that the great article of difference
     between Greeks and Latins was the question of the procession, not
     that of Purgatory, and after all, that the real point of repulsion
     between them lay in national jealousies; whereas they agreed
     together, as the Council shows, or at least with the slightest
     difference, on the question in which we are concerned, while the
     subsequent resentment of the Greeks at home had little or no
     reference to it; and that their agreement under such circumstances
     was only the more remarkable. It may be replied, that the object of
     the foregoing account has been to shew that the Greeks at Florence
     were not trustworthy, that they had neither the ease of
     circumstances, the learning, or the composure of mind to be
     witnesses of the traditionary and universal doctrine of their
     Churches. If this is proved by after circumstances, by the popular
     indignation as regards one doctrine, it takes all credit from their
     testimony as regards another. Moreover as regards the doctrine of
     Purgatory, they did not agree with the Latins in an important point,
     yet that point they gave up to them; most unfaithfully, considering
     them as stewards of Gospel truth; and, had they discerned the
     bearings of the Latin doctrine, which doubtless they did not, most
     treacherously. They admitted, against the national belief, the
     beatification of souls under specific circumstances, before the
     judgment, and in so doing they admitted practically almost as: much,
     as if they had subscribed to the doctrine of purgatorial fire. For,
     as the mention of fire on the; one hand is definite, and ascertains
     Purgatory to be strictly a place of punishment, which the general
     expressions of the Greeks did not strictly imply, so in like manner
     to separate off from it all the perfected saints, and transfer them
     to a better and heavenly state, does in effect sink it, by the
     contrast, to a place of privation and suffering. The presence of the
     souls of all saints, (to speak in general terms, that is, not to
     include the Martyrs whom the early Church has excepted) in Hades,
     Paradise, or Abraham's bosom, or by whatever other name we designate
     the Intermediate State, is our guarantee for the substantial
     blessedness of that State. We cannot spare the higher Saints from
     Paradise, in that they are our pledges for its heavenly character in
     the case of all believers. Thus as regards their own doctrine, the
     Greeks made most important admissions to the Latins, for making
     which they had no warrant, and therefore cannot be considered of
     authority in witnessing a Purgatory at all, any more than in the
     account they gave of it.

     And with these remarks shall terminate a discussion, which has
     extended far beyond the limits which were originally proposed by the
     writer.

     OXFORD.

     The Feast of the Annunciation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
