   A
   SHORT ADDRESS TO HIS BRETHREN
   ON THE
   NATURE AND CONSTITUTION
   OF
   THE CHURCH OF CHRIST,
   AND OF
   THE BRANCH OF IT ESTABLISHED IN ENGLAND.

                                BY A LAYMAN.

                                 [Number 5]
     __________________________________________________________________

          I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church. NIC. CREED.
     __________________________________________________________________

     THERE are many persons who have the happiness of being members of
     that pure and Apostolical branch of Christ's holy Church,
     which, as it is established in this our country, we call " the
     Church of England;" persons who attend with regularity and devotion
     to her services, and have participated in the benefits of her
     Sacraments; who may yet have no very clear idea either of the nature
     of that body which we call " the Church" in general, or of the
     peculiar circumstances and events which have led to the present
     position and constitution of that portion of it to which we belong.

     To such persons it may not be unacceptable if we present them in
     these pages with a short account of "the Church;" of that
     institution which, previous to His return to the regions of His
     heavenly glory, our Lord bequeathed to the world, to be cherished
     and enjoyed as a precious legacy, until His coming again; of that
     body which He framed for the reception of the first gifts of His
     Almighty Spirit, and for the transmission of those precious gifts
     from age to age, to the end of time. Such an account will naturally
     lead to a brief statement of the manner in which it has pleased
     Providence to bless us, in this our own island, with a branch of
     that holy institution; and thus to have established, and to continue
     among us, a body of men bearing a commission direct from Himself, to
     admit us into His fold by the waters of Baptism, and to nourish us
     in the same, not only with the pure word of His doctrine, but with
     the spiritual nourishment of His most blessed Body and Blood.

     It would have been in vain that the two Sacraments had been
     instituted, had no persons, no set of men, been appointed to ad
     minister them. You cannot suppose that you or I, (for he who thus
     addresses you is a layman like yourselves, that is, has never
     received the ordination of a clergyman,) you cannot, I say, suppose
     that any one of us might, with no other authority than his own good
     pleasure, proceed to baptize, or to administer the bread and wine in
     the Lord's Supper. Such a proceeding would, it is evident,
     involve the highest degree of arrogance and impiety, and would be
     nothing short of a mockery of that great and awful Being, of whose
     gifts these sacred ordinances are alike the appointed means and
     pledges.

     And if, as men, simple members of Christ's Church, we have not
     this power, the next question to ask is, Who could give us this
     authority? If admitted into the great Christian Congregation, if the
     promise, confirmed to us in Baptism, of the assistance of
     Christ's Holy Spirit, cannot give it, is it to be supposed that
     any act emanating from men, from sinful creatures like ourselves,
     should be of force to convey it? Clearly not; no command of an
     earthly king, no ordinance of an earthly legislature, could invest
     us with power over the gifts of the Holy Ghost; for such may we well
     term the power duly to administer the Sacraments which Christ has
     ordained. No Act of Parliament, however binding the provisions of
     such Acts may be with regard to the temporal affairs of the nation,
     could make any one of us a Priest, or clothe us with one jot or one
     tittle of power over the things of the unseen world.

     As little, surely, could popular election invest us with this power
     from on high. Men may express their readiness to receive the gifts
     of Heaven at our hands; but is it not absurd that those who are to
     be the receivers from us of any boon whatsoever, should themselves
     be the persons to supply us with the means of bestowing it? It
     cannot be, then, that those to whom we are to administer the
     sacraments should themselves confer upon us the power of their
     ministration.

     To cut this inquiry short, He alone is evidently entitled to confer
     the power of conveying, by the appointed means, the gifts of His
     Spirit, who Himself gave, in the first instance, that Spirit to His
     Church. It is to Him that such commission must be traced in the case
     of every individual who would establish his right to this holy
     office.

     He appointed in the first place, as is well known to every reader of
     the Scriptures, the Apostles; to whom He at different periods
     entrusted all such powers as were necessary to the formation and
     continued protection of His Church, which they, under His Spirit,
     were to establish. He gave them the power of admitting members into
     it: and He put into their hands that power of expulsion from it,
     which it was necessary, for the well being of the society, should be
     vested somewhere: assuring them, at the same time, that their
     decrees in this respect should be ratified on high; that what they
     "bound on earth, should be bound in heaven." To them it was that he
     entrusted the power of baptizing all nations; and still more
     emphatically the power of celebrating the sacred rite which
     commemorates His passion. They undertook the sacred trust, preached
     to all, and at first baptized all converts; though, when the number
     of these increased, when the Church could reckon its three thousand
     and its five thousand members, and when thus, to borrow the
     prophetic language of Daniel, the stone began to swell which was
     destined in time to become a great mountain, and to fill the whole
     world, it was plainly impossible that the small band of Apostles,
     employed as they were in the business of teaching the word, should
     suffice themselves to baptize all who should accept their offers of
     salvation. For this, among other purposes, the formation of a class
     of ministers, distinct from, and subordinate to, themselves, became
     necessary; a class, of thc first establishment of which we read in
     the 6th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. The members of this new
     class were called " Deacons:" they were at first only seven in
     number: they were chosen, at the suggestion of the Apostles, by the
     believers in general, or, in the language of the Church, by the
     laity; but they were ordained to the office by the Apostles
     themselves, by the laying of their hands on them, accompanied by
     prayer. A principal part of their office, when they were first
     appointed, was the distribution of the charitable gifts of the more
     wealthy believers among their poorer brethren: but that the power of
     administering baptism was a part of their commission is evident from
     the history of Philip the Deacon, contained in Acts viii. There were
     thus two classes of guides and teachers to the Church of Christ,
     Apostles and Deacons; the first bearing authority over the general
     flock by the direct word of Christ Himself; the second by commission
     from those thus directly authorized; a commission given by them when
     the Holy Spirit was most abundantly poured out upon them, and
     solemnly ratified by that Holy Spirit Himself in the miraculous
     powers and graces vouchsafed to Stephen and his colleagues.

     But as the limits of the Church began to extend, and the believers,
     instead of dwelling in one body in the city of Jerusalem, began to
     spread over the adjoining regions, the want was felt of another
     class, to superintend the scattered divisions of Christ's
     flock, to act in some measure as the substitutes of the Apostles in
     their absence, and as their deputies and subordinate officers in
     their presence. This class, of higher rank in the Church than the
     Deacons, and forming a connecting link between them and the
     Apostles, in Scripture the name of "Elders" or "Bishops," and is, by
     one or other of these names, the subject of frequent mention in the
     later books of the New Testament. The constitution of the Church was
     then, for the time being, complete. The Apostles, as, in the
     exercise of their high office, they founded congregations from city
     to city, ordained (always by the laying on of hands) Elders and
     Deacons; in whom each congregation recognised the ministers set over
     them by their Lord and Master in heaven: from whom they received the
     blessings conveyed in His Sacraments; and to whom they looked for
     guidance and example in the holy course on which they had entered,
     the Christian warfare which they had undertaken. The Apostle
     himself, however, who had planted each of these congregations,
     continued to exercise over it a general superintending authority,
     and to interfere, where the case required it, in the most solemn and
     decided manner. The nature and extent of the power thus assumed over
     each local Church, in virtue of his heavenly commission, by its
     Apostolic head, will be manifest from a study of the two Epistles
     written by St. Paul to the Church of the Corinthians; and from a
     comparison of the second of these Epistles with the first, it will
     be seen how fully this authority was recognised, and the directions
     thus sanctioned were obeyed, by the primitive believers.

     It may not be amiss here to point out a circumstance from which we
     may most decidedly infer it to have been the will of the Holy Spirit
     that ordination, or the solemn ceremony above mentioned, of the
     laying on of hands, should be the only mode of admission to the
     ministration of His gifts in the Church. Were there any one person
     who might, from the very peculiar circumstances of his call and
     conversion, have grounds for conceiving himself entitled to dispense
     with this ceremony, that person was undoubtedly St. Paul; yet we
     find that, favoured as he had been, when it was seen meet to send
     him as an Apostle to the Gentiles, the Holy Ghost deigned to give
     express directions that he should be separated for the purpose;
     ordained, that is to say, to such ministry; and that in compliance
     with those directions, the heads of the Church at Antioch, when they
     had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, sent him and
     Barnabas away.

     The Church, under the government of its Apostles, Elders, and
     Deacons, was, as we have already stated, for the time being,
     complete. One thing, however, was still wanting to give perpetuity
     to its constitution, and that was, a provision for the supply of
     ordained ministers to distribute the gifts of the Spirit to the
     generations who should live when the Apostles themselves, and those
     who had received ordination from their hands, should have alike
     passed away from the scene of their labours. It was necessary that
     the Apostles should appoint successors to themselves; persons to be
     armed with at least all that portion of their authority which did
     not depend on their miraculous powers, or extraordinary gifts of the
     Spirit; with neither of which was the power of ordination to any
     rank of the ministry necessarily connected. They felt this
     necessity, and they did appoint such persons; but from the altered
     condition of the Church, and the number of converts in each
     particular place, it became expedient, instead of giving to each
     person so appointed that species of general commission with which
     the Apostles themselves had commenced their labours, to fix the
     residence of each in some particular city, and to give him the
     peculiar superintendence of the Church therein, and in the districts
     adjoining. It was thus that St. Paul appointed Timothy to preside,
     as (what we now call) Bishop, over the Church at Ephesus; and Titus
     over that of Crete: and the Holy Spirit, by dictating to the Apostle
     those directions to them for the discharge of the duties of these
     offices which form the Epistles bearing their names, gave the
     fullest and most solemn ratification, not only to their individual
     appointment, but also to the establishment in perpetuity of the
     episcopal order in the Church.

     Though this event in the history of the Church has been narrated as
     occurring subsequently to the appointment of the lower classes of
     ecclesiastical ministers, it must not be supposed that it was as
     after thought, or that the Apostles were not from the first aware
     that their office was to be perpetuated by succession. Our Lord
     ended the sentence in which He endued them with power to baptize,
     with the promise of His assistance in the discharge of their
     functions through all time: " Go," said He, "baptize all nations:
     and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world:" a
     phrase which, as addressed to mortal men, must clearly have been
     understood as a promise of continual assistance to them and to their
     successors. We find, accordingly, that so far were they from
     understanding this gracious promise as applying solely to the
     individuals to whom the words were spoken, that one of their very
     first joint acts, when deprived of the presence of their Lord, was
     to select a person to be associated with themselves in the apostolic
     office, that the number originally named to the office by our
     Saviour might be complete. They did not, it is true, ordain him, in
     the manner afterwards adopted by the laying on of hands; for they
     referred the act of ordination to Almighty God by casting lots
     "whether of the twain" He would choose; and in the pouring out of
     the gifts of Pentecost upon the head of Matthias, as well as upon
     those of the eleven, the Spirit bore a testimony, which could hardly
     be misunderstood, to the will of the Almighty that the Apostles
     should from time to time, as it became necessary, nominate such
     associates in their general Apostolic toils and powers as they might
     select; associates on whom, as they themselves were gradually
     withdrawn from the world, the whole government of the Church, and
     the whole care of providing for its further continuance, must
     ultimately devolve.

     The miraculous gifts and graces, which God in the first instance
     showered upon his Church, answered their purpose in giving it its
     first footing in the world; and, when no longer necessary for that
     purpose, were consequently withdrawn; but it should never be
     forgotten, that these, wonderful and striking as they must have
     been, were but secondary and subsidiary to those invisible spiritual
     gifts, which are the real fulfilment of God's promise of
     constant aid to his Church. With regard to these latter, it was
     indeed necessary that they should be her portion through all ages;
     but the others derived in truth their chief value from the evidence
     which they bore to the evidence of these more precious boons; an
     evidence which, though immediately addressed to converts in the
     first ages, was intended to convince, not them alone, but all those
     to whom their report of these miraculous gifts should come, of the
     reality of God's promises with regard to those gifts which were
     not palpable to earthly senses; of the truth of Christ's
     saying, already quoted, that He would be with His Church even unto
     the end of the world; and of His declaration that the Comforter,
     whom He would send; would abide with that Church for ever.

     What name was originally applied to the office borne by Timothy and
     Titus, of destined successors to the Apostles, is not very clear.
     There was perhaps at first no one name especially used to designate
     it. They may have sometimes been called Evangelists (see 2 Tim. iv.
     5.); sometimes, from their bearing in some measure the character of
     heavenly messengers to mankind, the Angels of their respective
     Churches By this name, at least, the heads of the different Churches
     of Asia are addressed in the 2nd and 3rd chapters of the book of
     Revelations. Consecrated as they were by different Apostles in
     different parts of the world, some little time would necessarily
     elapse, before one general name would be applied by the whole
     Christian Church to the associates and successors of its first
     inspired governors.

     Of the powers entrusted to these persons, a good idea may be formed
     from the study of the Epistles address to two of them. Timothy, it
     appears, had Apostolic authority to superintend and arrange the
     celebration of divine service, to prescribe the nature of prayers to
     be used therein, and to give general directions for the decent and
     orderly behaviour of the congregation. (See 1 Tim. ii.) copious
     instructions were given him as to the persons whom he should choose
     to ordain as Bishops (or Elder ) and Deacons, (chap. iii.) He had
     power to select among the Elders such as should rule, (ver. 17.)
     probably over different portions of his congregation; and to hear
     and decide upon any accusations brought against them in the
     discharge of their office, (ver. 19.) He was reminded by St. Paul to
     stir up the gift that was in him by the putting on of his hands, (2
     Tim. i. 6.) and of the hands of the Presbytery; (1 Tim. iv. 14 ;) to
     ordain no man suddenly, (1 Tim. v. 22.) or without due examination
     into his character, but to commit the doctrine which he had learnt
     of St. Paul to faithful men, who should be able to teach others
     also. (2 Tim. ii. 2.)

     Titus was left in Crete that he might set in order the things that
     were wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as St. Paul had
     appointed him. (Tit. i. 5.) He was taught what sort of characters
     befitted those whom he should make Bishops; he was to exhort and
     rebuke with all authority, and let no man despise him. (ii. 15.) He
     was to be the general instructor of his flock, and to have the power
     of expelling thence obstinate heretics. (iii. 10.) But it is
     unsatisfactory to quote particular passages: the whole of these
     three epistles should be seriously studied by those who wish to form
     a good general idea of the powers with which the Apostles, or rather
     the Holy Ghost, by their means, invested those who were to bear rule
     in the Church in times when they themselves should have gone to
     their reward.

     Those times came.-St. John, the last of the glorious company of the
     Apostles, entered into his rest, and the Church found itself
     committed, under Heaven, entirely to the charge of the three
     established orders of its ministers. To each of these a specific
     title was now ascribed, and applied with greater exactness than
     before. The title "Bishop," which had at first been used
     indifferently with "Elder," became the exclusive property of the
     highest class of functionaries, the colleagues of Timothy and Titus.
     The word "Elder" served to designate the second, and from its Greek
     equivalent, "Presbuteros," we have formed our English word "Priest,"
     by which "Elder" is now, in common use, superseded. The third class
     preserved its original and appropriate name of " Deacons."

     Such, then, was the constitution of which the Church, when first
     deprived of outward supernatural aid, found herself possessed; the
     machinery at her disposal for the dispensation to mankind of those
     glorious gifts and privileges, which it was hers, and hers alone, to
     confer. As Priests or Deacons were required for the ministration of
     the Word and Sacraments to the different portions of her flock, the
     Bishops, in exercise of the heavenly gift confided to them, laid
     hands upon such individuals as they deemed suited to the charge, and
     as vacancies occurred among the Angels of the churches, the
     successors of the Apostles themselves, or as additions were required
     to their number, the existing members of the sacred band,
     consecrated new individuals to the participation of their
     privileges, or the candidates for the office being presented to the
     laity for their approval, or fit and proper persons being selected
     by themselves.

     The gift conferred by their ordination was now no longer confirmed
     by outward ocular demonstration; but, while they reverently complied
     with all the particulars and forms of these holy rites, as
     established under the guidance of inspiration by their predecessors,
     they would have held it a most guilty instance of want of faith had
     they presumed to doubt the continued fulfilment of the
     Redeemer's promise, or the continued abiding, with the Church
     which he had framed, of the Almighty Comforter.

     Since the Apostolic age seventeen centuries have rolled away:
     exactly eighteen hundred years have elapsed since the delivery of
     Christ's recorded promise; and, blessed be God, the Church is
     with us still. Amid all the political storms and vicissitudes, amid
     all the religious errors and corruptions which have chequered,
     during that long period, the world's eventful history, a
     regular unbroken succession has preserved among us Ministers of God,
     whose authority to confer the gifts of His Spirit is derived
     originally from the laying on of the hands of the Apostles
     themselves. Many intermediate possessors of that authority have, it
     is true, intervened between them and these, their hallowed
     predecessors, but "the gifts of God are without repentance;" the
     same Spirit rules over the Church now who presided at the
     consecration of St. Paul, and the eighteen centuries that are past
     can have had no power to invalidate the promise of our God. Nor,
     even though we may admit that many of those who formed the
     connecting links of this holy chain were themselves unworthy of the
     high charge reposed in them, can this furnish us with any solid
     ground for doubting or denying their power to exercise that
     legitimate authority with which they were duly invested, of
     transmitting the sacred gift to worthier followers.

     Ordination, or, as it is called in the case of Bishops,
     Consecration, though it does not precisely come within our
     definition of a sacrament, is nevertheless a rite partaking, in a
     high degree, of the sacramental character, and it is by reference to
     the proper sacraments that its nature can be most satisfactorily
     illustrated. And with respect to these, it would lead us into
     endless difficulties were we to admit that, when administered by a
     minister duly authorised according to the outward forms of the
     Church, either Baptism or the Lord's Supper depended for its
     validity either on the moral and spiritual attainments of that
     minister, or on the frame of mind in which he might have received,
     at his ordination, the outward and visible sign of his authority.
     Did the Sacraments indeed rest on such circumstances as these for
     their efficacy in each case of their ministration, who would there
     be of us, or of any Christian congregation, who could possibly say
     whether he had been baptized or not; or what preparation or
     self-examination could give to a penitent the: confidence that he
     had duly partaken of the Body and Blood of Christ were the reality
     of that partaking to depend upon something of which he had no
     knowledge, and over which he could exercise no control; upon the
     spiritual state not only of the officiating minister himself, but of
     every individual Bishop through whom that minister had received his
     authority, through the long lapse of eighteen hundred years? He who
     receives unworthily, or in an improper state of mind, either
     ordination or consecration, may probably receive to his own soul no
     saving health from the hallowed rite; but while we adr4itj as we do,
     the validity of sacraments administered by a Priest thus unworthily
     ordained, we can not consistently deny that of ordination, in any of
     its grades, when bestowed by a Bishop as unworthily consecrated.

     The very question of worth indeed, with relation to such matters, is
     absurd. Who is worthy? Who is a fit and meet dispenser of the gifts
     of the Holy Spirit? What are, after all, the petty differences
     between sinner and sinner, when viewed in relation to Him whose eyes
     are too pure to behold iniquity, and who charges His very angels
     with folly? And be it remembered that the Apostolic powers, if not
     transmitted through these, in some instances corrupt, channels, had
     not been transmitted to our times at all. Unless then we acknowledge
     the reality of, such transmission, we must admit that the Church
     which Christ founded is no longer to be found upon the earth, and
     that the promise of His protection, so far from being available to
     the end of the world, is forgotten and out of date already.

     The unworthiness of man, then, cannot prevent the goodness of God
     from flowing in those channels in which He has destined it to flow;
     and the Christian congregations of the present day, who sit at the
     feet of Ministers duly ordained, have the same reason for
     reverencing in them the successors of the Apostles, as the primitive
     Churches of Ephesus and of Crete had for honouring in Timothy and in
     Titus the Apostolical authority of him who had appointed them.

     A branch of this holy Catholic (or universal) Church has been,
     through God's blessing, established for ages in our island; a
     branch which, as already stated, we denominate the Church of
     England. Its officiating ministers are divided into the original
     orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and no other. In the
     exercise of that authority which is inherent in every society, of
     making salutary laws and regulations for its own guidance, it has
     been found expedient to vest in two of the principal members of the
     episcopal order in England a certain authority over the rest, and to
     style them Archbishops, but this not by any means to be understood
     as constituting them another order in the Church. They are but, in
     strictness of language, the first and leading Bishops of our land.

     The Priests and Deacons, whom we usually class together under the
     common name of Clergymen,) who officiate in the Churches and Chapels
     of our Establishment, have each received ordination to the discharge
     of their holy office by the laying on of hands of a Bishop,
     assisted, in the case of Priests, by members already admitted into
     the presbytery or priesthood, as St. Paul was assisted in the
     ordination of Timothy. (iv. 14.)

     And each Bishop of our Church has, at the hands of another Bishop,
     (himself similarly called to the office,) received in the most
     solemn manner the gift of the Holy Ghost, and that Apostolical power
     over the Church, for the support of which the Redeemer pledged
     Himself that His assistance should never be wanting to the end of
     time.

     Wonderful indeed is the providence of God, which has so long
     preserved the unbroken line, and thus ordained that our Bishops
     should, even at this distance of time, stand before their flocks as
     the authorized successors of the Apostles;-as armed with their power
     to confer spiritual gifts in the Church, and, in cases of necessity,
     to wield their awful weapon of rejection from the fold of Christ;-as
     commissioned, like Titus, to bid, on heavenly authority, no man
     despise them, and to point to those who, as a class, as Bishops of
     the Church, do despise them, the solemn words, "He that despiseth
     you, despiseth Me; and he that "despiseth Me, despiseth Him that
     sent Me."

     The mode in which new candidates for the episcopal station have been
     presented to existing Bishops for consecration; has differed in
     different ages and countries. They have sometimes been chosen by the
     laity, sometimes selected by other Bishops, and sometimes by civil
     magistrates. In our own country the latter mode has for some
     centuries prevailed, and the King of England has presented to the
     Prelates of its Church persons for their approval and consecration.

     As the King and Legislature were the pledged defenders of the purity
     and integrity of that Church, this was perhaps a mode as
     unobjectionable as any which could have been substituted for it, and
     it possessed the advantage of being free from the turmoil and party
     feeling which have always been generated by proceedings in the way
     of popular election. The mode, however, in which this presentation
     is made is, after all, of minor importance, it being understood that
     it is upon the responsibility of the Bishop himself that the solemn
     rite at last takes place. No earthly authority can compel him to lay
     his hands upon what he may conceive an unworthy head, or can presume
     to dispense with his concurrence, and arrogantly assume to itself
     the power to confer the Holy Ghost. The solemn words in which the
     offices of Bishop, Priest, and Deacon, are respectively conferred,
     are annexed to these pages, and from their perusal it will be seen
     how impious it would be, in any one but the deputed minister of
     Heaven, to utter them over a fellow-mortal, or to conceive that he,
     whatever his earthly rank or station, could bestow, or even aid in
     bestowing, the gifts imparted thereby.

     Many ages ago the civil rulers of our country recognised the
     principle that a Christian nation should, as such, consider itself a
     branch of the Apostolical Church of Christ; they therefore
     acknowledged, and gave temporal dignity, and a voice in the general
     councils of the state to her ministers; privileges which they to the
     present day enjoy. And the Church, on her part, the above principle
     having been adopted by the State, acknowledged the head of that
     State, the. King, to be her temporal head; investing him with that
     general supremacy in ecclesiastical affairs, which he already
     possessed in civil. But we are not thence to infer that she gave, or
     that she could give, to an earthly monarch, or to his temporal
     legislature, the right to interfere with things spiritual, with her
     Doctrines, with her Liturgy, with the ministration of her
     Sacraments, or with the positions, relative to each other, of her
     Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

     When corruptions, prevalent among the professedly Christian world,
     render it necessary for her to state the substance of her faith in
     articles, (as was done in A.D. 1562,) or when circumstances appear
     to require any change or variation either in the forms of her
     Liturgy, or in her general internal government, the King has the
     constitutional power of summoning the houses of convocation, a sort
     of ecclesiastical parliament composed of Bishops or Clergy, from
     which alone such changes can fitly or legally emanate.

     Such are the circumstances under which a branch of Christ's
     Church is domiciled among us, and claims over us, while acting
     according to His Spirit, the delegated authority of her Founder. She
     makes no pretensions to that immediate inspiration of the Spirit
     which, by positively securing her ministers from error, would clothe
     her decisions with absolute infallibility. She puts the Bible into
     the hand of every member of her communion, and calls upon him to
     believe nothing as necessary to salvation which shall not appear,
     upon mature examination, to be set down therein, or at least to be
     capable of being proved thereby; but showing, at the same time, her
     authority as its appointed interpreter, she cautions him not rashly,
     or without having fully weighed the subject, to dissent from her
     expositions, the results of the accumulated learning and labour of
     centuries. She warns him not, without cause, to run the risk of
     incurring the fearful sin of schism, or unnecessary separation from,
     and violation of the unity of Christ's fold; a sin of which,
     surely, none can think lightly, who remembers the Saviour's
     affecting and repeated prayer, (see John xvii.) that His followers
     might be one, even as He and His Almighty Father were one. She bids
     him in that Bible itself read her credentials; she there exhibits,
     in the recorded indications of her Lord and Master's will, the
     rock on which she is built; the foundation which, whatever changes
     may convulse the globe around it, is to abide, unmoved and
     immoveable, till time shall be no more.

     The duties which our knowledge of these things, Brethren of the
     Laity, makes incumbent upon us, are almost too clear to need
     recapitulation. Filial love and affectionate reverence toward the
     collective Church, and toward those, her Pastors and Masters, who
     are set in spiritual authority over us; a zeal for' the
     inculcation of her pure doctrine and the extension of her heavenly
     fold; a determination in evil report and in good report to stand by
     her, and to approve ourselves her faithful members and children;
     these, and such feelings as these, are, by our bond of communion
     with her, peremptorily required of us; these let us make it the
     business of our lives to cultivate and comply with; and if tempted,
     as any one of us may be, hastily and needlessly to forsake her
     hallowed pale, let us reply to the temptation by addressing her in
     words somewhat similar to those of Peter to his Divine Master, "To
     whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal "life; and we
     believe and are sure that Thou art the" Minister and Representative
     of "Christ, the Son of the living God."
       _______________________________________________________________

                                  APPENDIX.

     THE following are the words addressed respectively to Bishops,
     Priests, and Deacons, when their offices are conferred upon them by
     the laying on of hands.

                                 TO A BISHOP.

     "Receive the Holy Ghost, for the Office and Work of a Bishop in the
     Church of God, now committed unto Thee by the Imposition of our
     hands; in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
     Ghost. Amen. And remember that thou stir up the grace of God which
     is given thee by this Imposition of our hands; for God hath not
     given us a Spirit of fear, but of power, and love, and soberness."

                                 TO A PRIEST.

     "Receive the Holy Ghost for the Office and Work of a Priest in the
     Church of God, now committed unto thee by the Imposition of our
     hands. Whose sins thou dost forgive, they are forgiven; and whose
     sins thou dost retain, they are retained. And be thou a faithful
     dispenser of the Word of God, and of His holy Sacraments; in the
     name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen."

                                 TO A DEACON.

     "Take thou the authority to execute the Office of a Deacon in the
     Church of God committed unto thee; in the name of the Father, and of
     the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen."
