                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

              ON RESERVE IN COMMUNICATING RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE.

                                 [Number 80]
     __________________________________________________________________

     PART I.

                        FROM THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD.

     1. Some general allusions to this mode of concealment.

     2. The general historic narrative of our Saviour's life and
     resurrection.

     3. Some particular expressions of this kind.

     4. The teaching by Parables.

     5. The manner of our Lord's miracles, their concealment, &c.

     6. Some incidents which seem to imply the same reserve.

     7. Our LORD spoken of by others,---and speaking of Himself.

     8. His instructions to His disciples, and their conduct illustrating
     the same.

     9. The same system in the Epistles.

     10. Passage from Scripture on the other side explained.

     11. Confirmed by the analogy of GOD'S present dealings with
     mankind.

     12. Manifestations of CHRIST'S presence subsequent to the
     Gospel narrative in His Church.

     PART II.

          THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD CONFIRMED BY HIS MORAL GOVERNMENT.

     1. That all moralists consider vice and virtue as states of darkness
     and light.

     2. That Scripture attributes these effects to the immediate agency
     of GOD.

     3. This knowledge is considered as something infinite and divine.

     4. It is of a moral and not of an intellectual nature.

     5. That we may perceive intimations of what it may be.

     6. That GOD punishes with blindness those who approach sacred truths
     with a speculative mind.

     7. That CHRIST, as seen in the conduct of good men, thus conceals
     Himself.

     8. That the whole subject contains something analogous in each
     particular to the circumstances notices in our LORD'S life.

     PART III.

               SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE FOREGOING OBSERVATIONS.

     1. That the principle was fully recognized by the Ancient Church.

     2. That the present aspect of the world is much opposed to it.

     3. A practical rule afforded by it in the investigation of truth.

     4. This principal of reserve applied to prevailing opinions on the
     modes of promoting religion.

     5. On the supposed necessity of bringing forward the doctrine of the
     Atonement.

     6. On reserve in speaking of sacred subjects.

     7. The important practical conclusion.
       _______________________________________________________________

     PART I.

     FROM THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD.

              1. General allusions to this mode of concealment.

     THE object of the present inquiry is to ascertain, whether there is
     not in GOD'S dealings with mankind, a very remarkable holding
     back of sacred and important truths, as if the knowledge of them
     were injurious to persons unworthy of them. And if this be the case,
     it will lead to some important practical reflections.

     It is not intended to speak of it as a mark of judicial punishment,
     nor as denoting the anger of the Almighty, nor as connected in any
     way with intellectual acuteness: but, if I may so speak with
     reverence, I would say, that there appears in GOD'S
     manifestations of Himself to mankind, in conjunction with an
     exceeding desire to communicate that knowledge, a tendency to
     conceal, and throw a veil over it, as if it were injurious to us,
     unless we were of a certain disposition to receive it.

     And though this cannot explain the speculative difficulty, why the
     truth is not set before mankind so strongly and clearly that they
     cannot fall; yet it may tend to satisfy a fair mind, to see that we
     have symptoms of such a thing being not good, or perhaps possible in
     morals; and such we may assuredly gather from what we see of
     GOD'S dealing with us in all His moral government, both natural
     and Scriptural, so as to show us, that as we are to be thankful for
     what is revealed, we have also to be thankful for what is not
     revealed.

     As the first view, we have the remarkable fact of the many
     generations of the heathen world, in a state of great ignorance of
     many things which we know to be of the very highest importance to
     our well-being. In the next place, we may notice the silence
     observed, respecting a future and eternal life in the books of
     Moses, as one of "the secret things which belonged unto GOD." The
     fact that the Patriarchs were supported by an indefinite, but full
     assurance of GOD'S unfailing goodness, which could not cease
     with this life, will be a confirmation of this point; for it shows
     that it was in some measure revealed unto them, as they could bear
     it. In the next place, the numerous rites and types are instances of
     a veil thrown remarkably over moral and spiritual truth; for it is
     very evident that to David and others, they conveyed all the
     "secrets of wisdom," and spoke of "the hands washed in innocency,"
     and "the sacrifice of a broken heart," and "the circumcision of the
     heart"---but it was through a veil. The expression "I am a
     stranger upon earth, hide not thy commandments from me," seem to
     imply, that the commandments being hid from him was the thing which
     the Psalmist apprehended from unworthiness; and the verse preceding,
     "open thou mine eyes, that I may behold the wondrous things of the
     law," and indeed the whole of the 119th Psalm, indicates something
     great and wonderful, contained in the commandments beyond the
     letter. Origen says (contr. Cels. p. 197.) "if the law of Moses had
     not any thing of a more latent meaning, the prophet would not have
     said, ;open mine eyes, that I may behold the wonderful things
     of thy law.' The descriptions of the Messiah's kingdom in
     the prophets were exactly of this kind, such as a carnal mind would
     take literally; a good man would see that God had something better
     for those that waited for Him."

       2. The general Historic Narrative of our Saviour's Life and
                                Resurrection.

     The whole of the Gospel History may be seen to be remarkable in
     harmony with this view of GOD'S dealings in the Old Testament.
     The circumstances attending our LORD'S birth, and the important
     transactions at the early period of His life, we might have expected
     beforehand would have been more known to the Jewish nation, instead
     of being concealed, like the actions of apparently obscure persons,
     (as for instance the LORD'S appearing in His temple as foretold
     by Malachi.) The account of all these things is so familiar to us,
     that we are perhaps scarce able to judge clearly of the wonderful
     and mysterious economy of GOD, in these circumstances. There is
     something in the thought of our SAVIOUR'S being for thirty
     years among men, not known and not believed on, even by those about
     Him, and the witnesses of His early life, very remarkable and awful.
     And the great pledge and seal of the truth of the Gospel, the
     Resurrection itself, seems in such a striking manner to have been
     kept back, if I may so speak, from the gaze of the multitude, from
     the broad light of the common day. Its great manifestations break
     forth, as if indistinctly, and according to the great need of
     certain persons, the watchful and weeping Mary, then the penitent
     Peter, then (the perhaps aged) Cleopas. And we find the obscure
     Galilee mark out so repeatedly and pointedly to be the chosen scene
     of these manifestations more than the crowded Jerusalem. Surely, in
     all this there is something of mysterious wisdom, which it is good
     for us humbly to consider.

                 3. Some particular expressions of this kind.

     We may reasonable expect some more distinct intimations of this, in
     our blessed LORD'S own teaching and mode of disclosing Cleopas.
     And so we not find the same SPIRIT, "who spake by the Prophets" with
     type and figure, in things of this kind?

     In the use, for instance, of figurative expressions to persons who
     did not understand the meaning of them. To this we cannot but apply
     the remark of Bishop Butler, where he observes the vast difference
     between Holy Scripture, and any human composition in this respect,
     that in the latter our object is by words to convey most fitly our
     meaning to others; we cannot say this of GOD'S written word. It
     may have other objects quite of another kind, which its very
     obscurity serves, better than its distinct meaning would do.

     Thus, when our SAVIOUR told His disciples, that it was now time that
     he who had not a sword should sell his garment and buy one, it is
     evident that they took the meaning literally, nor does our LORD
     appear to have done away with their misconception; although their
     erroneous impression was of a practical nature, and perhaps led to a
     subsequent action, wrong in itself, but overruled by His mercy for
     good. The expression of "the living Water" to the Samaritan woman,
     "the leaven of the Pharisees," and "the Bread from Heaven," with
     perhaps many others, seem not to have been understood, and were
     spoken in such a manner as to bear a striking analogy to the
     figurative expressions of the Old Testament and their reception.

     Such, it may be added, is the expression of rebuilding the Temple in
     three days, which was not comprehended. And at twelve years of age,
     it is said, His parents understood not the saying that He spake unto
     them, but Mary "kept all these sayings in her heart." (Luke ii. 51.)

     And are not the numerous expressions in the Old Testament, which are
     taken from the Old, and are either brought forward in a new meaning,
     or in alight which opens and expands their fuller meaning, or in a
     light which opens and expands their fuller meaning, of the same
     kind? for they are made to convey a lesson different from what is at
     first sight perceptible to a careless hearer, such as that of taking
     the lowest place in order that we may gain honor in the presence of
     those who sit at meat; and that of the Apostle's, to do good to
     our enemy in order to "heap coals of fire on his head?" And in the
     Old Testament itself are there not passages that refer to this
     reserve of wisdom? what is the meaning of that expression, (in
     Proverbs xxv. 2.) "It is the glory of GOD to conceal a matter?" Does
     it not allude to this?

     But what is much to be observed with regard to those expressions of
     our LORD is, that the not understanding of them was considered as
     matter of reproof, as implying something morally deficient, not
     intellectually. This would, I think, appear to be the case, as for
     instance, as in the expression of the "leaven of the Pharisees," "He
     saith unto them, Why reason ye because ye have no bread? perceive ye
     not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened?" (Mark
     viii. 17.)

     In St. Matthew the same expression of complaint or rebuke is
     repeated, "do yet not yet understand?" ch. xvi. ver. 9. and "how is
     it ye do not understand?" (Mark viii. 21.) And in the explanation of
     the parable of the sower, "the understanding" or "not understanding"
     is spoken of in some higher sense, evidently, than that of the mere
     reception or barren acknowledgement of a Truth; "when any one
     heareth the word and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked
     one, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart," where, of
     course, it cannot be the mere intellectual apprehension, for without
     that it could not be received at all. And again, "but he that
     received the seed into the good ground, is he that heareth the word
     and understandeth it." (St. Matt. xiii. 23.)

     And in chap. vi. of St. John, when the Jews murmured at the literal
     expression, and said it was "a hard saying," it seems to be implied
     that it was the teaching of GOD only that could bring them to a
     better mind, so as that they should understand the full meaning of
     such typical expression, "JESUS answered and said, Murmur not among
     yourselves, no man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent
     me, draw him." "It is written in the prophets, And they shall all be
     taught of GOD; every man therefore that hath heard and hath learned
     of the Father cometh unto me."

     Again, of the coming of Elijah in the person of John, our SAVIOUR
     says, "If ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to come."
     "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." From which it is evident
     that it was a certain state of the heart which could alone receive
     it in the sense implied. The Baptist had before declared that he was
     not Elias in the manner that the Jews conceived.

     Add to this that the Disciples are reproved, for not understanding
     the parables (Matt. xv. 15.) "Then answered Peter and said unto Him,
     Declare unto us his parable. And JESUS said, Are ye also yet without
     understanding? Do not ye yet understand?"

     Again, does not the expression of the Disciples in St. John, (xvi.
     29.) "Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb," seem
     to imply that in our LORD'S usual discourse there had been
     proverbs which they did not understand?

     All of which instances are examples in various degrees of persons
     "who hear the word of he kingdom and understand it not;" and which I
     would adduce as showing that the want of comprehension was indeed a
     fault in the moral understanding of the hearer; on which supposition
     alone is grounded the argument of the Truth not being fully
     manifested by our LORD.

     There is another circumstance that will bear upon this subject, that
     which must be observed on many occasions, and perhaps it would lead
     us to a better comprehension of other points, if it was observed in
     more, viz., our LORD'S custom of answering not the words of the
     inquirer, but the thoughts in his mind, which had prevented his
     discerning the truth, or of directing His answer to the sentiments
     which the circumstance suggested to others. This must necessarily
     have rendered His expressions difficult of comprehension to some,
     while at the same time they were beneficial to all, according to the
     need of each. Like the rains from Heaven, or the seasons, in His
     natural providence, which are not as each wishes, or prays for, but
     as is best for each and for all. This may be perceived in the
     observations made at the feast in Levi's house, where the
     company was composed of such different kinds of persons; and
     expressions so pregnant and full of meaning to one, must have been
     dark sayings to another.

                         4. The teaching by Parables.

     I cannot but conceive that there must have been this intention of
     veiling truth in the Parables. It has been said indeed that they
     render moral truths more plain and easy, as well as more engaging;
     and that this was their purpose. But is this the case? They are easy
     to us, as all such things seem to be when explained; but were they
     so at the time? Was not the Crucifixion foretold nine times to the
     Apostles, and yet it was said distinctly that they did not
     understand it, although it does not appear to us, who know the
     circumstances, so difficult? Does not the place where the word
     parable occurs, often imply that this was its meaning or effect?

     Twice in the Psalms it occurs with "dark sayings," Psalm xlix. 4.,
     "I will incline mine ear to a parable, I will open my dark sayings
     upon the harp," and Ps. lxxviii. 2. quoted expressly to this purpose
     by St. Matt. ch. xiii. verse 35. "I will open my mouth in a parable,
     I will utter dark sayings of old."---And in the prophet Ezekiel
     in the same sense, "They say of me, Doth he not speak parables?" And
     does not our LORD'S answer to his Disciples, when they asked
     him why he taught the people in Parables, prove this? "He answered
     and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the
     mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given."
     The whole of which passage at length seems to me to explain this
     view of the subject. And seems, with regard to the Disciples, the
     same as is said of Moses in Numbers xii. "If there be a Prophet
     among you, I the LORD will make myself known to him in a vision, and
     will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is
     faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth,
     even apparently, and not in dark speeches."

     The passage just now referred to in the Gospels is the following,
     "And He said to His disciples privately, But blessed are the eyes
     which see the things which ye see, for I say unto you, that many
     prophets and kings have desired to see the things which ye see, and
     have not seen them." Those glorious promises therefore of the Old
     Testament were now already thrown upon the world, but only seen by
     certain persons who had "eyes to see." So that those glowing
     prophetical descriptions of CHRIST'S kingdom may not imply any
     great change in the external appearance of the world, as is
     sometimes supposed, but only those high and heavenly privileges
     which some may value and receive. And the blessings of CHRIST'S
     kingdom as contained in the Beatitudes would indicate the same, as
     confined to persons of a certain description and character.

     I think we cannot but be struck at the little direct information
     that our Blessed Saviour gives to the Pharisees and such inquirers;
     the moving and striking discourses, as they appear to us, are all
     more or less private, such as the prophecies and parables respecting
     the end of the world and the like, (Matt. xxiv. xxv.) and the
     discourses towards the end of St. John's Gospel. It is in the
     retired Galilee, that the Gospel seems to open with blessings,
     couched in the half secret though simple forms of the Beatitudes;
     and it is in the crowded Temple at Jerusalem that our LORD'S
     public ministry ends with the opposites throughout to those
     Beatitudes, the woes pronounced on the Jews at Jerusalem.

     In speaking of a Parable as a veil, I would be cautious against
     mentioning anything as the end proposed in the operations of GOD:
     which, of course, to confine to one end and purpose, we may perceive
     would be quite impossible, as in the works of Nature; I would only
     say that the Parable did serve this purpose among others. Might it
     not be that the most spiritual and heavenly precepts were thus left
     to the rude and rough world, so that the veil of the figure might
     still be over them, though disclosing its import to any attentive
     and thoughtful person; performing thus by themselves through the
     wonderful wisdom of GOD, that which He has commanded us to observe,
     in not "giving that which is holy to the dogs," and not "casting
     pearls before swine."

     This view of a parable as a veil of the truth seems generally
     confirmed by the Fathers. A Parable is explained by Theophylact (see
     Schleusner) as "a dark saying." Cyril (in the Catechesis vi.) says,
     "Is it only the GOD of the Old Testament who hath blinded the eyes
     of them that believe not? Hath not JESUS Himself said,
     ;therefore I speak unto them in Parables, that seeing they
     might not perceive.' Was it from hating them that he wished
     them not to see? Or, was it not that they were unworthy to do so,
     since they had closed their eyes?" and again, the same writer says,
     "To those who could not hear He spoke in parables, and privately
     expounded them to His disciples. The brightness of glory was for
     these; and blindness for unbelievers."

     Clement of Alexandria says (Stromata, B. vi. p. 676.) "Neither
     Prophecy nor our Saviour Himself promulgated the divine mysteries in
     such a manner that they might easily be apprehended by all persons,
     but discoursed in Parables. Certainly the Apostles say concerning
     the LORD, ;that He spake all things in Parables, and without a
     Parable spake He not unto them.'" "And even in the law and
     prophets," he adds, "it was He that spake to them in Parables."

     And Chrysostom in like manner. "Had He not wished them to hear and
     to be saved, He would have been silent, and not have spoken in
     Parables. But by this means He moveth them, by speaking things
     overshadowed and darkened." (Homil. on St. Matt. xiii.)

      5. The manner of our Lord's Miracles,---their concealment,
                                     &c.

     The miracles of our blessed LORD were the other mode of His teaching
     mankind and disclosing His Divinity---and will not all that has
     been said forcibly apply to them also? Would it not appear (if I may
     so express myself with reverence) that He walked about, infinitely
     desirous to communicate good, without any limit or measure of His
     own goodness or power, but yet bound, as it were, in some very
     wonderful manner, by the unfitness of mankind to receive Him? For as
     He is revealed to us as more than willing to forgive, but as it were
     unable to do so unless we repent; in like manner is He also as
     desirous to manifest Himself to us, but as it were unable to do so,
     unless we are fitly disposed for it. Is it not very observable that
     the miracles recorded were to the very utmost of the faith of the
     person seeking relief, but as it were unable to go beyond? By a
     word, and at a distance, if so asked, as in the case of the
     Centurion: by laying on His hand, if the request went to this, as in
     Jairus's daughter: by a more speedy cure of another intervening
     by touching the hem of His garment, if such the belief; and He is
     spoken of as unable to work miracles (except a few) because they
     believed not: A very memorable expression, which incidentally occurs
     as marking the sole bounds of His power and will.

     I think it may be considered without doubt as a general rule, that
     the benefits conferred in the Gospel are in a sort of measured
     proportion according to the faith of the recipient or person
     engaged, as shown by the words of St. Mark, "JESUS said to them that
     word of His, If thou canst believe," ([to, ei dunasai piseteusai,])
     and there are many like sayings. There may be some instances which
     appear to be exceptions to this, and in the manifold and
     incomprehensible ways of GOD'S wisdom, there may of course be
     these exceptions, and some mode of accounting for them, but this
     would not affect the general rule. But in the second place I doubt,
     whether any of these exceptions can be made out to be so. Take for
     instance the case of the healing of Malchus; we are perfectly in the
     dark respecting this individual and the state of his mind, excepting
     so far as the service he was engaged in proves he could not have had
     the highest degree of faith and knowledge. The case of the ten
     lepers might appear an exception, but cannot be proved to be so; it
     was said to the one, in some especial sense probably, "Thy faith
     hath saved thee." It would seem from this that he had in his case
     some benefit conferred which the others had not; and though the nine
     had not the gratitude to return thanks, they might have had, under
     the pressure of disease, the faith to trust for help, which would
     only make it an ordinary case of human nature, of good thoughts
     departing with restored health. And that this faith required was the
     result of a certain state of the heart, and not a mere effort of the
     feelings or imagination, would be evident from the place where the
     means of acquiring it are spoken of, viz. by prayer and fasting.

     The frequent instances of our LORD forbidding them to mention His
     miracles, is usually accounted for by His not wishing to call the
     attention of the Jews, and provoke persecution on the one hand, and
     that the people might not make Him a King on the other, for which on
     more than one occasion we have an Evangelist's authority. But
     may we not see more in it than this? forbearing to work miracles
     before some persons seems to be like that of keeping from them what
     was already done. For might it not have been that, if such
     persecution on the part of the Jews were thus brought on
     prematurely, it would prove their more hardened state; He would
     therefore first of all deal with them more gently, by not showing
     them His full power? This will, I think, appear from the instance in
     St. Matt. xii, 16, where it is said, that "He changed them that they
     should not make him known," and that in His thus doing, was
     fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, in part of which it is said, "He
     shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any one hear His voice in
     the streets. A bruised reed shall He not break, and the smoking flax
     shall He not quench, until He shall send forth judgment unto
     victory." The application of which passage to our LORD, introduced
     with reference to His having charged them not to make Him known,
     would seem to imply, that it was from great tenderness towards them,
     that our LORD would not disclose Himself. And this will appear also
     from a circumstance that occurs immediately afterwards in the
     narration, when on our LORD'S casting out a devil, and the
     people being greatly astonished, the Pharisees on "hearing" of it,
     attributed it to the prince of the devils. And upon this, we know,
     follows that most awful and earnest admonition, as if by this
     circumstance they had come to the edge of the precipice from which
     He had been endeavouring to save them, the sin against the HOLY
     GHOST. For they might have doubted the reality of GOD'S
     revelation, and have seen only the Son of Man, and still have
     repented; but if they allowed the miracles, which must be divine,
     and still continued in unbelief, they were in a state of heart that
     could neither repent nor be forgiven. If the manifestation of
     Divinity is made to them, and they still disbelieve, nothing more
     can be done. All sin is forgiven which is repented of; but to see
     GOD Himself revealed, and to deny Him, is a state in which all
     principle is gone; there can therefore, perhaps, be no repentance;
     we are sure there is no forgiveness. Might it not be to prevent
     their falling into this sin against the HOLY GHOST, that so much was
     done to keep the knowledge from them, till all means might be tried
     gently to lead them? It may be remarked, that this twice takes
     place: that after our LORD charged them not to declare the miracle,
     on the next occasion the Pharisees bring this charge of casting out
     devils by the prince of the devils; the one alluded to in the xiith
     of St. Matt., another in the xith.

     And if we take the instance of those miracles which appear to have
     been the most public, those, for instance, of the loaves and fishes,
     with 5000 persons on one occasion, and 4000 on the other partaking
     of them; even here it would appear as if there was somehow a sort of
     secret character about the miracle, for the multitudes were
     afterwards following our SAVIOUR, because they ate the bread, but
     not considering the miracle; and of the disciples themselves, of
     whom it is said, (by some doubtless very important coincidence of
     expression by the four Evangelists on both occasions,) that they
     distributed the bread as it grew in their hands, it is said
     immediately after on the sea, that they considered not the miracle.
     It was not, therefore, even on this public occasion like an
     overpowering sign from heaven, but the Divine agency even here
     retiring in some degree from view, as in His natural providence.

     One must be cautious not to appear to limit the intention of Divine
     Wisdom by any interpretation, and, indeed, Chrysostom on St. Matt.
     viii. gives another purpose to the words [hora medeni eipes], "see
     that thou tell no man," (and also, I think, does he on another
     occasion,) which he considers as a lesson to us in all our good
     works to avoid the praise and even the knowledge of men. But
     thankfully acknowledging this lesson does not prevent our seeing
     other purposes also. For it is evident that another, a deeper and
     higher meaning, was sometimes (if not always) contained in it, as
     when our LORD told His disciples not to declare who He was. And at
     another time, when the devils were commanded not to make Him known.
     And on these occasions it is much to be observed, that it is the
     Divinity of our Lord, or any thing that would indicate Divine power,
     such as the Transfiguration, which they were commanded not to
     divulge.

     All these things tend to confirm the supposition that our
     LORD'S manifesting Himself was accompanied with very great and
     singular danger, and this is born out by expressions such as these,
     "If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin;" and,
     "If I had not done among them the works which non other man did,
     they had not had sin;" and we know that the places of our
     LORD'S peculiar abode, and the scene of His mighty works,
     Capernaum and Bethsaida, were brought into a condition so fearful,
     that as to the former it will be more tolerable for Sodom in the day
     of judgment. If, therefore, such great guilt was incurred by
     witnessing our SAVIOUR'S miracles and preaching, may we not
     reasonably suppose that the withholding the full evidence of His
     power was in mercy intended to keep them back from so awful a state?
     It may also be observed, persons who come before us as most
     accepted, are those who have had least advantages, the Centurion,
     the Canaanitish woman, the good Samaritan, the returning leper,
     (also a Samaritan,) the thief on the cross; on the contrary, the
     Levite in the parable, is only not so bad as the priest; out of
     those admitted nearest to our LORD the Judas is found.

     In accordance to all this, viz., that withholding the sign or
     greater manifestation was out of great tenderness to them, is that
     circumstance which is mentioned, when they asked a sign of Him, "He
     sighed deeply in spirit." And on other occasion our SAVIOUR pointed
     out the manner in which they should have arrived at the truth, in
     the same way of probably evidence by which they judged of things in
     Nature, that they knew the signs of the weather, whether it would be
     fine or cloudy. And, indeed their continual asking for a sign, when
     such wonderful miracles were being abundantly performed, seems
     extraordinary, for it cannot but occur to one, What greater sign
     could they have? And the circumstance of their thus asking seems to
     prove that the miracles or the greatness of them was rather out of
     their sight. And what is much to be noticed is, that although our
     LORD'S divinity was thus, as it were, concealed from the
     indifferent and careless observer, yet from any serious attention to
     the miracles, even in the accounts we have, the fulness of divine
     power is clearly discernible, as in the expression, [thelo,
     katharistheti], "I will, be thou clean," and many others, and in
     that power which is the attribute of GOD alone, so frequently
     exerted, reading the thoughts, [ate echon ophthalmous kardias
     dialogismous blepontas], "as having eyes which behold the thoughts
     of the heart," as Origen says of the words, [idon dialogismous],
     "seeing their thoughts." Indeed, it has been well shown in some
     vases, and in many other it may clearly be noticed, so as to carry
     the fullest conviction to any one desires to know the truth, that by
     an attention to our LORD'S actions and the manner of His
     speaking, we may perceive strong and lively indications of His
     divinity. Observe, for instance, the Sermon on the Mount. "Think not
     that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets, I am not come to
     destroy;" and that expression frequently repeated, "For I say unto
     you," which considering they were spoken with reference to the law
     of Moses, it seems almost blasphemous to suppose could be spoken by
     one less than Divine.

     On the occasion of their requiring a sign, though they are told with
     such sorrow and earnestness, that no sign should be given to that
     generation, yet St. Matthew twice inserts an exception, "excepting
     the sign of the prophet Jonas."

     The only sign which they should receive, namely, "the sign of
     Jonas," which was thus promised them, cannot but convey to us, who
     know to what it applied, something very awful; for it was, that they
     should have no sign such as they wanted, but should have one which
     they themselves would bring about in condemning Him, a sign which
     would show the enormity of their guilt, that they had done no less
     than put to death the SON of GOD.

     And will not the solemn answer of Abraham to the rich man bear much
     on this point? We are inclined to say they will repent if they have
     this or that warning; but this mournful prophecy has declared
     otherwise, for one can scarce help thinking of it as conveying a
     prophetic intimation of the Resurrection and its reception. It was a
     mercy, therefore, that no one was sent to them from the dead, for
     otherwise they would have been worse. May not this be said also of
     the Jews, to whom the manifestation of the Resurrection publicly was
     not vouchsafed? And it is to be observed, that the very commencement
     of the plot against our SAVIOUR'S life, was the report of his
     raising Lazarus from the dead. (St. John xi. 45.) "But some of them
     went their way to the Pharisees, and told them what thing JESUS had
     done. Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council;"
     and the object of this council was to put Him to death. Certainly a
     most astonishing fact, as leading to the development of this fearful
     phenomena in the human mind, that the circumstance, which of all
     conceivable should have been most to their wealth, was to them an
     occasion of falling. I would speak with caution on such a subject,
     but if, on other occasions, our LORD'S being troubled was from
     causes of this kind, may not this explain our LORD'S personal
     deportment (so to speak,) on that occasion, as proceeding from the
     very fearful nature of such a miracle to those who should witness
     it. (v. 38) "JESUS therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the
     grave." We naturally watch for some expression to give us some clue
     to the cause of this distress, and in the next verse but one, we
     read, "JESUS saith unto her, (Martha) Said I not unto thee, that, if
     thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of GOD?" And,
     indeed, one cannot but remark, that the preparation, as it were, for
     this miracle, was a gentle leading or drawing on of Martha, the
     weaker sister, to this fulness of belief which was necessary: first
     of all a confession of our Saviour's power is elicited from
     her, great indeed, but inadequate, "I know, that even now,
     whatsoever thou wilt ask of GOD, GOD will give it Thee." But our
     LORD proceeds afterwards to declare to her His own inherent
     Divinity, "I am the Resurrection and the Life," and a full
     confession is required, "Believest thou this?"

     In addition to these two circumstances, viz. the performing of
     miracles, only in proportion to men's faith, and the
     withholding the knowledge of them, there is another point, which
     requires to be considered, that of certain persons only being
     admitted on some occasions, and others excluded. We do not of course
     suppose that it was from any partiality to the three disciples thus
     favoured, but in divine love and wisdom, alike for their good and
     that of all. We are reasonably led to inquire, why, in one instance
     recorded, that of Jairus's daughter, he put them all out but
     those three disciples, and the father, (who had asked and worshipped
     Him) and the mother? We shall find one thing mentioned in all these
     accounts, that may explain it, viz. it is said, "they laughed Him to
     scorn." It seems probable from this, that our LORD knew they were
     not of a temper of heart fitted to witness such a miracles without
     injury to themselves.

     On the other occasion, that of the Transfiguration, we are naturally
     inclined to ask, why it is stated, in all three accounts, so
     particularly in connexion with a certain conversation, which took
     place about a week before? The "six days" of St. Matthew and St.
     Mark, and the "eight days" of St. Luke, perhaps imply that it was on
     the same day in the following week: whether it was on our Sunday, or
     there was any other circumstance that rendered the day, on which
     these two great events occurred, remarkable. That discourse, so
     noticed as preceding this event, was the confession of St. Peter;
     from which it would appear that it was this testimony so blessed of
     our LORD, that rendered them now meet to be, as St. Peter expresses
     it in his second Epistle, "eye witnesses of His majesty."

     And may there not be something more in it, than what we should call
     a mere accidental circumstance, that, on our LORD'S appearing
     to the assembled disciples on the evening of the Resurrection, that
     one of them who was most slow of belief was not present? I trust
     also it will not be considered fanciful, to apply to this view of
     the subject the remarkable difference in the tone (if I may so speak
     reverently) of our LORD'S conversation, after the departure of
     Judas at the last supper: and also the high and divine subjects of
     the discourse which ensues, independently of its free and
     affectionate character. Again, in that most interesting narrative of
     the circumstances which occurred to two of them as they were going
     to Emmaus, (which St. Luke records) we shall be supplied with
     another instance of this caution, in not revealing the truth,
     excepting so far as there was a great disposed to seek out and
     embrace it: "And they approached to the village whither they went,
     and He made as though He would have gone farther, and they
     constrained Him," on which, we read, He went in to abide with them,
     and revealed Himself to them. From which it would appear, that he
     would have gone away, and left them, if they had not evinced this
     desire to retain Him.

     There is another incident, in which there might be something of the
     same kind; it is in one of those interesting incidental observations
     in which St. Mark abounds, where, in describing the account of our
     SAVIOUR'S walking on the sea, and their alarm at seeing Him, he
     adds, [kai ethele parelthein autous], "and he would have passed by
     them," but when in their fear they cried out, then he immediately
     talked with them.

     To which may be applied the remark of St. Chrysostom on another
     occasion, when they besought Him to depart from their coasts: we
     read, "He entered into a ship and passed over;" to which St.
     Chrysostom adds, [akontas gar ou sophronidzei], "for the unwilling
     he does not instruct;" and [ekbletheis ouk anteteine, all'
     anechorese], "and "when cast out He resisted not, but retired."
     There are examples, or perhaps typical intimations of the same mode
     of acting, which might be pointed out in the Old Testament, in which
     it would appear that GOD was "waiting to be gracious," but waiting
     til something should be done on the part of man, to accept his
     deliverance. Thus, when the angel appeared unto Moses in the bush,
     we read, "and Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great
     sight, why the bush is not burnt. And when the Lord saw that he
     turned aside, GOD called unto him." (Exod. iii. 3, 4.) It is also to
     be observed, that even those miracles in the Old Testament, which we
     might suppose most public and open, were not entirely of this
     character; thus in the striking of the rock it is said, "The Lord
     said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee the
     elders of Israel," (Exod. xvii. 5.) which might be compared with the
     miracle of the loaves dispensed by the disciples, as referred to
     above.

           6. Some incidents which seem to imply the same reserve.

     In addition to the parables, and miracles, are there not events in
     the Gospel, which are similar in their effect to those difficult
     expressions before alluded to, such as convey a high and heavenly
     meaning beyond the letter? I do not allude to any mere fanciful
     interpretations, but to events such as to a plain attentive reader
     would suggest immediate moral and spiritual intentions and
     instructions; as perhaps that of St. Peter walking on the sea, which
     seems in many points typical or prophetical of his fall; and the
     miraculous draught of fishes, recorded in the 5th of St. Luke, when
     the disciples, as it appears, had been previously called, and were
     now again at their worldly employments, by which action they seem to
     be significantly taught, that, though they had to relinquish their
     means of livelihood to follow our SAVIOUR, they need not fear to do
     so, and that, as fishers of men, they need not despair, though their
     efforts might long seem unavailing. Such also was the withering of
     the fig tree, and the bearing of the cross after Him. These
     evidently contained hidden wisdom, not palpable, nor seen or
     acknowledged at the time, if at all. They seem to be quite of the
     nature and character of dark and difficult sayings, conveying
     instruction by a kind of metaphor, or similitude, in the same way.
     And in both, the full meaning was a secret to those to whom it was
     first spoken. Such are remarkably in unison with events in the Old
     Testament, as, e.g., the offering up of Isaac. The instances
     mentioned appear obvious ones--they may be but glimpses, which we
     perceive, of a great system. Add to these the Sabbath day being
     selected by our LORD for His miracles of mercy. How much is
     signified in this, to a thoughtful observer! Indeed no less than all
     the Gospel, as contained within, and rising out of the law, and the
     latter departing away.

        7. Our LORD spoken of by others,---and speaking of Himself.

     May we not also, from the expressions of other respecting our
     SAVIOUR, see allusions to this awful and mysterious wisdom, and
     which indicate that He was in the habit of concealing, in a
     remarkable manner, His divine power and majesty, excepting so far as
     persons might be found capable of receiving it? Such is the
     expostulation of His brethren: "No man doeth any thing in secret,
     and he himself seeketh to be known openly; if thou do these things,
     shew thyself to the world." And not his unbelieving brethren only,
     but the unbelieving Jews at Jerusalem also say, "How long makest
     thou us to doubt? if thou be the Christ, tell us plainly." All of
     which cannot but forcibly remind us of passages in the Old
     Testament, such as where the angel (or, as it would appear, more
     than an angel) says to Manoah, "Why askest thou my name, seeing it
     is secret?" (or wonderful;) and to Israel, "Why askest thou my
     name?" and in Isaiah, (xlv. 15.) "Verily thou art a GOD that hidest
     thyself, O GOD of Israel, the SAVIOUR." And, though GOD hath
     appeared out of Sion in perfect beauty, yet "clouds and darkness are
     round about Him." So that, although the beloved disciple could say,
     "we have seen His glory," yet to the world He hath "no form nor
     comeliness." (Origen.)

     Origen has, I think, observed, that, although false Christs should
     arise, saying, "I am CHRIST, and I am CHRIST," yet that our LORD
     does not openly profess, or proclaim Himself as such. And the
     constant open designation of Himself as "the Son of Man," is to be
     noticed, for it might be thought, here is the common admission which
     those, who wish to deny the Godhead of CHRIST, might most desire.
     And will it not be seen, by examining the passages where our LORD
     most fully declared His Divinity, that it was, as it were, (so to
     speak) forced from Him by others, and followed by violence? And when
     indeed the most full declaration was at last extorted from Him, by
     the adjuration of the high priest, the consequences which ensued
     were, we know, dreadful beyond example, for it was the beginning of
     the great crime. But on the other hand, any thing approaching to an
     acknowledgment of divine power in our SAVIOUR seems to be followed
     by some signal blessing, as in the case of the Centurion, &c. and
     the full confession still more so in the case of St. Peter; no one
     else seems to have made this, others acknowledged our SAVIOUR as the
     Son of David, or as the CHRIST, not knowing what it imported. It is
     worthy of attentive observation, that the acknowledgement is from
     the devils, (see Mark iii. ) when He strictly charged them not to
     divulge it. As if to see, and acknowledge, without suitable
     reverence, was a state utterly hopeless.

     From all which it may be gathered, that it was indeed of infinite
     importance, that they should see and believe that He was the CHRIST;
     but, that it was of no less infinite importance, that He should not
     Himself declare it to them. If, when they required the sign, the
     stronger miraculous attestation, He groaned deeply in spirit; so, on
     the contrary, when Peter acknowledged Him to be the CHRIST, the SON
     of GOD, (from which conversation it would appear that He had never
     Himself told them that He was,) then came down that blessing, which
     ceases not, and never shall cease. And it has been observed, (by
     Origen) that, as St. Matthew is the only one of the three
     Evangelists, who records the expression, "Thou art the SON of GOD,"
     in addition to "Thou art the CHRIST," so he is the only one of the
     three who records the blessing, and that this was revealed to Peter
     "not of flesh and blood, but of GOD," as if this latter expression
     of our SAVIOUR'S, had a reference to that declaration of His
     Divinty [sic!] on the part of St. Peter.

     The only mode, therefore, of arriving at the truth was by means of
     that moral inference, under the influence of GOD's good Spirit,
     which arises from that probably evidence, which He has given us as
     the guide of life: in the same way that we have in natural truths.
     This was the mode pointed out to the Jews, and such appears to have
     been the vase with the Virgin herself, of whom it is said, [Mariam
     suneterei tauta sumballousa te kardia autes], "Mary kept to herself
     these things, pondering them together in her heart," and on another
     occasion, [he meter dieterei panta ta hremata tauta en te kardia
     autes], "His mother kept throughout all these words in her heart;"
     the same which St. Paul has pointed out as the way to heavenly
     wisdom, "comparing thing spiritual with spiritual," and thus
     arriving at what is sometimes called the [plerophoria], the full
     accumulation gathered from probable evidence to the full assurance
     of faith.

     As if in the same manner, as in natural events or worldly matters,
     we gather this fulness of assurance from the recurrence or
     repetition of many single circumstances, so also a divinely
     illuminated mind, in the course of practical obedience, necessarily
     must accumulate numerous facts which necessarily lead to certain
     conclusion, or convictions of divine truth, so as to be open to the
     heart, and full reception of higher knowledge, when presented to it;
     the numerous circumstances, on which such evidence is built, being
     perfectly unknown to the careless, and disobedient; which of course
     would explain how such conviction is entirely moral.

     This view of the subject seems to explain, and itself to be
     explained by, the Baptist's sending his disciples when he was
     in prison, to our SAVIOUR, and our LORD'S reply to them. As
     John came to bear testimony to our LORD, and some of his disciples
     had already followed our SAVIOUR on that testimony, the Baptist must
     naturally have desired, that the others should do the same,
     particularly now on his approaching death; and, according to this
     mode of divine teaching, would have been desirous to leave it to
     them to see and believe according to the strong moral evidence set
     before them. For if John expresses no belief in His being the
     CHRIST, nor does our SAVIOUR on the other hand declare Himself to be
     so; the Baptist tells them not it is the CHRIST, but sends them to
     see: and our LORD declares not that He is the CHRIST, but points to
     His works.

     For we can hardly suppose, I think, that the Baptist, to whose
     testimony our LORD himself so strongly appealed, could have had any
     doubts himself. That John the Baptist's sending in that manner
     might have naturally occasioned such a supposition on the part of
     the persons present, and that our LORD intended to correct that
     erroneous impression, appears to me to be the meaning of what our
     blessed LORD says on the occasion; as if (Matt. xi.) in that passage
     which commences with the words "what went ye out for to see,"
     something of this kind was implied, "Thin not the Baptist's
     faith is shaken; you yourselves went to see him, you well knew his
     character, that it was not liable to wavering, like the reed of his
     own desert. But, perhaps, you think his own sufferings, or my lowly
     appearance, have shaken this belief. He was not, you well knew, (for
     you have seen him) a person like this, one who looked on personal
     exterior, whom a king's court could have dazzled, or subsequent
     misfortune shake. Such a man as that you would not have to see in
     the desert; was he not a prophet, yea, indeed, and more? Do not
     think, therefore, that he himself has any doubt or wavering."

     And at the same time they are told that, if they could receive it,
     this was the foretold Elijah; which seems to prove two things,
     first, that, if he was that great prophet, he could be no doubtful
     testimony, and secondly, that it required a certain disposition of
     heart to receive him as such.

     And our blessed LORD Himself describes this peculiarity in His own
     mode of teaching, as in the parable of the new cloth added to the
     old, and the new wine received into the old bottles, which appears
     to indicate the exceeding danger of the Gospel being received into
     the unregenerate heart of the old man, and such fatal consequences
     as our LORD'S manner of teaching was calculated to avert. And
     even to the disciples themselves at the last, He thus speaks, "I
     have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now." In
     all which our LORD appears as morally dealing with mankind in the
     same was as He supplies the necessities of all His creatures in His
     natural providence, ministering to all their meats in due season,
     and also according to the wants of each, and as they were able to
     bear it.

     There is a tradition (mentioned I think by Origen) highly
     interesting from the moral reflections it suggests, that our LORD
     was in the habit of appearing to different beholders in a different
     personal form. Whether there is any evidence for the truth of such a
     statement or not, it is clear, that the very different feelings with
     which He would be looked upon, from those of the deepest adoration
     and love, to those of Pharisaical contempt, would, in fact, in the
     eyes of mankind have invested him with the greatest imaginable
     difference of exterior, which might have given rise to such a
     report. Indeed the same writer makes this application of it, "The
     Word," he says, "hath different forms, appearing unto each beholder
     in the way beneficial to him, and being manifested unto no one,
     beyond what he that beholdeth Him can receive." (Origen, Comment.
     St. Matt. tom. xii. 36.)

     8. The instructions to the Disciples, and their conduct illustrating
                                  the same.

     Again, do not our LORD'S instructions to His disciples, when
     they were sent forth to preach, convey throughout something of the
     same impression, that they were not to press the truth beyond what
     men were willing to receive, and imply the awful state of those, to
     whom it had been spoken, as may be seen at length in the 10th
     chapter of St. Luke? Again, the word [matheteusate panta ta ethne,
     baptizontes] is to be remarked, as of course it implies something
     different from "teach all nations," as if it was not to be the mere
     communicating of knowledge, but rather, the training them, and
     making them disciples; and it is observable, that the same
     expression is also applied to the apostles in the Acts, xiv. 21,
     [matheteusantes], "having made disciples." And these remarks derive
     an additional force from something of this kind being observable in
     their conduct, as when St. Peter in raising Tabitha first "put them
     all forth." Athanasius speaks of them as observing the same reserve
     which is here noticed in our LORD respecting His Divinity. In his
     answer to the Arians, who urge that the apostles spoke of our
     SAVIOUR, as of a man, as when St. Paul says at Athens, "by the Man
     whom he hath ordained," and St. Stephen, "I see the Son of Man
     standing." To this says Athanasius, "Because the apostles used these
     words, did they consider that CHRIST was only a man and nothing
     more? GOD forbid! Let such a thought never enter the mind. But this
     they did as wise master-builders and dispensers of the mysteries of
     GOD; not without a good reason for doing so."---"With much wisdom
     the blessed apostles first declared to the Jews what concerned the
     human nature only of our LORD: in other that, when they had
     thoroughly persuaded them from the manifest miracles that had taken
     place that CHRIST had come, they might afterwards lead them on to
     faith in His divine nature, showing that the works which had taken
     place were not those of a man, but of GOD." [Athanasius de Senten.
     Dionys. 8.]

                     9. The same system in the Epistles.

     And now, if this view of the subject be correct with respect to the
     Old Testament, and the Gospels, may we not reasonably expect to find
     the same Spirit dealing with us in the same manner in the Epistles?
     And if we find what we might consider obscurities in the former,
     which had the effect of misleading the unwary and inconsiderate, as
     the prophecy of Elijah, those of the supposed temporal kingdom, and
     perhaps the expression of the sword, misunderstood by St. Peter: we
     know also from the authority of an apostle, that there are things
     hard to be understood in the Epistles of St. Paul, which are
     "wrested to their own destruction by the unwary." May we not suppose
     that the difficulties in the Epistles were intended to answer the
     same purpose as the figures of the Old Testament, and the parables
     of the New? Such was the opinion of Origen, who on the Epistle to
     the Romans thus writes:

     "It must be observed, as a general truth, that, where it is the
     purpose to throw a veil over, and not openly to set forth the
     sentiments of truth, whether it be by the Spirit of CHRIST speaking
     in the prophets, or by His word in the apostles, there is often a
     confusion (or obscurity) in the diction, and the order of the
     sentiments is not clear and unbroken, to prevent those who are
     unworthy from discovering, to the condemnation of their souls,
     things which it is for their good should be concealed from them. And
     hence it is oftentimes the case that there appears a want of order
     and connexion in different parts of Scripture, especially, as we
     said before, in the Prophetical and Apostolical parts. And in the
     latter, especially in the Epistle to the Romans, in which things
     concerning the law are spoken of, and in such different ways, and
     under such different circumstances, that it might have appeared as
     if St. Paul had not the object of that Epistle distinctly before his
     mind in writing it."

     But with regard to the Epistles, as confirming these opinions, the
     subject would be too long to enter upon further than just to notice
     the many passages in them, in which the Apostle speaks of his care
     not to impart divine knowledge to those, who are not worthy to
     receive it.

     A full and adequate reason for this withdrawing, and withholding of
     divine truth, might be shown in passages which speak of the great
     danger of a revelation of GOD to man, as a savour of death, as well
     as a savour unto life. If fire the the figure under which the Holy
     Ghost is spoken of, it is alluded to under both its properties, to
     cheer and give life, and also to consume. The Baptist, who foretold
     our SAVIOUR'S manifestation as baptizing with fire, spoke also
     of the fire unquenchable, which should burn the chaff; and the
     pillar of fire, which was the strength of the Israelite, was the
     destruction of the Egyptian. Is it not said of Tophet, "the breath
     of the LORD like a stream of brimstone doth kindle it?" In all His
     moral dealing, therefore it is the same mercy which said to Moses,
     "Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the LORD
     to gaze, and many of them perish." (Exod. xix. 21.) "For our GOD is
     a consuming fire." (Heb. xii. 29.)

            10. Passages in Scripture on the other side explained.

     There is one passage in Holy Scripture, which has occurred to me as
     at first sight appearing contrary to the whole of this argument,
     where in the Book of Proverbs it is said, "Wisdom crieth without;
     she uttereth her voice in the streets, she crieth in the chief place
     of concourse, in the openings of the gates, in the city she uttereth
     her words, saying." But, on a little consideration, it will be seen
     to fall in with, and confirm the view we have taken. For of this
     whole description in the Book of Proverbs, Bishop Butler has
     remarked, that it may be questioned, wither it was most intended as
     applicable to prudence in our temporal affairs, or to that wisdom,
     which is purely religious and heavenly. To him, therefore, who was a
     beginner, or who had not yet entered into the school of CHRIST, it
     would speak of this temporal wisdom; the higher sense would be to
     him a secret, concealed under the other, as by the veil; but to the
     heavenly minded it would open the higher meaning, the deeper
     treasures of divine Wisdom. So that it would really appear the same
     as that Wisdom, of which it is said in another place, that she walks
     at first in difficult and trying ways, and not shewing her secrets,
     but to those whom she hath proved and found worthy. "She goeth about
     seeking such as are worthy of her, shewing herself favourably unto
     them in the ways, and meeting them in every thought." (Wisdom xi.)
     And of course the passage from the Book of Proverbs means that there
     is no one living but to whom Wisdom speaks, a voice that tells him
     of something better, which he ought to do, than what he does, which
     the very nature of probation implies; but until he follows this
     first voice, the higher and better Wisdom is hid from him. But,
     however this may be, we know it was said of Him who was Wisdom
     itself, and "the light that lighteth every one that cometh into the
     world," "that He should not cry nor lift up His voice in the
     street."

     Another passage has been suggested to the writer, as appearing to
     militate against some of the foregoing inferences,---the
     expression of our LORD'S "compel them to come in, that my house
     may be full." But the meaning of that parable seems to be that, on
     the Jews refusing the Gospel, the Gentiles would be forced to enter,
     that the Church throughout the world might be full. And it rather
     therefore seems to imply the mode of GOD'S dealing with the
     world at present (which will be noticed afterwards), contrary to all
     His former dispensations, when all men are as it were forced to come
     in. While, at the same time, of the spiritual kingdom, it may be
     always "that the violent take it by force."

     Another expression is also to be explained; the Jews say, (John xii.
     27.) "We know this man whence he is, but when CHRIST cometh, no man
     knoweth whence He is. Then cried JESUS in the Temple, as He taught,
     saying, Ye know me, and ye know whence I am." This might seem at
     first contrary to the view here taken. But in reconciling this
     passage with that in the following chapter, where our LORD says,
     (chap. viii. 19.) "Ye neither know me, nor my Father," Origen shows
     in his Commentary, that the former alludes to our LORD'S human
     nature, to which the Jews were referring, but the latter to His
     Divinity.

       11. Confirmed by the analogy of God's present dealings with
                                   mankind.

     The whole history of this, the Almighty's mode of revealing
     Himself, is the circumstance which has been matter of offence to the
     unbeliever, asking for a sign. And perhaps it is different to
     preconceived expectations, such as we might have been led to form of
     ourselves: for instance, we might have thought, that the evidence of
     the Resurrection would have been more public, and the like. It is
     therefore, as in solving all other difficulties in the history of
     revelation, very satisfactory to show, how remarkably consistent all
     this is what what we see in the analogy of GOD'S Providence, in
     our own experience of His dealing with us in His moral government,
     which we discern, as now going on.

     A good man, however illiterate, has his faith established by a daily
     accumulating weight of evidence, which may perhaps be considered as
     equivalent to the testimony of the senses in the case of any of our
     LORD'S miracles. A weight of evidence which is perfectly
     unknown to the infidel and thoughtless, however intellectually
     superior; it is the path of the just, brightening in the clearness
     of his faith to the perfect day.

     It seems as if this kind of evidence might be considered as joined
     on to the former (as being in our case the substitution for it, and
     yet acting in a similar manner upon this point), by that singular
     fact, which Origen mentioned, (against Celsus, p. 5) that the traces
     (or steps) of those miracles were still remaining in his day among
     those, who lived according to the precepts of the word of GOD. So
     that the moral evidence, which a good man ordinarily has, arose at
     that time to the more sensible evidence of miracles, in the same
     manner as good persons were admitted to a closer and more intimate
     knowledge of our LORD'S works, and the manifestation of
     Himself.

     At the same time we must not speak as if we considered that a
     sensible manifestation of the Divine Presence, or Power, appeared to
     be the highest reward, or crown and end of a good and obedient
     faith; but rather, perhaps, it may be a help vouchsafed to those,
     who are desirous to be led on to something better, and require such
     assistance. Indeed, where St. Peter speaks of the manifestation of
     our LORD's person, and the hearing of His voice, with both of
     which he had been so singularly honoured, he speaks of such
     testimony of the senses, as something less sure than the word of
     Prophecy, and this latter but as the "light shining in a dark
     place," compared with "the day-star arising in the heart," whatever
     this may be explained to be. Add to which, we know that St. John
     himself had not the earliest sensible and direct evidence of our
     LORD'S Resurrection; and that he needed not this assurance, but
     had the more especial blessing of having believed, though he had not
     seen, perhaps a blessing, which was no other than that, which
     belongs to the pure in heart, that they shall see GOD; for, surely,
     if this blessing of seeing GOD be one, which, in the manifold
     application of Scripture, refers to this life, as well as to the
     next, we have abundant evidence in the writings of St. John, of its
     having been singularly fulfilled in him, as well in the habitual
     turn of his own mind, as in those higher and more divine
     revelations, to which he was admitted.

     It may well be supposed that the disciple, who lay upon His
     LORD's breast, had the fulness of His Divinity (so to speak)
     disclosed to him in a signal and singular degree. This is obvious
     throughout his Gospel and Epistles. As Chrysostom says at the
     commencement of the former, "He beginneth not, like the rest, from
     below, but from above," so may it be said does he continue
     throughout. We may suppose him to have remembered, and dwelt upon,
     in a way to have almost absorbed every other thought, those of his
     Master's words, which fully showed him to be the Son of God.
     And this might be traced, with much interest, to some little
     particulars, perhaps, in his Gospel, some manifest, but as it were
     incidental indications, which were such as this Evangelist might
     alone have noticed; and with these we might compare or contrast some
     observations respecting St. Peter. It gives a very peculiar interest
     to the Gospel of St. Mark (which is supposed to have been St.
     Peter's,) that the very minute, and apparently unimportant
     remarks, with which it abounds, are many of them respecting our
     LORD'S own personal demeanour. Such as, twice that "He was
     angry;" that "He was moved with pity;" that "He marvelled;" that "He
     groaned" on two occasions; that "He loved" the young man; twice that
     He took children into His arms; that he was asleep on a pillow.
     Several observations of kind occur in a few chapters, where the
     substance of the account seems often taken from another Gospel; many
     of them such as, humanely speaking, none but one admitted to a very
     intimate approach to our LORD'S person, as St. Peter was, could
     have observed. And all this is exactly what we should have supposed
     of St. Peter during this period, a most earnest watchfulness
     respecting every shade of expression, which might have appeared on
     our LORD'S countenance, and the most apparently trivial of His
     actions observed, and remembered. For, when he speaks, in his second
     Epistle, of their "having been eye witnesses of His majesty, and
     "having heard the voice of GOD bearing testimony to Him," he speaks
     like one, who had felt at the time the need of such confirmation, or
     at all events was much supported by such divine attestation. And
     these casual remarks, which have been mentioned, are indications of
     a state of mind, in which his eyes were intensely bent on "the Son
     of Man," while GOD the Father was gradually revealing to him that,
     which "flesh and blood had not told." A blessed and high state of
     faith and acceptance; but we are supposing it to have been something
     less than that of St. John. The faith of the latter, needing no
     manifestation, may be compared to that of Abraham, who, requiring no
     proof of GOD'S favour, as it is more than once recorded, at the
     place of his sojourn "builded an altar unto the LORD, and called on
     His name." Whereas the faith of Jacob required some attestation of
     the Divine Presence with him: "If GOD will keep me, and I come again
     to my father's house, then shall the LORD be my GOD." To
     acknowledge the indications of GOD'S presence in the proofs he
     gives us of His favour is acceptable to Him, but not to need such
     sensible proofs would appear to be more so.

     But to return from this digression. In addition to all that has been
     said, it must be remarked, that, when our LORD was most exposed to
     the view of the unbelieving multitude, it was, by the Providence of
     GOD, at a time when His Divinity was most shrouded, as it were, by
     the veil of human suffering; if it be true (as I think Origen says)
     that His Divinity was the last truth the perfect man came to know,
     and CHRIST crucified the first taught. And this is according to the
     whole analogy of the Gospel narrative, wherein he is drawing first
     of all "by the cords of a man, with the bands of love," until able
     to disclose His Godhead. Therefore they were capable of being
     forgiven, because "they did it ignorantly," as St. Peter says, and
     our LORD could pray for them, as "not knowing what they did." Would
     it otherwise have been the sin against the HOLY GHOST? (I ask not
     curiously, but for our profit.) Certainly we cannot but be struck
     with the effects which ensued, when the Divine power was more
     manifested and acknowledged, as in the case of Ananias and Sapphira,
     and in that of the sorcerer.

        12. Subsequent manifestations of CHRIST'S presence in His
                                   Church.

     One ought to pursue such a subject with caution, but if we consider
     the manifestations which God has subsequently been pleased to make
     to mankind, it may be observed that, as a right holding of the
     sacraments, and the acknowledgment of GOD'S presence in them,
     is the mark and sign of a healthful Church, which the history of the
     Church will warrant us in supposing; so it appears that, when
     religion has been decaying in the minds of men, GOD has either
     allowed His divine presence to be hid from them, by the errors of
     the Roman Catholics on the one side, which would have the effect of
     a veil, like a type and figure, in concealing His presence under a
     low and carnal notion; or has left men to deny that presence
     altogether, (as Protestants are inclined to do,) so that a sacrament
     would be to them no sacrament, as far as the Divine power is
     displayed in it---but merely like a picture, or representation of
     our SAVIOUR'S sufferings---no more. Nor in this view are we
     at all considering it s if GOD was the author of evil, but rather as
     seeing His hand controlling the errors of men, and judicially
     present, as so often represented, even in their wickedness. At all
     events it would seem to be an instance of the same kind as those
     enumerated "He did not miracles because of their unbelief,"---it
     is precisely the same in effect. He is among us, and our eyes are
     holden, and we know it not, or, as St. John says, (ch. xii. 36)
     "These things spake JESUS, and departed, and did hide himself from
     them."
       _______________________________________________________________

                                   PART II.

          THE EXAMPLE OF OUR LORD'S LIFE CONFIRMED BY HIS MORAL
                                 GOVERNMENT.

     1. That all Moralists consider vice and virtue as states of darkness
                                  and light.

     THE object of the former inquiry was, to ascertain whether, in the
     history of our SAVIOUR'S life, there does not appear a very
     remarkable reserve in the communication of Divine Truth. It is now
     intended to carry on the same inquiry, and to show that there are
     strong indications of something extremely analogous to this in His
     moral government.

     This is so much the case, that, if it maybe said of our LORD in the
     days of His humiliation, that He went about exceedingly desirous to
     disclose Himself; but that, nevertheless, He did, in a very
     remarkable manner, hide and conceal Himself from the view of those
     who were not desirous to know Him. So may it, in like manner, be
     stated in the same words respecting our moral nature, that there are
     clear indications that he is therein going about, exceedingly
     desirous to disclose Himself; but that, nevertheless, He does, in a
     very remarkable manner, hide and conceal Himself from the view of
     those who are not desirous to retain Him in their knowledge.

     In proof of this, the first point which I would adduce is the
     fact,---that all the best moral writers, whether sacred or
     profane, speak of a state of probation, as being one of increasing
     moral light, or of increasing darkness; that a good life is, in some
     especial sense, one of advancement in knowledge, and an evil life,
     of growing and progressive ignorance.

     Aristotle's system is a sufficient instance of this. In the
     state of ignorance which is considered wrong and blameable, there
     are two degrees; one, the ignorance of a general principle, such,
     perhaps, as may be instanced in that action of the disciples, when
     they were blamed in that they knew not of what spirit they were of;
     the other, the very proof of viciousness in character, by which men
     become utterly depraved, as was, perhaps, the case of the Jews. The
     first, like a spot on the organ of vision, increasing in the latter
     to a loss of sight. Whereas, on the contrary, the whole of moral
     improvement, in the heathen philosopher seems to be an increase in
     knowledge; and a preparation of the heart to a discernment, ever
     clearer, and more clear of the highest wisdom, and a cordial
     embracing of, and resting in, the contemplation of truths which are
     thus at length disclosed to it. For he not only considers goodness
     to lead to, and consist in, improved moral and practical discernment
     ([phronesis]), but this discernment as subservient to the attainment
     of some higher wisdom ([sophia]).

     Now these acknowledgments of moral writers seem glimpses, and
     guesses, and sometimes distinct shadows and outlines, of great and
     divine truths; for it is to be observed how this description of our
     moral nature is confirmed by Holy Scripture, where sin is frequently
     spoken of by expressions which imply "the light within being
     darkened;" and progressive holiness is continually alluded to as
     progress in knowledge, and to know GOD as the end of all Christian
     obedience. The strength of ungoverned passion, ending in a total
     want of control, is emphatically called "adding drunkenness to
     thirst," and the want of spiritual discernment is termed "a book
     that is sealed." And, in like manner with the Divine Scriptures,
     Clement of Rome says, "On this account Righteousness and Peace is
     far from you, because each of you has left the fear of GOD, and in
     His Faith has become blind, or dull of seeing." (c. iii.)

      2. That Scripture attributes these effects to the immediate agency
                                   of God.

     Thus far Scripture may only seem to confirm this moral account of
     our nature. But now it is to be noticed, that although this
     principle is often alluded to by heathen moralists, yet in Scripture
     there is to be observed a mode of expression very remarkably
     distinguished from theirs. In the first place, Scripture speaks of
     this Divine knowledge as, in some especial manner, the gift of GOD.
     As in the instance of the blessing on St. Peter, on account of his
     acknowledging the SON of GOD, it is said expressly, because "flesh
     and blood had not revealed it unto him, but GOD the FATHER, who is
     in heaven;" and in the thanksgiving of our SAVIOUR to His Father,
     because He had "hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
     revealed them unto babes;" and in the expression, "if any one be
     otherwise minded, GOD shall reveal even this unto you;" and, "if any
     one want wisdom, let him ask of GOD, from whom cometh every perfect
     gift;" and respecting religious comprehension, it seems to be said,
     "no one cometh unto me except the FATHER which hath sent me draw
     him." It is very edifying to observe this. Yet it is not so striking
     as in the opposite case, which is so contrary to all that we should
     have expected beforehand, that means are constantly taken to explain
     it away. The fact I allude to is, that this blindness of heart and
     darkness which is superinduced, as the natural consequence of an
     evil life, is variously, yet consistently, throughout the whole of
     Scripture, attributed to the agency of GOD. By Moses, as where GOD
     is spoken of as "hardening the heart of Pharaoh;" by the Prophets,
     as where Ezekiel says, "If the Prophet be deceived, I the LORD have
     deceived the Prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him and
     destroy him:" and Isaiah, "The LORD hath poured out upon you the
     spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes" (see Isa. xxix.);
     and in the Gospels these expression are often repeated in the same
     form from the Prophets; as, for instance, that they could not
     believe because that Esaias had said, "He hath blinded their eyes,
     and hardened their heart, that they should not see with their eyes,
     nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal
     them." And, after the same manner of expression, St. Paul speaks of
     those of the latter days, on whom GOD shall send a strong delusion,
     that they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned, who
     believe not the truth. And, perhaps, the same thing, which we should
     consider the mere natural effect of a wicked temper, is to be found,
     where it is said, "that an evil spirit from GOD was upon Saul, when
     the good spirit had left him." Surely such an identity of statement,
     under such a variety of expression, and in such variety of
     circumstances, ought not to be explained away, as if a mere mode of
     speech; but, on the contrary, we should consider, that, where the
     meaning is wrapt up by such difficulties on the surface, it is one
     of a high and sacred character. When, therefore, it is asked, why
     did not JESUS CHRIST disclose to them, that He was not born at
     Nazareth, as they supposed, nor the Son of Joseph, whom they said
     they knew; why did He leave them in such ignorance of His wonderful
     power and goodness? It must be answered, that it was He of whom it
     is written, "He hath blinded their eyes;" and that we have no way of
     coming to the full meaning of His words but by obedience. But that
     on the wicked He shall send, not His ultimate judgments only, but,
     if the expression may be allowed, snares also; "Upon the ungodly He
     shall rain snares, fire and brimstone." (Ps. xi. 7.) But of this
     circumstance thus much may be observed; that a great deal which
     revelation informs us of, is a bringing forward to our view the
     presence of GOD in those things in which the world is least inclined
     to acknowledge it; in attributing to the immediate agency, and
     influence, and presence of GOD, what was otherwise ascribed to the
     course of nature. Thus we see in nature the sins of fathers, in a
     temporal point of view, visited on children; this, revelation tells
     us, is the denunciation of GOD. We see the innocent overwhelmed with
     the guilty, and infants with their parents, in wars and convulsions
     of nature: this, scriptural history shows us, is by the command of
     GOD. So, likewise, in morals, Aristotle points out fully the effects
     of vice in bringing on a state of blindness. But that this is the
     judicial punishment of GOD, as clearly acting and present in this
     world, amid all the confusions that abound, this revelation sets
     before us,---"GOD shall send upon them a strong delusion."

     Instead of attempting to explain away, let us thankfully adore and
     bless His holy name, for these indications of His gracious presence,
     even in these awful mysteries, and "give thanks unto Him because we
     are fearfully and wonderfully made;" for this very mysteriousness
     creates a feeling of awful regard, and is a subject of thanksgiving,
     as bringing palpably before us, that in all things, "His is the
     kingdom and the power."

     Thus far, therefore, we seem to have arrived at this
     point,---that there are in our moral nature indications of the
     same kind of concealment and disclosure, according to our various
     dispositions of heart, as we before observed to be the case in the
     history of our LORD'S life. But much more than this, that such
     light and darkness is attributed, in a very singular manner, to the
     immediate agency of GOD.

      3. This knowledge is considered as something Infinite and Divine.

     But this analogy will carry us still further: as it was our blessed
     LORD'S divinity, which, we have seen, He studiously concealed,
     but wished all men to come to the knowledge of; so the knowledge
     which is supposed in morals to be the results of a good life, is
     something which is of a nature very great and infinite. In Aristotle
     it is the going out of mortality, as it were, into the earnest
     contemplation of things that are wonderful, eternal, and divine.
     Such is the shadow of that truth which Scripture unfolds to us. For
     certainly those pre-eminent saints of GOD, Abraham, St. John, and
     St. Paul, seem to stand out, as it were, from the human race, by a
     kind of solitude of spirit, from their minds appearing to be
     conversant with things above human nature. Abraham, of whom it was
     said, on account of his obedience, "Shall I hide from Abraham the
     thing which I do?" St. Paul, who saw things that it was not lawful
     for man to utter; and St. John, whose character is not more strongly
     marked by that divine love for which he is known, than for what may
     be termed, but very inadequately, heavenly contemplation; so as to
     have been found worthy, not only to have written his divine Gospel,
     but to whom the Book of the Revelations should have been entrusted.
     Add to this, that those Christians, who appear, from many
     circumstances, to have been the most advanced of all St. Paul's
     converts, the Ephesians, are especially addressed on the subject of
     growing in knowledge. The Apostle's unceasing prayer for them
     is, that "GOD will grant them the spirit of wisdom and revelation in
     the knowledge of Him; the eyes of their understanding be
     enlightened, that they might know what are the riches of the glory
     of His inheritance in the saints."

     This knowledge is always spoken of as something so vast, and, as I
     said, infinite, that persons seem never to be addressed as if they
     had attained, so much as urged on to the greater attainment: it does
     not seem spoken in terms such as Peace and even Faith, but more like
     Divine Charity, and perhaps as co-existent and co-extensive with it,
     as a part only at best of what is boundless, and will be more fully
     developed hereafter. It is said, "in knowledge of whom standeth
     eternal life;" as eternal life cannot be defined by bounds, no more
     can this knowledge have any limits.

     And indeed it is often thus spoken of as directly connected with the
     Divinity. It is called "the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid in
     CHRIST." It is "the new man which is renewed in knowledge after the
     image of Him that created him." It is to "be able to comprehend what
     is the breadth and length and depth and height, and to know the love
     of CHRIST which passeth knowledge," and by St. Peter it is "growing
     in the knowledge of CHRIST." It is expressly spoken of by St. John
     as our SAVIOUR manifesting Himself. (John xiv.)

           4. It is of a moral, and not of an intellectual nature.

     The next point to be observed is that this hidden wisdom is entirely
     of a moral nature, and independent of any mere cultivation of the
     intellect. Indeed the latter of itself would appear to be a
     hindrance to it,---for such knowledge "puffeth up." Even
     Aristotle cautions us that knowledge in morals can only be gained by
     practice. And that heavenly knowledge, of which St. Paul speaks, he
     is cautious of disclosing to those who are carnally minded. "Add to
     virtue knowledge," says St. Peter; and this knowledge he considers
     as the very end of obedience. "If these things (i.e. these graces)
     abound in you, they will make that ye shall not be unfruitful in the
     knowledge of our LORD JESUS CHRIST." (2 Pet. I. 8.) It was seeing
     that he would command his family to keep the ordinances of GOD,
     which was the reason given, why GOD would not withhold from Abraham
     the thing which He did. And indeed the character of this knwoeldge
     in all its fulness, it secret and hidden,---its vast and infinite
     nature, and its being entirely a matter of moral attainment, is
     sufficiently expressed in our blessed LORD'S own words---
     "Judas saith unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words; and
     my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
     abode with him." It might also be considered that holiness in man
     is, in fact, nothing else but a sense of the Divine presence; to
     improve in holiness, therefore, is to grow in the consciousness of
     GOD'S presence. And would again bring us to the same point, i.
     e. our blessed SAVIOUR revealing himself according to the state of
     each man's heart.

     St. John often mentions this knowledge in connexion with love, and
     such love as the result of obedience. And experience thus confirms
     it; actions of self-denial dispose the heart to prayer, prayer to
     the love of GOD, and the love of GOD to the knowledge of Him. And
     this secret and heavenly knowledge, thus attained, seems alluded to
     the in the expression, (Rev. xiv.) "They sang a new song, which song
     no man could learn, but the hundred and forty and four thousand."

     Moreover, it is to such as Daniel, "the man of loves," which are
     divine and not earthly, that revelations are made: and it is worthy
     of consideration, that those who speak of the intimate connexion of
     CHRIST with his Church, under he type of marriage, are the Baptist,
     St. Paul, and St. John. As if it were to the higher, or virgin,
     state of life that the mysteries signified by this figure were
     confided.

            5. That we may perceive intimations of what it may be.

     Of the nature of this Divine knowledge, which GOD is pleased to
     reveal to His obedient children, it is of course quite impossible
     for us to speak adequately, "seeing that it is secret," by our very
     supposition. But of the manner in which this light that lighteth the
     path of the just may make our way clearer, and open and disclose
     things to us, before obscure, as we advance, may be shown in one or
     two instances. First of all, in morals we may see how it is that if
     any sincere person be otherwise minded, in any point, than what
     holiness of heart requires, GOD will reveal even this unto him. It
     may be seen that the whole system of morals is one of progressive
     light, as far as we can discern. Take, for example, two controverted
     cases in morals, and observe how the faith of Christian duty throws
     light upon them. First the love of praise, a subject so debated in
     morals, with regard to its merit or demerit. Is it not a sign of
     good, and therefore praiseworthy, in the worst and most indifferent
     characters, that they should desire the praise of their superiors in
     virtue? it is an endeavouring to persuade themselves that they have
     some merit, which their betters approve, and therefore an intimation
     of some wish to attain it. It is a step, as it were, in the scale of
     virtue, that leads us, by human means, to the footstool of GOD. On
     the other hand, in the best men it is a fault to desire praise at
     all---something that sullies their best actions: it is because
     they ought to look to the sole infallible standard of goodness. The
     approbation of man was only, in the former case, a weak substitute
     for this---for it was a looking to the erring judgment of the
     creature, instead of that unerring judgment and approbation of GOD,
     in which the life of the soul consists. True goodness of heart can
     only acquiesce in the judgment of GOD; therefore, says Taylor, a
     good man, when praised, trembles, lest the judgment of GOD should be
     different. And our SAVIOUR has said, "How can ye believe who receive
     honour of one another, and seek not the honour which cometh of GOD
     only." And yet we have in this case GOD calling us on, through the
     medium of parents and superiors and good men, to whose good opinion
     we naturally look, to seek for some approving judgment out of
     ourselves, and thus to rest in Himself alone. The circumstance,
     which in this case appears to involve a difficulty or a
     self-contradiction, does, in fact, more strongly confirm the
     analogy; for to state, as this instance seems to imply, that the
     same thing should be right, and yet that it should also be wrong and
     blameable, may appear extraordinary. But the case would seem to be
     similar to that of typical rites and offerings, which were commanded
     in the Old Testament, and, therefore, of course approved of, and yet
     the same are strongly and repeatedly condemned, i.e. with a
     reference to a higher standard of those great moral duties and
     heavenly significations, which they represented and were intended to
     lead to.

     The same may be seen in another case, considered questionable in
     morals, whether emulation is consistent with Christian holiness, or
     to be considered as distinct from envy. The fact is that wherever
     there is a desire after, and a resting in, finite good as an end,
     such a good, being finite, must be lessened by another obtaining the
     same from the very nature of the finite good: emulation cannot exist
     in such a case, without envy as its shadow. For objects, which are
     finite, we estimate merely by comparison. But, with regard to that
     which is infinite, as to obtain the love of GOD, which love is
     infinite; to do His will, which is infinite; to know Him better; all
     this, being of an infinite nature, can admit of no envy, because the
     more another may obtain in no way diminishes, but increases our own
     attainment of it: here is disclosed the only legitimate course for
     emulation, as it is the only one in which there can be no envy.

     Such instances will serve to show how, in morals, He, "who is the
     light that lighteth every one who cometh into the world," discloses
     Himself in the path of Christian duty, which looks to Himself as the
     only means and end; but reveals Himself in no other way.

     The same may be shown after another manner, in cases which would be
     more strictly considered as religious. Take the Ten Commandments and
     the LORD'S Prayer, as the subjects of devotion. That there is,
     in some especial manner, an infinity of wisdom and knowledge
     contained in these, may be concluded from their both being in an
     especial manner the words of GOD. And our blessed SAVIOUR has taught
     us to look for this secret wisdom in the first in the Sermon on the
     Mount, where He has opened their fuller meaning and spiritual
     intentions, as necessary to be observed, and by which we shall be
     judged at the last day. And from one petition in the LORD'S
     Prayer, "Give us this day our daily bread," taken in conjunction
     with our LORD'S explanation of the "only true bread," and with
     that of His injunction of our not seeking the bread that perisheth,
     in another place, we are necessarily led on to seek for more than
     the letter through the whole of that Prayer. Now the manner in which
     the Ten Commandments open themselves to a devout mind, coming forth
     as a two-edged sword, and capable of discerning and trying the
     inmost thoughts of the heart, coming forth as "full of eyes round
     about them," may be seen in Bishop Andrews' Devotions; where
     upon each occasion they are brought forth as having clear and
     distinct, but consistent, meanings and applications; but all such,
     that it would be difficult to say that one was more properly or
     strictly the intention of the commandment than another. The same may
     be seen in other practical and devotional texts.

     In like manner, where the LORD'S Prayer in the same book, or in
     Bishop Wilson's Sacra Privata, is made the subject of devotion,
     and, as such, has each petition very fully and largely paraphrased,
     and new and different meaning given to the words on each occasion;
     it cannot be said that it does not bear all those meanings, and
     perhaps scarcely that it bears any one of those more than another.

     These are instances of a kind of mysterious language addressed to a
     certain state of the heart; and the same may be seen in passages of
     Scripture which are only understood in the day of visitation; and in
     the new and pregnant meanings, which the most illiterate perceive in
     Scripture when religious excited, and the more devout and thoughtful
     at all times. This depth and infinity of comprehensiveness seems
     thus to disclose itself by a continual new adaptation to
     circumstances all in a moral way; and this may give us some glimpse
     at the meaning of the Divine knowledge which has been alluded to,
     and which is the especial gift of GOD. For here we have the Divine
     Word opening itself according to the need of all occasions, and
     adapting itself to them in a wonderful manner, like Him whose
     manifold gifts, when He appeared in a bodily person, whether it was
     to lighten the eyes, or to give feet, or health, or life, were all
     but varied emanations from a Presence containing infinite
     perfections.

     6. That GOD punishes with blindness those who approach sacred truths
                           with a speculative mind.

     In in these instances our blessed SAVIOUR appears to be disclosing
     Himself to those who are earnestly desirous to obtain the knowledge
     of Him in order to obey Him, in a manner no less remarkable does He
     appear to be hiding Himself from those who venture to approach Him
     with another mind. For, in perfect harmony or analogy to all that
     has been before observed, we find that we are in a striking way
     hedged in by ignorance respecting great truths, which we endeavour
     to gain the knowledge of by any way but that of practical obedience.
     Such have been attempts to explain the doctrine of the Trinity,
     which have ended in Arianism; to explain CHRIST'S presence in
     the Holy Communion, which have led to Transubstantiation: the mode
     of the new birth at Baptism, which seem, in great measure, to have
     been the cause of denying it: the incompatibility of free will with
     Divine foreknowledge is the conclusion which speculations on such a
     subject have come to. All these topics contain great sacred truths
     of the very highest possible importance that we should know; but if
     we attempt to arrive at any knowledge of them by speculation, or any
     other mode but that of practical obedience, that knowledge is
     withheld, and we are punished for the attempt: in the same manner
     that it was of the highest importance that they should know our
     LORD; but unless they were sincerely and humbly seeking Him, He was
     hid from them. Thus it is in the question our LORD to Pilate---
     "Askest thou this of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?" If
     it is of thyself, that there is this desire to know, thou shalt
     indeed receive this life-giving knowledge: and when it is found to
     be merely that ensnaring cavil and false insinuation of the Jews,
     enough is said to do away with such a false impression, and to lead
     on the inquirer to further knowledge, if he had been desirous to
     follow that clue. With regard to the true understanding of those
     high truths alluded to, it seems, (so to speak with reverence,) as
     if our LORD admitted some chosne few to witness the secret, but shut
     out the others.

     All this may be applied to the question of sins being admitted to
     pardon and remission after Baptism: however lightly and
     inconsiderately such a subject may be dealt with, still, in the
     humiliations and mortifications which mark the devotions of such as
     Bp. Andrews, and Wilson, and Pascal, it may be seen that they
     practically felt this difficulty of obtaining forgiveness. The
     temper evinced seems a hearty apprehension and sense of unworthiness
     corresponding to such a fear.

     So also with respect to the great Catholic and Primitive mode of
     interpreting both Scripture and nature ; of seeing things the most
     sacred, such as the Cross and Baptism, figured and shadowed out by
     an infinity of types. It may be, that the coming to the knowledge of
     these may be, as Bp. Butler suggests respecting other things in
     morals, by a certain general rule according to progressive
     improvement in holiness of heart. For instance, it certainly is the
     case that all strong feelings are prone to catch at such intimations
     of themselves in all things, to take up circumstances the most
     trivial, to dwell on the derivation of names, and the like. Abundant
     instances of this will occur in the Greek tragedies, and on all
     occasions of excitement. There seems reason to believe that the
     Almighty has hid this vastness of analogy and type in His word and
     His works ; and, of course, most of all, with respect to the highest
     truths, such as relate to our blessed SAVIOUR'S incarnation and
     death, and His own attributes. It seems probable that, according to
     some great general principle, a fervent piety is the key to all
     these hidden stores of GOD, in a natural and almost necessary
     manner, as it might be. A tendency thus to interpret Scripture is
     observable in the most illiterate persons, under the influence of an
     unaffected piety. So that, independently of such a mode of
     interpretation being Scriptural, and Apostolical, and Divine, such
     knowledge may be also the reward of affectionate devotion, in what
     we might call a natural way; and the contrary tendency, in a cold,
     sceptical, and self-indulgent age, may be according to the same
     general principle, GOD hiding Himself from them. For to say that
     such persons as the ancient Fathers were holy, self-denying, and
     devout, but at the same times were weak, injudicious, and fanciful,
     is to transgress the first principle in Christian morals, which is,
     that he who doeth the will shall know of the doctrine; for it is to
     say that they do the will indeed, but know not the doctrine, that
     the tree is good, but not its fruits.

     Now in all these cases which have been referred to, it appears as if
     pains were taken that, in the language of Pascal, "the understanding
     should not forestall the will;" as if knowledge was still the fruit
     of death, till the heart was prepared for it: that there is a
     knowledge boundless in extent and infinitely good, and, indeed, no
     other than that of acknowledging the Divinity of our LORD, to the
     attainment of which we are urged as the great end of faithful
     obedience; but that, unless that obedience lead us, as it were by
     the hand, we shall never arrive at this inner temple. And that the
     state of Christianity is now, and always would be such in the world,
     is, I think, to be gathered from the Gospel itself, more than seems
     usually considered. Thus, after our LORD had publicly taught the
     people in parables, and such modes of speaking as, it is said, they
     did not understand, He said to His disciples "privately," (which
     privacy has been especially noticed) that their eyes were blessed,
     because they saw those glorious things which Prophets and Kings had
     in vain desired to see, i. e. the kingdom of heaven upon earth.
     Those glories of the kingdom described in such glowing language in
     the Old Testament, were already thrown upon the world; but still
     they were only known, seen, and received privately by persons who
     are there described as having eyes to see and ears to hear, i. e.
     persons of a certain disposition and character; they were things
     which it is said in the same passage (Luke x.), were "hid from the
     wise and prudent, and revealed unto babes." And the expressions
     which describe that kingdom as established upon earth, till speak of
     it as a secret-a treasure hid in a field, which a man found, and for
     joy thereof sold all that he had to purchase it: as the pearl of
     great price, found by a certain person seeking goodly pearls, i. e.
     giving earnest heed to religious instructions. The same may be shown
     in the nature of the beatitudes, which maybe considered as the very
     opening of this kingdom foretold:---the windows of heaven opened,
     and the pouring down of these riches, "the heavens dropping down
     from above, and the skies pouring down righteousness." (Isa. xlv.)

     It has been before alluded to, that these riches are all secret;
     given to certain ispositions---not cast loosely on the world. And
     the characters described as coming to this inheritance, such as the
     poor in spirit, and they that mourn, &c., may be considered

     as certain narrow and confined paths, leading to these riches of the
     kingdom. And it may be observed, that there is not only such
     distinctness and appropriateness in each, both in itself and when
     compared with the end designed, but likewise such a mutual
     connection, that the attainment of the one disposition implies the
     other also in some degree; and that the attainment of alt these
     dispositions is the natural and necessary result of a hearty,
     honest, and earnest embracing of religion. And, perhaps, the great
     end in which there may be found an union of all these beatitudes as
     existing together, may be that which is more peculiarly attributed
     to one,---namely, that "they shall see GOD,"---see Him
     according to each of His various attributes, which their own
     characters most open to them. All of which implies, that they only
     who do the will can know the doctrine, however it may be thrown upon
     the world; that "the secret of the LORD is with them that fear Him,
     and He will show them His covenant."

     The great doctrines which of late years have divided Christians, are
     again of this kind very peculiarly, such as the subjects of faith
     and works, of the free grace of GOD, and obedience on the part of
     man. They seem to be left in Scripture in a way to give rise to all
     these disputations among (if I may so speak) the multitude who are
     without: I mean to say, among those who do not labour to obtain the
     knowledge of them by obedience, and in practical seriousness of mind
     (i. e. the disciples, of whom it is written, He said, "Follow me,"
     and."they followed Him"). For they appear to be great secrets,
     notwithstanding whatever may be said of them, only revealed to the
     faithful. What I would say is, that fully to know that we are saved
     by faith in CHRIST only, and not by any works of our own, and that
     we can do nothing, excepting by the grace of GOD, is a great secret,
     the knowledge of which can only be obtained by obedience, as the
     crown and end of great holiness of life. Thus St. Paul, who had
     always laboured to have a conscience void of offence, and of all the
     Apostles had laboured the most abundantly, yet felt himself the
     chief of sinners. And Abraham says of himself, that he was but "dust
     and ashes;" David, that he was but "a flea," and "a dead dog." May
     not all these difficulties be like those of the Jews, who knew that
     no good thing could be born of Nazareth, or like that with which
     they seem to have "suggested to startle the Disciples, "that Elias
     must first come." For in all these things we seem to have JESUS of
     Nazareth going about still among us hiding himself from the many who
     are engaged in factious disputations concerning Him, or busied with
     their worldly views; but here and there He is in secret disclosed
     and acknowledged.

     Again, the moral government of GOD, in the light thrown upon it by
     Holy Scripture, illustrates the point in this way. Signal
     afflictions, and temporal calamities are spoken of in Scripture, as
     the comings and the visitations of CHRIST and of GOD. And in
     furtherance of this, such chastenings are spoken of as the proofs of
     GOD'S love to those who are thus visited, and the withdrawing
     of them of His displeasure, "Why should they be stricken any more?"
     implying impenitent reprobation. Now as the disclosure of our LORD'S
     Divine person was a very signal blessing, but not without a
     proportionate danger, if not worthily received, so we may observe,
     that nothing hardens the heart more than temporal afflictions, which
     are spoken of as the signs of His presence; if not received and
     cherished with a right spirit, they leave a person at length worse,
     if not improved by them. And yet it seems agreeable to Scripture to
     consider them as if persons were thereby drawn into a certain
     nearness to GOD---great privilege; so great that it cannot be
     trifled with or neglected with impunity.

      7. That Christ, as seen in the conduct of good men, thus conceals
                                   Himself.

     There is another mode in which we may find (I would speak with
     reverence) the presence of JESUS CHRIST, as still in the world, and
     His manner of dealing with mankind, and that is in the usual conduct
     of good men, especially if such conduct is at

     all marked by any peculiarity, and such peculiarity increasing as
     they advance in strictness of life. And this I think we may find to
     be the case: for notwithstanding that a spirit of true charity has a
     natural desire to communicate itself, and is, of all things, the
     most expansive and extending, yet in all such cases, we may still
     perceive the indwelling of CHRIST in them, still seeking, as it
     were, to hide Himself; for, I think, they are all marked by an
     inclination, as far as it is possible, of retiring, and shrinking
     from public view. We might have expected that it would have been
     otherwise, and that an increasing knowledge of GOD would have been
     accompanied with an increasing power of setting forward such
     knowledge to the world. In such instances, we seem to have the same
     impatience of feeling respecting His true Disciples, which His
     Brethren once expressed respecting our blessed LORD Himself; "If
     Thou doest these things, shew Thyself to the world."

     The circumstance I allude to is such as this ; it is mentioned of
     James Bonnel, that he was of great "retiredness of spirit;"
     "solitariness of spirit," is mentioned of George Herbert; he seems
     to have felt, as it were, an unseen hand pulling him back. The same
     is noticed of Robert Nelson, and of Thomas a Kempis, whose book is
     full of this spirit; a similar sacred reserve was the characteristic
     of Charles the 1st. Instances of this kind might probably be adduced
     respecting all such characters. Pascal says, " This wonderful
     mystery, impenetrable to any mortal eye, under which GOD is pleased
     to shade His glories, may excite us powerfully to a love of solitude
     and silence, and of retirement from the view of the world" p. 264,
     Dr. Kennet's translation.

     The fact must doubtless be admitted, and several concurring causes
     would tend to produce this effect. In the first place that humility
     which must ever accompany increasing holiness of life seeks
     naturally to hide itself, is desirous not to be known, and would
     even seem to check, and draw back the strength and wisdom of the
     natural man. In such a case human nature is humbled under the mighty
     hand of GOD, and that self-abasement, which arises from a sense of
     his nearer presence, has a tendency to withdraw a person from what
     the world considers spheres of usefulness. Now this principle of
     humility is of all others the most universal in good men, and under
     all diversities of characters, and of gifts, and circumstances of
     life: there seem to be no persons held out to our imitation in
     Scripture, without some marks of it! and indeed degrees of
     acceptance and approbation are in proportion to it. We must of
     course conclude, that the work of God is somehow best done, and His
     strength perfected, under this apparent (worldly)
     weakness,---that His victory over the world is somehow best
     achieved by thus retiring from the contest. This is contrary to
     human calculation, in the same way that no one would have thought
     beforehand, that the coming on of night would open to us more
     glorious objects than the light of day. When the light of this world
     is withdrawn, the heavens open. As God, in whom we live, is Himself
     unseen, and His good angels, who minister to us, are unseen, so also
     good men, as they approach Him in any way, seem to be withdrawn from
     the sight of the world.

     As our blessed SAVIOUR in various ways retired from the view of men,
     and hid His glories, so it is remarkable how little we know of the
     saints of GOD; of one of the most eminent of the disciples we know
     nothing, and next to nothing, of St. John's private history and
     character. Indeed, what little we do know of them is but as it were
     accidental, and the exception to the general rule, as in the letters
     of St. Paul: and even there, casual intimations greatly tend to shew
     our ignorance respecting them, as of the Revelations of St. Paul, of
     the time he spent in Arabia, and at Tarsus. Add to these, how many
     things are there, which more immediately respect our LORD Himself,
     the account of which, as St. John says, would have been more than
     the world could contain, yet all lost in silence. So also the things
     pertaining to the kingdom which were spoken for the forty days.
     "Verily, thou art a GOD that hidest thyself, O GOD of Israel, the
     SAVIOUR. (Is. xlv.)

     It must have occurred to every one, with some surprise at first, how
     much the sacred people, having the visible presence of GOD among
     them, and containing, as it were, the eternal destinies of mankind,
     were overlooked by, and unknown to, the more polished and powerful
     nations of the world. Gibbon has not failed to take hold of this
     circumstance. And, in like manner, how little Christianity was
     noticed or know to heathen writers at a time when it was secretly
     changing the whole face of the world, the salt of the earth, and on
     which the earth depended for its existence. There may be something
     analogous to this in cases of unknown individuals still. And all
     such are examples of what Aristotle says of virtuous principle, "[ei
     gar kai to ogko mikron est, dunamei kai timioteti poly mallon
     hyperechei panton],"

     "though in external appearance it be but small, yet, in power and
     worth, it is very far indeed superior to all things." (Ethics, b. x.
     c. vii. ad finem.) In the second place, there is another
     circumstance, which would tend to produce the same effect, viz. that
     reserve, or re tiring delicacy, which exists naturally in a good
     man, unless injured by external motives, and which is of course the
     teaching of GOD through him. Something of this kind always
     accompanies all strong and deep feeling, so much so that indications
     of it have been considered the characteristic of genuine poetry, as
     distinguishing it from that which is only fictitious of poetic
     feeling. It is the very protection of all sacred and virtuous
     principle, and which, like the bloom which indicates life and
     freshness, when once lost cannot be restored. Which is thus
     expressed in a Latin hymn;

     "Se sub serenis vultibus

     Austera virtus occulit:

     Timet videri; ne suum,

     Dum prodit, amittat decus."

     Paris. Brev. Comm. Mul.

     Such a reserve on other subjects of sublime or delicate feeling is
     only a type of the same in religion; where, of course, from the very
     nature of the subject, it must be much greater, inasmuch as it
     comprehends all feelings and all conduct which are directed to Him
     who is invisible, and who reads the language of the heart, and to
     whom silence may often best speak. Every thing which has GOD for its
     end gives rise to feelings which do not admit of expression. This
     seems to be implied in the difference which Aristotle speaks of,
     when he says there are objects which are worthy of higher feelings
     than praise can express, and such we look upon with honour and
     veneration. We do, indeed, often speak of such with words of praise,
     as we do of the Supreme Being, but in so doing we stand upon lower
     ground, and rather turn to each other than to Him, and introduce
     relation and comparison, which necessarily must be drawn from human
     and inferior objects: but we then descend from the higher, but si
     lent, impressions of awe, veneration, and wonder. Such, for
     instance, are those with which we first contemplate a vast religious
     edifice, or some grand object in nature. When these first feelings
     subside, we express ourselves in praise, and, necessarily, have
     recourse to comparison or contrast. Hence it was the case in the
     primitive times of Christianity, that the feelings of devotion were
     expressed by significant actions, which spoke, as it were, a secret
     language: such was the custom of turning to the East, and the use of
     the sign of the Cross. For "Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes
     stupent," those who feel deeply are pained by the lighter
     expressions of others.

     When that reserve is cast aside, there is a want of true and deep
     feeling; and this may be seen in the rejection of strong, typical,
     and figurative, and, therefore, half-secret expressions with which
     deep feeling is apt to clothe itself. Thus, in early periods of a
     nation, when their sense of the great and marvellous is strongest,
     they make use of those terms or modes of speech, which partake more
     of the infinite and divine; and their language, as they become more
     civilized, will partake more of the character of what is earthly and
     human. They adopt what they think is more full of expressions of
     their meaning; but the fact is, that they are general expressions,
     and therefore more limited and finite, and such as indicate rather a
     straining after such strong feeling, which they have not, than an
     expression of it. An instance of this may be seen in the rejection
     of the Ancient Psalms for modern paraphrases of the same. In the
     former, an infinite meaning was opened to the eye of faith; in the
     latter, it is tied down to one feeble human interpretation.
     Instances of the same may be seen in the New Version compared with
     the Old. May not one reason why Scripture, and our LORD Himself,
     uses figurative and proverbial expressions be on account of their
     comprehensiveness, and the extent of application which they hear?

     In addition to such holy reserve, and the suggestions of humility,
     another circumstance, which tends to produce the effect here
     described, are the commands of Holy Scripture, which enjoin the
     concealment of religious actions. Now, considering that actions
     teach more than words, and living examples more than maxims and
     admonitions, this immediately removes from the sight of men the most
     powerful appeals of GOD, and evidences of His presence; for all the
     most purely religious actions are thus withdrawn from view, done
     from GOD only, who is in secret, and to Him only, who seeth in
     secret, they begin and end in Him alone, unknown to the world. These
     are the signs of GOD'S presence among us, and of His
     withholding that presence from the gaze of the multitude, as too
     pure and holy for us to look on, and covering those that seek Him in
     the shadow of His hand. So that in the lives of those, in whom
     CHRIST dwells, there is ever something remarkably analogous to the
     retiring actions of His own life; and the state of such persons,
     while on earth, no words can express so emphatically as those of
     Scripture, their "life is hid with Christ in God."

     Now, it is much to be observed, that these indications, which are
     found with good men, and increase with holiness of life, and by
     which we may learn the mode in which the HOLY SPIRIT is dealing with
     mankind, are not to be found in religious enthusiasm. I would mean
     by enthusiasm, a state of the mind when the feelings are strongly
     moved by religion, but the heart is not adequately purified nor
     humbled. Such, therefore, would be most likely to occur when the
     passions have been strengthened by an irregular life, and the
     objects that excited them are casually removed from view, and the
     importance of religion is in consequence seen and felt. Such a state
     would partake much of the nature of earthly passion, and would be
     such as might be called in morals, according to the view taken
     above, a state of ignorance. GOD is not apprehended, as He is set
     forth in Scripture, as of infinite holiness, but a fiction of the
     imagination, as each man feigns the idea of GOD according to his own
     heart, which was shown visibly in the idols of old, and alluded to
     in the expression, "Thou thoughtest wickedly that GOD was such an
     one as thyself." In such a case men would have no reserve in
     expressing that which was not at all rightly apprehended, or feared,
     or loved. And the cause of this state of heart would be a not
     keeping the commandments which give this light to the eyes, or the
     not having kept them, and such transgressions not having been
     repented of. For this is set before us as the great cure for
     enthusiasm by St. John. It is the Apostle of Divine Love who seems
     to have been especially commissioned to warn us against this its
     counterfeit. Not only in his Epistles, but, in recording the parting
     consolations of our LORD, no less than eleven times in the course of
     two chapters does he stop, as it were, to insert these cautiond, "If
     ye keep my commandments." So that it would be exactly the case with
     these, as with those heretics of whom Tertullian speaks, as having
     none of that discipline of secret reserve which the Church
     maintained: "All things," he says, "are with them free, and without
     restraint." They have no fear of GOD, because GOD is not among them;
     for where GOD is, there must be the fear of Him." (Tertullian de
     Praescript. Haereticorum.) And yet, of course, the effect of this
     would be a strong contagious influence, after the usual manner of
     all earthly passion.

     Religion does not, under such circumstances, produce its genuine
     effect of humbling the natural man. To have a knowledge of GOD,
     without a knowledge of our own guilt and misery, has (as Pascal
     mentions) the effect of puffing up. And there is a great deal in
     religion which the natural man may eagerly take hold of, in order to
     exalt himself. Here, therefore, there would not be humility drawing
     back into the shade, as in the former instance; nor would there be
     that delicacy, or modest reserve in the outward expression of
     feeling; because there would be rather an aiming after the
     persuasion, than any really deep and true sense of religion. On the
     contrary, a mind in this state by strong expressions would be
     endeavouring to persuade itself, and to persuade others, in order
     that, through their opinion, it may again in return persuade itself,
     of its having that sense. And this would account for that deceit
     which, as Bp. Butler observes, so often accompanies religious
     enthusiasm; first of all deceiving itself into a false apprehension,
     and then, in order to support this, deceiving others; and then
     others, without this self delusion, as its end.

     The third characteristic in holiness of life is also here wanting;
     i. e. a self-denying and consistent performance of religious duties
     in secret. For such obedience would clearly remove it, and,
     therefore, this would account for another circumstance which
     characterizes religious enthusiasm, and that is unsettled ness and
     inconsistency,---a state of ever learning, and never coming to
     the knowledge of the truth; which, of course, arises from not
     seeking for it by obedience, which, we are told, is a sure way of
     arriving at it. The actions it does perform are rather the
     extraordinary, than the ordinary actions of religion, so as to lose
     that reserve before mentioned; and, for the same reason, it delights
     in actions of a purely religious character, more than in those, in
     which the religious motive is concealed in the actions of daily
     life.

     There would, also, from a secret misgiving, or sense of insecurity,
     be a tendency to feel after sensible signs, as in Balaam, when he
     sought for GOD'S voice and warrant. Such would be seen in a
     craving after palpably felt evidences, in doing extra ordinary and
     remarkable actions; in strong party affection, as taken for
     self-denying charity; in a looking out for miracles. (I mention this
     looking out for them, in distinction from a kind of credulity, and
     readiness to receive miracles, which is observable in the best men,
     when they come before them in the line of duty; for the former seems
     forbidden by our SAVIOUR,---for many shall arise, saying, "Here
     is CHRIST, and there," but the practical rule is given, "Go not
     after them.")

     As every thing in nature seems to decline and die away when it has
     done its work---such as the bodily faculties, natural gifts, and
     the like---so do animal feelings gradually subside when they have
     done their part in the probation of the soul, which may be seen in
     the circumstance of passive impressions becoming weaker by
     repetition. And perhaps this may be the case, as men advance in
     holiness of life; that a calm equability of soul is produced, (as in
     St. John,) and such sensible feelings exist less, as having done
     their part in the state of trial.

        8. That the whole subject contains something analogous in each
           particular to the circumstances of our Lord's life.

     Now, the inference from the whole of this view of the subject is,
     that the HOLY SPIRIT, in every way in which His dealings with
     mankind may be ascertained, is ever wont to throw a veil over His
     presence from the eyes of the world. That, as our LORD avoided the
     more public places for the manifestation of His Divine power and
     goodness, and went into the retired and despised Galilee, and hid
     His Divinity under the garb of humble and common life, so does He in
     the persons of His disciples, producing in them a tendency to
     withdraw themselves from the eyes of men; so that of each of them it
     may be said, as it was of Him, "He doth not strive nor cry, neither
     is his voice heard in the streets."

     That, as our LORD wrapt up the most sacred and divine truths in
     parables and mysterious sayings, so we find, that in good men there
     is a natural reserve of expression, which is apt to veil from the
     world holy sentiments; in both cases the end is observed, of keeping
     "that which is holy from dogs." And that such reserve i9 apt to give
     vent to its own feelings, especially in such similitudes and dark
     sayings, as partake of the nature of what is infinite, and,
     therefore, to the world mysterious.

     That, as our LORD concealed His divine miracles, and could not
     perform them because of men's unbelief, and commanded others
     not to mention them, so does He now, in that He makes known to a
     good man a daily increasing weight of evidence, similar to the
     attestation of miracles, in disclosing to him those confirmations of
     his faith, which are opened to an obedient life, and by the
     harmonious language of all nature, all of which testimony He reveals
     not to others because of their unbelief. And, in addition to this,
     He has commanded His disciples not to promulgate to the world those
     good works which He Himself still works in, and through, and by
     them.

     That, as our LORD left the curious and worldly-minded Jew to his own
     delusions, and answered him not, but left him to the difficulties
     which Scripture had thrown before him, in the solving of which
     alone, with a serious mind, could he find the truth; and did not
     explain to him his misconceptions concerning Him self; so is it also
     now with those who speculatively consider religious truth (the
     knowledge of which is the gift of GOD alone); they are beset with
     insurmountable difficulties, suggesting to them that "this is not
     the CHRIST," or leading to other practical errors.

     That, as our LORD disclosed the greatness of His divine power and
     person to a chosen few obedient and teachable spirits, limiting even
     that disclosure more and more; first to twelve, then to four, then,
     still further, to three (as in the Garden of Gethsemane, and at the
     transfiguration, &c.): so does it appear that in morals, both when
     considered as separate from, and also when considered as including
     religion, there is something, which is called knowledge, which is
     infinitely great and good, which is concealed from all others, who
     are universally represented as being in a state of darkness and
     ignorance, and is thus disclosed to these alone.

     That, as He, who spake by the law and the prophets, veiled the
     gospel therein in type and figure; and because of men's
     disobedience, "gave them statutes which were not good, and judgments
     by which men should not live," but led them on, by laws which
     satisfied not, to a secret wisdom, which good men perceived beyond;
     so also are there in morals, things which have led to much
     difficulty with speculative moralists, which are good and right to
     the natural man, but wrong in a Christian, on account of a further
     knowledge disclosed to the eye of faith: these are circumstances in
     which all that can be said is, "this is He, if ye can receive it."
     For, to the natural man, it is his boast "to covet honour" of men,
     but to the Christian his shame. Thus also the Fifth Commandment
     contains the germ of all piety; and yet to the Christian it is said,
     he must hate father and mother.

     Lastly, that as the manifestation of our LORD was seen to imply some
     very great and peculiar danger, when the heart was not prepared to
     receive it; so do we find that whenever these feelings, which are
     natural to a good man under the protection of the Spirit, are
     violated, as by enthusiasm, it is accompanied with dangerous
     consequences. Not to adduce other proofs of this, we have the
     memorable one in this country, when there broke in upon us an age,
     which has been well called one of "Light, but not of Love;" when the
     knowledge of divine truths was forced upon men of corrupt lives, and
     put forward without this sacred reserve. The consequence of this
     indelicate exposure of religion was, the perpetration of crimes
     almost unequalled in the annals of the world.
       _______________________________________________________________

                                  PART III.

               SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE FOREGOING OBSERVATIONS.

      1. That the principle was fully recognised by the Ancient Church.

     IT is well known that the general principle upon which the foregoing
     remarks are founded, pervades the whole religious system of the
     Ancient Church, and appears so much in various shapes throughout the
     works of the Fathers, that it would of itself form an entire subject
     of discussion to trace and exemplify it. Origen often alludes to it,
     as appearing in the conduct of our LORD; and his expositions of
     Scripture are founded upon it. Others do the same. Clement of
     Alexandria had, before Origen, philosophically discussed the subject
     at great length. Cyril of Jerusalem says, that not to men only, but
     from the highest archangel to the lowest created being, it is CHRIST
     that reveals the FATHER, to each as they are found worthy and
     capable of receiving Him. St. Basil speaks of the traditions they
     had received being of this character, which, says he, our Fathers
     have preserved in unobtrusive silence, and alludes to the secrecy
     and sacredness of the Holy Place in the Mosaic Law, as representing
     the same spirit of reserve. And there are some interesting
     circumstances that seem to connect it with our LORD Himself and His
     disciples. Such may be seen in the early Epistle to Diognetus,
     attributed to Justin Martyr, where the writer speaks of himself, as
     carrying on that sacred reserve, which they had derived from CHRIST
     and His Apostles, for, says he, "knowledge is not safe without a
     true life." There is a remarkable instance of similar testimony in
     that passage of Hippolytus, quoted by Mr. Keble in his Sermon on
     Tradition, (p. 19, 1st Edit.) This principle of Reserve was
     developed into a regular system, known under the name of the
     Disciplina Arcani. In another form it may be observed among the
     Ancients in their, almost universal, mode of interpreting Scripture,
     every part of which they consider replete with mysterious knowledge,
     revealed only to the faithful Christian. And although individuals
     among them may be wrong in any particular explanation, the general
     principle of interpretation, so Catholic and Apostolic, it cannot be
     doubted? is the right one. St. Augustin speaks not only of the Word
     of GOD, but of his works also in nature, and of the Heavens
     themselves, serving for a covering to hide GOD from us, by this
     means to lead us on to she gradual knowledge of Him. Here,
     therefore, again, the conduct of our blessed LORD might be traced,
     as illustrating this subject, viz. in His Church, in which we know
     He is present always; and if where two or three are gathered
     together in His name, He is in the midst of them, where shall we
     find Him, who is Truth itself, more assuredly than in the Catholic
     consent of His Church?

        2. That the present aspect of the world is much opposed to it.

     When, after being engaged in such contemplations, we lift up our
     eyes upon the present state of the world, an extraordinary aspect of
     things meets our view. The knowledge of GOD, hastening to cover the
     earth, as the waters cover the sea; and a remarkable combination of
     circumstances at work, to produce effects, the opposite to what has
     been hitherto witnessed in the world. The art of printing, bringing
     home this knowledge to all; the means which Providence has formerly
     allowed to hide it, not only from the Heathen and the Jew, but also
     from the Christian, (by a mysterious economy, which has been long
     permitted in the Church of Rome,) we see now removed; men of various
     creeds, opposed in principles and opposed in discipline, one might
     almost say Christians and Unbelievers, combining together in the
     circulation of the Scriptures. Add to this, preachers and teachers
     of various parties and from various motives, all busily engaged in
     imparting religious instruction. Schools more over, and many on an
     extensive national system. Churches and altars thrown open to all,
     from the loss of church discipline: and, what is worthy of notice,
     Christianity acknowledged as true, by persons of the worst
     principles. Discoveries of science too, opening to us the boundless
     extent of the material world, which we cannot but suppose may have
     some bearing on the religious condition of mankind, as
     manifestations of GOD. Add moreover a new principle, unknown to
     former ages, prevailing throughout the world, in the shape, not only
     of an Article of Faith, but as the one and only Article, indeed as
     one so important, and requiring to be received with such authority,
     as to supersede the very fabric of the Church: dispensing with her
     Sacraments, her Creeds, her Liturgies, her Discipline; and this
     principle is, that the highest and most sacred of all Christian
     doctrines, is to be brought before, and pressed home to, all persons
     indiscriminately, and most especially to those who are leading
     unchristian lives.

     Such are some of the most prominent features of the case. And so
     much does the opinion prevail of the value of religious knowledge
     merely and of itself, that when public attention was lately called
     to the commemoration of the familiar use of the Scriptures for these
     last 300 years, we heard no expressions on the subject which implied
     any thing like that feeling of apprehension, which the foregoing
     remarks would have led us to attach to it. Nor was it at all looked
     upon as that trying dispensation which the Baptist spoke of, as of
     the axe laid unto the root of the tree, and the coming wrath, and
     the sifting of the wheat. Nor was the awful import of those words
     considered, "be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come
     nigh unto you" (Luke x. 11 ), and "for judgment I am come into this
     world" (John ix. 39). Nor was our case at all alluded to in
     conjunction with that of Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, or of
     them to whom our LORD said, "if I had not come and spoken unto them,
     they had not had sin." There seems also an impatience at any book
     being held back from any person, as too high and sacred for them; it
     is a thing not understood. And so far from it being considered
     necessary to keep persons from church on account of irreligious
     lives, it is usually thought that every thing is done, if they can
     be brought to it. There is also an inclination to put aside the Old
     Testament for the more exclusive use of the Gospel itself, which is
     contained in it. And indeed full statements of religious truth have
     been thought so necessary, as to have produced ways of thinking
     often unnatural, of which this is an instance. A writer,
     investigating the existence of Christian truth in the Church, has
     thought it necessary to find explicit declarations of the acceptance
     of the atonement by the individual as the only proof of the
     preservation of the faith. The effect of which becomes equivalent to
     this, that an affectionate and dutiful child might be condemned for
     undutifulness, unless it could be proved, that he had made use of
     expressions of strong filial attachment.

     This general tendency of things cannot, I think, be considered in
     connexion with the former observations, without some serious thought
     in every reflecting mind, "waiting to see what GOD will do;" and not
     without some distrust of popular views, and superficial appearances,
     and an anxious desire for some anchor of the soul, in this new trial
     which seems coming upon the world. And cautious as we ought to be in
     speculations respecting the future, yet there is a thought which
     occurs, which one is almost afraid to mention, lest it should not be
     with sufficient seriousness. Whether when noticed in conjunction
     with the dangerous consequences which have been observed to follow
     our LORD'S disclosures of Himself, and the fact of those having been
     pronounced the worst to whom most knowledge was vouchsafed, and that
     so frequently as to mark a kind of mysterious and perhaps
     prophetical tendency of things which seem to point that way;
     whether, I say, all these circumstances may not indicate the coming
     of a time when "knowledge may indeed cover" the world, but "the love
     of the many shall have waxed cold," and faith be scarce found. There
     is something of prophetic admonition in the advice which St. Paul
     gives to persons under a similar apprehension, in the Second Epistle
     to the Thessalonians, where the stay against Anti-CHRIST is this:
     "Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye
     have been taught, whether by word or by our epistle." In looking to
     that epistle for some practical guidance, the general principle on
     which this steadfastness must be founded is here given, namely, an
     adherence to the Catholic truth written and unwritten.

       3. Practical rules afforded by it in the investigation of Truth.

     And now the observations which have been made respecting GOD'S mode
     of revealing Himself to mankind will furnish us with some important
     general rules for the attainment of religious truth. If in the
     sacraments we have in some especial sense the present power of GOD
     among us, and the episcopal and priestly succession have in them
     something divine, as channels which convey, as it were, such His
     Presence to us; according to the analogy of what has been said, we
     must expect to find in them something that hideth itself, something.
     like the personal presence of our LORD in His incarnation,
     surrounded with difficulties to the carnal mind, withdrawing itself,
     and leaving excuses for the Divine Power being denied; for did they
     come to us in a strong ,unquestionable shape, with the palpable
     evidence by some required, they would come to us in a manner unlike
     all other Divine manifestations. These would lead us to expect, that
     they should be left in so delicate a manner, that he who wishes to
     ascertain the truth may find a sufficient and satisfactory evidence,
     so as by a fine clue to lead him into all the treasures of the
     Divine blessings, but yet of such a kind that he who will not afford
     them such affectionate attention will lose all those high
     privileges. The secret of such enquiries is given us in the Book of
     Proverbs (xxiii. 26), "My son, give me thine heart, and let thine
     eyes observe my ways." For the whole case, in the search after GOD,
     is a trial of the affections, and whatever that knowledge may be, of
     which such great things are spoken, it implies affection combined
     with, and giving life to the understanding, otherwise dead, and
     after some heavenly manner illuminating and spiritualizing it. To
     require, therefore, that such subjects should come to us in a more
     sensible and palpable way, before we will accept them, betrays the
     same temper of mind as that of requiring a sign; or at best, it is
     but that weal: belief which says, "unless I handle and feel I will
     not believe;" and which therefore loses the highest blessing,
     "blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed."
     If the Divine presence is among us in these things, unbelief must be
     met as our LORD met that of the Jews. The obstacles to their belief
     were, first, low conceptions of GOD'S Messiah and His promises. To
     obviate these our SAVIOUR drew their attention to that prophecy
     where David himself called Him LORD; and, secondly, their looking
     out for a sign, which called from our LORD such visible indications
     of grief. And the remedy which He pointed out for this latter was
     this, that they should judge of heavenly matters as they did of
     earthly, such as indications of the weather, by affording them such
     attention as a person pays to any object respecting which he is
     solicitous. They who best know those signs of the weather are they
     whose interest it is to know them.

     The outset, therefore, of such inquiries is, first, that we should
     form high conceptions of the Divine promises and expressions, such,
     for instance, as "this is my body" (the only expression, I believe,
     in the whole of Scripture, used, on one single occasion, which has
     been recorded four distinct times in precisely the same words); and
     the second requisite is such an interest as would open our minds to
     acquiesce in the proofs of probable evidence. Both of these would
     make the reception of the truth to depend upon natural piety. It
     appears that that temper of mind which is produced by obedience to
     the fifth commandment, as extending through the various relations of
     life, is the foundation of that in the character in which piety or
     devotion consists, producing, as it were, that habitual attitude of
     the soul. And this piety to GOD gives life again in return to that
     piety which embraces all those lower relations, considering such
     superiors as invested in various ways with something of a Divine
     prerogative, as faint emblems or substitutes of the Supreme Father
     and Governor. Now, this highest temper of mind in natural religion,
     becoming spiritualized and exalted in the Christian, is rendered
     immediately in him the channel by which are conveyed to him all
     those gifts in which the kingdom of heaven consists. For first of
     all, by this temper of mind the Christian's affections are carried
     up through all these inferior relations by which the knowledge and
     power of Christianity is brought down to him) to JESUS CHRIST
     Himself, as the fountain of all good. And then, again, it is
     impossible to have a high sense of reverence for our LORD'S person,
     without investing all who approach Him with some portion of the
     same. This Nature itself shows us in the case of any strong
     attachment: and this would exist in all degrees according to the
     nearness of such persons. At first it would extend to apostles, then
     to apostolical men and fathers, and then to those commissioned of
     the same. This is so necessarily the result of affection, that it is
     impossible to do violence to it without impairing that affection
     itself. For instance, we cannot allow ourselves to think slightingly
     of apostolical fathers, without thinking so, in some degree, of
     apostles: and we cannot think slightingly of apostles, without
     lowering our veneration for our LORD Himself.

     The question, therefore, never need be, whether an ordinance, such
     as that of Episcopacy, can be proved to be of Divine command, for it
     has been observed, that our LORD never said that He was the CHRIST.
     But He was not on that account the less so, nor was it the less
     necessary that He should be received as such. All the external
     evidence required would be, whether there are indications of a
     Divine preference given to it, for if this can be proved, it is
     sufficient for a dutiful spirit. In such considerations, all that
     can be said is, "he that can receive it, let him receive it," and
     that "the poor in spirit" occupy "the kingdom."

     It follows, that, although such knowledge be the result of "senses
     exercised in the discernment of good and evil," yet that it depends
     not on intellectual acuteness, or subtle reasonings. Religion being
     a practical matter, a disposition to argument should be discouraged?
     and the thoughts directed to something practically good; as GOD does
     not reveal Himself excepting to a certain disposition, the question
     is one of natural piety.

     As our SAVIOUR pointed to His works, instead of declaring Himself,
     after the same manner, when, in the times of Origen, the secret
     discipline was practised in the Church, which seems to correspond to
     our SAVIOUR'S concealing Himself, he pointed to the lives of
     Christians, i. e. to the works of CHRIST shown in them, as the
     strongest evidence which he could offer to the world. The truth must
     ever be propagated by some way of this kind, and not by argument. It
     is perceived whether certain principles are seriously held with that
     consistency and constancy of endurance which attends the conviction
     of truth. It is to this evidence that the eye of mankind looks, and
     from which How its strong persuasions, otherwise they are not held
     so as to become a part of the character in those that hear of them,
     and therefore not in reality held as moral principles of truth.

        4. This principle of Reserve applied to prevailing opinions on
                             promoting Religion.

     The subject under discussion may in the next place be wisely applied
     as a test to the popular modes of extending Christianity, which
     partake of the spirit of the age. And these may be considered under
     three heads, that of bringing churches near to the houses of every
     body, cheap publications, and national schools.

     With regard to the building of churches, our LORD'S testimony to the
     widow's mite, and the costly ointment, and to the intention of the
     man after His own heart, prove such works to be in the highest
     degree acceptable to Him, and therefore necessarily productive of
     good. And the sacrifices they require are greatly beneficial to the
     individual, merely as religious sacrifices. It is also very
     important as setting up a witness, of which character alone many of
     the best actions must be. It is indeed one of the most natural
     expressions of a heart rightly disposed, as offerings made to GOD,
     arising in Him, and resting in Him as their end; and therefore there
     can be no means of promoting the cause of religion higher and better
     than such. Merely, I repeat, as oblations to GOD, and having
     reference to Him alone; and which of course cannot be too costly and
     expensive in proportion to our own habits of life, which natural
     piety itself would teach. It were painful to think we should bestow
     ornaments on our own houses, and leave the house of GOD without.

     But when the utilitarian view of the subject is taken, are we not
     thinking that we may do by human means, and such as partake of this
     world, that which is the work of GOD alone, as if the mammon of the
     world could promote the cause of GOD? For if the erection of
     churches, which from commodiousness and easiness of access are to
     invite, and from their little cost partake more of a low contriving
     expediency than of a generous love of GOD, is to do the work of
     religion, then is it more easy to win souls than Scripture will
     warrant us in supposing. On the contrary, if the maxim be true, that
     "men venerate that which resisteth them, and that which courteth
     their favour they despise," then have we to fear lest, rather than
     doing good, we be breaking that holy law, which hath commanded, that
     we give not that which is holy to the dogs; the Church's best gifts
     be trod under foot, and her enemies turn and rend her. For if
     churches are to be brought home to all, then are all persons to be
     brought into churches, and this by human means. Thus immediately
     connected with that view alluded to is that of eloquence and
     pleasing delivery, a powerful worldly engine, unlike that weak
     instrument which St Paul calls "the foolishness of preaching;" and
     liturgies made suitable to the taste of the generality, and
     canonical hours relinquished for those which are more popular, and
     sacred things brought out of their chaste reserve, and put forth to
     attract. We have not so learned of Him who is the same yesterday,
     and to-day, and for ever. Of Him it is said, that "He spake the word
     unto them as they were able to hear it;" and that our LORD'S own
     mode of teaching was the one prescribed to His Apostles is evident
     from the instructions, "unto whatsoever city ye enter, enquire who
     in it is worthy, and there abide."

     All acceptance of divine truth, and all religious worship, must be
     the spontaneous act of the individual, and the more inconvenience or
     self-denial such an act is accompanied with, the more does it
     partake of the nature of such spontaneous action. The dealings of
     our LORD seem intended to call out this self-denial, but in no way
     to force it, or to supersede the necessity of it; on the contrary,
     He appears to withdraw to avoid such an effect, "when cast out He
     resisted not, but retired," as Chrysostom says. The Church system is
     founded on this principle; the daily service actually requires such
     a devotional habit formed by self-discipline, which no attraction or
     external motive can supply the place of. The writer has heard it
     well remarked, that the tendency of the Church has ever been to
     prefer earlier hours of the day, the present system of the world the
     later hours, for religious services. The same may be applied also to
     the morning of life, to which the Church looks more than to a late
     repentance. This arises from the former requiring an effort on the
     part of the individual, the latter meeting him in his indolence.
     However this may be, all the good that can be done to others must be
     by calling out by some means their self-denial. " The kingdom of
     heaven is preached," but the "violent" alone "press into the
     possession of it." [Pathemata mathemata] was an ancient proverb, and
     is universally extensive; there is no strength but in the Cross. It
     will always be true of human nature, that it cannot approach GOD
     without a sacrifice.

     Much of what is here said may be applied to an indiscriminate
     distribution of Bibles and religious publications. We must not
     expect that the work, which occasioned our SAVIOUR and His disciples
     so much pains, can be done by such means. We have rather to look
     with awe on these new dealings of Providence with mankind. It might
     perhaps be thought that, if it is a state of the heart alone which
     can receive the truth, to bring it forward before persons unprepared
     to acknowledge it does not signify. Such persons cannot receive it,
     and therefore the effect is merely nugatory and unavailing. But this
     does not follow: that they cannot receive it is the appointment of
     GOD, but our attempting to act contrary to His mode of acting may be
     productive of evil. It may arise from a want of real seriousness on
     the subject of religion, and it may be that for this reason we are
     not acting under the teaching of God, and that, in consequence,
     these effects are prevailing. Are we rightly estimating the
     consequence of a bare knowledge of the Gospel? As a proof that
     religious knowledge has been otherwise considered, may be mentioned
     one of the short practical rules attributed to St. Basil: the
     question is asked "whether it be advantageous to learn many things
     out of Scripture?" the answer implies, that, though it be necessary
     for those whose office it is to instruct, yet that all should be
     cautious that, according to the Apostle's injunction, "they think
     soberly ," earnestly learn their own duty, and do it, only caring
     for and bent on attaining that blessing, "well done, good servant,
     thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler
     over many." The next question and answer is the following:

     "Q. How ought they to receive the gift, who have been deemed worthy
     to learn the four Gospels?"

     "A. Since the LORD hath declared that 'to whom men have committed
     much, of him they will ask the more,' they ought to be more
     exceedingly afraid, and give earnest heed, as the Apostle hath
     taught us, saying, 'as workers together with Him, we beseech you
     that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.' And this will be the
     case if we be persuaded by the LORD when He saith, 'if ye know these
     things, happy are ye if ye do them ."'

     Here he evidently seems to think that the knowledge of the Gospels
     was a matter for the most serious apprehension, not to be lightly
     coveted, but received with fear. And these occur among religious
     rules most sensible and practical.

     Thirdly, with regard to national schools. I would be careful not to
     say any thing that might appear to depreciate the value of religious
     knowledge, but to say that such knowledge is a treasure of so
     transcendent a nature, that it must be handled with sacred care, is
     not to depreciate, but to exalt its value. As our LORD led persons
     gradually to the knowledge of the truth by quiet teaching, by
     leading them to observe His works, by drawing out their self-denial
     and engaging their confidence, so, in obedience to His command "to
     make disciples of all nations," the system of the Church is that of
     parental and pastoral training, and building up by practical
     instruction; such as catechising and the use of a constant
     devotional form. These not having been sufficiently carried on has
     given rise to two effects: the one is an undue preponderance given
     to preaching, in order to supply the want, as if it were able
     powerfully to bring to the heart that knowledge which has not been
     received into the character by gradual inculcation and discipline;
     the other effect has been the system of large national schools, the
     object of which is contrary to the spirit of the Church, to impart
     sacred knowledge without any of this training as coinciding with it
     except in a very limited way, and to inculcate knowledge without
     adequately instilling a sense of its practical importance.

     With regard to preaching, that it cannot of itself supply, the want
     of the other requisites, is evident. George Herbert, indeed, speaks
     highly of it as an instrument of good, but only as subsidiary. And
     what are his preacher's qualifications? "The character of his
     sermons," he says, "is holiness; he is not witty, or learned, or
     eloquent, but holy." In another place, he says, his library, from
     which, of course, his stores are drawn, is "a divine life." Speech,
     therefore, with him is chiefly efficacious, as the means by which
     the all-prevailing force of example passes from one to another; and
     this brings the subject again to the point this treatise would
     inculcate, that the only way to promote good in others is to begin
     by self-discipline.

     In addition to all this it must be observed, that the effect of the
     Church as a witness, though in a manner silent and out of sight, is
     something very great and incalculable, of which I would adduce the
     following instance. Before the Reformation the Church recognized the
     seven hours of prayer. However these may have been practically
     neglected, or hidden in an unknown tongue, there is no estimating
     what influence this may have had on common people's minds secretly,
     but we find strong traces of it in these circumstances; that not
     only were numerous books of devotion written by persons of a
     Catholic spirit, recognizing these appointed hours, but many others
     were evidently attempting to realize to their own minds some
     influence or feeling of want which this system had left on their
     thoughts. Thus we have Nicholas Ferrar supporting in his family an
     unceasing round of worship, night and day, and reading the whole of
     the Psalms in the twenty-four hours. We have William Law
     recommending every independent Christian to appoint with himself
     these frequent hours of prayer, making the object of each a distinct
     grace or virtue; and Robert Nelson advises us thus to realize each
     day some Christian duty. Dr. Sherlock of Winwick, in his Practical
     Christian, is another instance; and many others might be adduced to
     prove the effect which this system had produced in their minds;
     though the Breviary itself does not appear to have been in their
     thoughts. Since the former system has worn out of people's
     recollections, and the two daily services have been forgotten,
     practical books of devotion have been of rare occurrence, and such
     as have appeared have been from persons who have been comparatively
     more alive to the existence of such an obligation in the Church. And
     yet any form of religion that does not support devotional habits
     must be essentially wrong.

     These means are of a more unobtrusive and retiring character than
     the age approves of, but still this is the temper of the Church, as
     it always has been. Indeed, the great occasions of difference on
     which many Separatists have left, or would leave, her bosom, have
     been this very temper of reserve, which she has inherited from the
     beginning. It may be observed, that they have in many cases taken
     some single doctrine; which they have put forward in a bold and
     prominent way, and made the centre of a self-formed system, which
     the Church holds as well as themselves, but after a certain manner
     of reserve, in a certain proportion and in combination with others.

         5. On the necessity of bringing forward the Doctrine of the
                                  Atonement.

     We now proceed to the consideration of a subject most important in
     this point of view,---the prevailing notion of bringing forward
     the Atonement explicitly and prominently on all occasions. It is
     evidently quite opposed to what we consider the teaching of
     Scripture, nor do we find any sanction for it in the Gospels. If the
     Epistles of St. Paul appear to favour it, it is only at first sight.
     The singular characteristic of St. Paul, as shown in all his
     Epistles and speeches, seems to have been a going out of himself to
     enter into the feelings and put himself in the circumstances of
     others. This will account for the occasions on which he brings
     forward this doctrine; as in the Epistles to the Romans and the
     Galatians. In both of these cases, the prejudices which closed up
     their ears against the reception of the truth were such as were
     essentially opposed to the Atonement. So much in the writings of St.
     Paul does the Holy Spirit adapt His teaching to the wants of each,
     as our LORD did in His Incarnation, a principle which is opposed to
     this opinion.

     There is another point which might seem to countenance it, that St.
     Paul speaks of himself as at all times preaching "CHRIST crucified;"
     and it being said by Origen that CHRIST crucified was the first
     doctrine taught, and that of our LORD'S divinity the last which men
     came to know. But this, in fact, so far from contradicting, strongly
     confirms the view here taken; it will be evident, on a little
     attention, that when St. Paul thus speaks, it is not the Atonement
     and Divinity of our LORD which he brings forward, although it is
     implied in that saying. The whole of St. Paul's life and actions,
     after his conversion, and the whole of his teaching, as appears from
     the Epistles, may be said to have been nothing else but a setting
     forth of CHRIST crucified, as the one great principle which absorbed
     all his heart, and actuated all his conduct. It was the wood cast
     into the waters which entirely changed them into its own nature, and
     impregnated them with itself. This is intimated by expressions of
     this kind which are of continual occurrence, such as, " GOD forbid
     that I should glory save in the Cross of our LORD JESUS CHRIST;" "I
     was determined not to know any thing among you but CHRIST
     crucified;" "But we preach CHRIST crucified." Now these words of
     course imply "the Atonement" as a life-giving principle contained in
     them; but it is a great mistake to suppose that they contain nothing
     more, or that, by preaching the Atonement, we are preaching what St.
     Paul meant by CHRIST crucified. It may be seen by an attention to
     the context in all the passages where these expressions occur, that
     it is a very different view, and in fact, the opposite to the modern
     notion, which St. Paul always intends by it. It is the necessity of
     our being crucified to the world, it is our humiliation together
     with Him, mortification of the flesh, being made conformable to His
     sufferings and His death. It was a doctrine which was "foolishness
     to the wise and an offence to the Jew," on account of the abasement
     of the natural man which it implied. Whereas, the notion now
     prevailing is attractive to the world, in the naked way in which it
     is put forth, so as rather to diminish, than increase, a sense of
     responsibility and consequent humiliation. If the doctrine of the
     Atonement is conveyed in the expression of CHRIST crucified as used
     by St. Paul, it is by teaching, at the same time, the necessity
     of-our mortification, which is repugnant to opinions now received.
     It is expressing, in other words, our SAVIOUR'S declaration, " he
     that cometh after me must take up his cross daily and follow me."
     They both imply that we cannot approach GOD without a
     sacrifice,---a sacrifice on the part of human nature in union
     with that of our SAVIOUR. Both of which seem to be taught in the
     legal sacrifices.

     The Cross of CHRIST which St. Paul preached was that by which "the
     world was crucified to him and he was crucified to the world,"
     "bearing about in the body the dying of the LORD JESUS." And
     precisely the same was the teaching of our blessed LORD also. His
     own humiliation, and the necessity of our humiliation together with
     Him, was the doctrine signified by the Cross which He put forth and
     inculcated on the multitude, in distinction from that of His own
     divinity, and our salvation through the same, which He rather kept
     secret. This is remarkably shown in the 8th chapter of St. Mark;
     after the confession of St. Peter, it is added, and "He charged them
     that they should tell no man concerning Him." And He began to teach
     them, as the account continues, concerning His sufferings, to which
     it is immediately added, "and he spake that saying openly," and the
     account proceeds, and "when He had called the people unto Him with
     His disciples also, He said unto them, Whosoever will come after me,
     let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me." We
     cannot but contrast the full declarations, so often repeated,
     concerning His sufferings, with the mysterious silence respecting
     His divinity; and we must observe that the mention of those
     sufferings is introduced in conjunction with that of the necessity
     of His disciples drinking of the same cup.

     In all things it would appear that this doctrine, so far from its
     being what is supposed, is in fact the very "secret of the LORD,"
     which Solomon says "is with the righteous," and "the covenant" not
     to be lightly spoken of by man, but which "He will show to them that
     fear Him:" That knowledge which is blessed, because flesh and blood
     cannot reveal it, but the Father only. The "hidden manna" which He
     will give to those who overcome the world: the white stone, with "a
     new name" written thereon, "which no man knoweth, saving he that
     receiveth it."

     The cause of the extraordinary prevalence of this modern opinion, of
     the necessity of preaching the Atonement thus explicitly, seems to
     be this: The doctrine of the Atonement is secretly implied in the
     whole of Scripture, in the Law and the Prophets, and the New
     Testament. In the Gospel it is in most of the precepts, in the
     blessings; in most of the parables, so much so, that they would have
     no meaning without it as the foundation: for how is the mourner to
     be comforted without it, or the poor in spirit to have a kingdom?
     how is the prodigal to be received with such welcome, or what is the
     pearl of great price, and the hidden treasure? In like manner ought
     it to pervade the teaching of the Church under the same Spirit, as
     doubtless it does its Liturgies, especially the Baptismal Service.
     And as a more and more full reception of this truth will accompany
     all growth in grace in a good man, proceeding from CHRIST crucified,
     to a broader, and deeper, and higher sense of that Atonement and our
     LORD'S divinity, so will it pervade all his teaching under the same
     Spirit. Since the great loss of Christian principle, which our
     Church sustained at the Rebellion of 1688; when she threw as it were
     out of her pale the doctrine of CHRIST crucified, (together with Ken
     and Kettlewell) a low tone of morals has pervaded her teaching, and
     not founded on the great Christian principle, and that Baptism,
     which implied it, has been much forgotten. The reaction which
     usually attends popular feeling, has brought in the present
     opinions, which, as might be expected, has rather caught at the
     shadow, than attained to the substance, of that truth, which is as
     much above our nature, as heaven is above earth.

     The apparent paradox which we witness, of Christianity having become
     publicly acceptable to the world, contrary to our LORD'S express
     declarations, can only be accounted for by its having been put
     forward without its distinguishing characteristic, the humiliation
     of the natural man: the doctrine of the Cross having been in some
     manner hidden: or those truths connected with it which are most
     agreeable to mankind being brought forward alone. "Had the design of
     our LORD'S coming," says Pascal, "been the work of Justification
     only, it had been then the easiest task in the world to convince an
     unbeliever. But since he came, as Isaiah prophetically speaks, in
     sanctificationem et in scandalum, perverse Infidelity is above our
     strength to conquer, and our art to cure." (page 179.) The teaching
     alluded to has practically made a separation between these
     doctrines, or, at least, has led the world to do so.

     Every great doctrine in Scripture secretly pervades the whole of it
     under different forms, and in different degrees, and we cannot
     calculate on the danger that may ensue, when we not only give an
     undue and exclusive prominence to any one truth, but bring forward
     that one singly and nakedly, without all that which accompanies it
     in Scripture. This may be seen in another instance; take the
     doctrine of eternal punishment: it is surrounded with speculative
     difficulties which might pronounce it incompatible with the goodness
     of GOD. The natural man is averse to receive it. But it comes to us
     in Scripture accompanied with so many circumstances equally
     mysterious and apparently connected with it, that a devout mind
     becomes prepared to receive it, in conjunction with many others,
     which it acquiesces in, though it cannot explain. As, for instance,
     the imprecations on the wicked, which abound in the Psalms, in which
     there is something incompatible with Christian feeling and the
     feebleness of our knowledge. But a good man, instead of explaining
     them away, learns from them a sense of awful acquiescence in the
     divine judgments; which prepares his mind to receive the other great
     doctrine, in a way that he would not otherwise have done. For we
     cannot but conceive these expressions to he bound up in some secret
     manner with that incomprehensible mystery, that, at the consummation
     of the world, the righteous shall be so entirely resigned to the
     Divine will, as somehow, we know not how, to acquiesce in the
     destruction of the wicked. As if the Almighty, in these passages of
     Scripture, were taking us into his own counsels, and making us, in
     some mysterious manner, partakers of them. This instance may serve
     to show how persons may be led practically to reject the most
     important doctrines, on account of their impatience at other parts
     of Holy Scripture.

     And not only is the exclusive and naked exposure of so very sacred a
     truth unscriptural and dangerous, but, as Bishop Wilson says, the
     comforts of Religion ought to be applied with great caution. And
     moreover to require, as is sometimes done, from both grown persons
     and children, an explicit declaration of a belief in the Atonement,
     and the full assurance of its power, appears equally untenable. For
     if, in the case of Abraham, and many others of the most approved
     faith in CHRIST, there was no such explicit knowledge, it may be the
     case now. If a poor woman, ignorant and superstitious, as might be
     supposed, was received by our LORD by so instant a blessing for
     touching the border of His clothes, may it not have been the case
     that in times, which are now considered dark and lost to Gospel
     truth, there might have been many such? That there might have been
     many a helpless person, who knelt to a crucifix in a village
     churchyard, who might have done so under a more true sense of that
     faith which is unto life, than those who are able to express the
     most enlightened knowledge. And therefore, though such as would be
     now considered in a state of darkness, had more fully arrived at
     those treasures of wisdom which are hid in CHRIST.

     Now all these unhallowed approaches to our blessed SAVIOUR which
     these principles indicate, will, from what has been said, in some
     manner lead to a disbelief in His divinity, the knowledge of which,
     it has been observed, was that which He kept from the unworthy. Not
     that we are to expect a declaration of Socinianism as its immediate
     consequence; but there are two ways in which the effect may be
     perceived; first, when the system develops itself in any course of
     time adequate for producing its legitimate results; and, secondly,
     it may be seen in a subtle shape in the tendency it produces in
     individuals to apply familiar and irreverent expressions to-our
     blessed LORD. For such is, in fact, a disguised shape of
     Socinianism. It may a]so be seen in a disposition to deny His Divine
     Presence and Power in His Sacraments,---the regenerating grace of
     one, and the Spiritual presence in the other. And this view of the
     subject derives confirmation from the Prophecies, which indicate
     that all corruptions tend to that apostasy which shall deny the SON.
     It may be that these are but accidental developments of a great
     necessary and essential principle, ending in the denial of "the LORD
     that bought them."

     But these general tendencies must not of course be applied to
     individuals, who may acquiesce in, or not see the danger of the
     system they espouse ; for we know there is often a great deal in the
     character to counteract one admitted principle; and it is often the
     case, by GOD'S mercy, that in particular instances wrong principles
     are not received into the heart and conduct, no more than in other
     cases good ones, which are professed. We must observe, that in the
     Old Testament, all approaches to GOD were accompanied with
     sacrifices and ablutions; in the Gospel with the denunciation of our
     SAVIOUR'S, that none are to follow Him without taking up the cross
     daily,---and the fuller manifestation at the last is seen through
     the extreme humiliation of human nature in CHRIST crucified.
     Afterwards, it is preached by St. Paul, while bearing about in the
     body the marks of the LORD JESUS; and received by his converts in a
     participation of the same sufferings. By St. John, our LORD'S
     Divinity is put forth with the repeated and unceasing exhortations
     of keeping the commandments. All of these are varied expositions of
     the expression, "now mine eye seeth Thee, wherefore I abhor myself,
     and repent in dust and ashes" (Job xlii. 6). Perhaps there is no
     giving glory to GOD without this humiliation of the creature, as
     David to the reproaches of his wife expresses his holy
     determination, "I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base
     in mine own sight." For "no flesh shall glory in His presence." But
     what is remarkable in this late moral phenomenon, is the reverse to
     all this,---it is accompanied with a great impatience, not only
     of any holding back of this Divine truth, but of the inculcation of
     it being accompanied with that of the necessity of mortification and
     obedience on the part of man.

     And here it may be asked, if this necessary tendency to some subtle
     form of Socinianism accompanies all practical disregard to Religion
     when professed: how is this proved in the case of the Roman Church,
     which, notwithstanding its extensive corruption, has served, by
     GOD'S protection, as a safeguard for the Catholic truth? It will
     explain a circumstance that seems otherwise unaccountable, the
     extraordinary, yet powerfully prevailing, tendency to substitute the
     Virgin as the object of religious worship. The great Catholic
     doctrine of the Trinity being so strongly established among them by
     entering into all their devotional forms and Creeds, that it could
     not be shaken, human depravity has sought out an opening for itself
     under another shape. It is by this means the natural heart lowers
     the object of its worship to its own frailty, so as to approach that
     object in Prayer without Holiness of life. Which is in fact the
     object of every false or perverted religion.

                 6. On Reserve in speaking of Sacred Things.

     In immediate connection with these topics, is that of not observing
     any Reserve on sacred subjects, or rather of casting aside that
     Reserve which is natural both in conversation and in writing.

     It seems to arise from causes not unsimilar to those which have been
     at the bottom of most of the things alluded to, viz. an attempt to
     remedy certain effects and symptoms which indicate a want of
     Religion, instead of the want itself.

     A simple and unaffected piety will fulfil the injunctions of
     Scripture, which says prophetically of our blessed SAVIOUR, and
     doubtless in Him of all His members, "I have not hid Thy
     righteousness within my heart, my talk hath been of Thy truth and of
     Thy salvation;'' and "the mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom and
     his tongue talketh of judgment;" his endeavours will be to fulfil
     the Apostolical injunction, "that his conversation be good for the
     use of edifying," "seasoned with salt" of Scripture principle, and
     "ministering grace." Add to which that bearing testimony to GOD'S
     truth in common discourse is a duty of the very highest importance.

     Agreeable to these commands are the practical remarks of Bishop
     Wilson, that "hearts truly touched with the love of GOD will
     minister light and warmth to each other in ordinary conversation."
     It is a distinct subject of his prayers that he may do so; and he
     observes that it was the constant practice of our blessed SAVIOUR to
     leave all persons better with whom he conversed.

     But the force of all this arises from this, that in all these cases
     it is "from the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." Bishop
     Wilson himself gives the caution, that we should never talk of
     religion without thinking seriously; that such conversation should
     be affectionate, seasonable, and "not casting pearls before swine."
     And surely our blessed LORD'S example was entirely of this kind,
     what we might be allowed to call perfectly natural; drawing out from
     every passing event treasures of wisdom, and also from the secret
     thoughts of His hearers. But the great sacred lesson was often only
     implied, and which might occur afterwards on attentive recollection.

     The injury produced by the habit here condemned is from what Bishop
     Butler mentions on the formation of moral habits, that going over
     the theories of religion has the effect of hardening the heart. And
     Aristotle had long before observed that the reason why persons did
     not improve in virtue was, that they have recourse to theory and
     words to persuade themselves that they are good, and so do not
     labour after internal habits. To this it may be added, that strong
     right feeling may find a vent in talking, which it would otherwise
     seek for in action.

     The same may be said of bringing forward the name of the
     ever-blessed Spirit of GOD without serious attention: the effect of
     this is to take away the sense of reality, and to habituate the mind
     to irreverence. "Whenever you happen to hear the name of GOD
     mentioned," says Norris, in his advice to his children, "accustom
     yourself to make a reverential pause, and form within yourselves an
     inward act of adoration; whereby you will be less apt to profane
     that great and venerable name in your more solemn addresses."

                    7. The important practical conclusion.

     But the one great practical consideration, and which contains in it
     all others, which is to be gained from a due regard to the whole of
     the subject which has been investigated, is one which is full of
     awe, indeed, but also full of consolation, as tending to keep the
     mind quiet in times of universal movement and excitement. That JESUS
     CHRIST is now, and has been at all times, hiding Himself from us,
     but at the same time exceedingly desirous to communicate Himself,
     and that exactly in proportion as we show ourselves worthy He will
     disclose Himself to us; that if we constrain Him He will come in and
     abide with us; that unsatisfactory as human knowledge is, and the
     increase of which is the increase of care, a knowledge which puffeth
     up; yet that there is a knowledge which humbleth, which is infinite
     in its nature, and is nothing else than deeper, and higher, and
     broader views of the mystery which is hid in CHRIST.

     That although Scripture does not set before us any sensible joy or
     satisfaction to be sought for, as the end of holiness, yet it does
     this knowledge; which is attainable by nothing else but by making
     the study of Divinity to consist in a Divine life.

     That with regard to any ways of doing good to the world, it is far
     too great a work for any thing of human device, or any plans that
     partake of this world to perform; but if in. the prescribed path of
     duty we shall be enabled to obtain this light, it will from us be
     communicated to others, but perhaps only in some secret way which is
     known to GOD, and which the world esteems foolishness, but a power
     which is of GOD, and therefore must overcome the world.

     That all the means of grace faithfully cherished will lead us, as it
     were, step by step, into all these treasures, inexhaustible in their
     nature, limitless in their duration, and exceeding all conception of
     man, the blessing of the pure in heart, that they shall see GOD.

     And to see GOD implies, even in this world, in all apparent
     imperfections, to discern something which is harmonious and
     life-giving; for even earthly passion, after the similitude of this
     affection which is heavenly, invests all things with itself, and
     makes them to speak eloquently its own language.

     It is to be observed, that Holy Scripture not only speaks of it as
     the light within, and its being darkened as a great darkness, but
     introduces the natural senses as being in some manner the seats or
     partakers of it. The loss of it is not only the heart being
     hardened, but the eyes being blinded, and the ears made dull of
     hearing. As if, when quickened by this internal light, all the
     senses were made to communicate with and to convey from things
     without this heavenly wisdom. Such expressions are not made use of
     merely as figures.

     Such a knowledge must include a power of setting a right value on
     all objects, which occupy the imagination and affections of the
     natural man, such as power, and wealth, and reputation, and beauty,
     and learning, and genius; such a light in the mind must show the
     right proportions of these things after some heavenly manner.

     But the whole of this subject, so truly divine and holy, it is
     perhaps better not to dwell on, from all that has been said: not
     only that we may not as we necessarily must do, speak unworthily of
     it, but also lest, making it a matter of words, we should please
     ourselves, and not be earnest enough to attain it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
