                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                        ADVENT SERMONS ON ANTICHRIST.

                                 [Number 83]
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  SERMON I.

                           THE TIMES OF ANTICHRIST.

                               2 THESS. ii. 3.

     "Let no man deceive you by any means: for that Day shall not come,
     except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
     revealed, the son of perdition."

     THE Thessalonian Christians had supposed that the coming of CHRIST
     was near at hand. St. Paul writes to warn them against such an
     expectation. Not that he discountenances their looking out for
     CHRIST'S coming,---the contrary; but he tells them that a certain
     event must come before it, and till that was arrived, the end would
     not be. "That Day shall not come," he says, "except there come a
     falling away first."

     As long as the world lasts, this passage of Scripture will be full
     of reverent interest to Christians. It is their duty ever to be
     watching for the advent of their LORD, to search for the signs of it
     in all that happens around them; and above all to keep in mind this
     great and awful sign which the text speaks of. At this season of the
     year, then, when we turn our thoughts to the coming of CHRIST, it is
     not out of place to review the intimations given us in Scripture
     concerning His precursor: this I shall now do in several Sermons;
     and, in doing so, I shall follow the exclusive guidance of the
     ancient Fathers of the Church.

     I follow the ancient Fathers, not as thinking that on such a subject
     they have the weight they possess in the instance of doctrines or
     ordinances. When they speak of doctrines, they speak of them as
     being universally held. They are witnesses to the fact of those
     doctrines being received, not here or there, but every where. We
     receive those doctrines which they thus hold, not merely because
     they hold them, but because they bear witness that all Christians
     every where then held them. We take them as honest informants, but
     not as a sufficient authority in themselves, though they are an
     authority too. If they were to state these very same doctrines, but
     say, "These are our opinions; we deduced them from Scripture, and
     they are true," we might well doubt about receiving them at their
     hands. We might fairly say, that we had as much right to deduce from
     Scripture as they had; that deductions of Scripture were mere
     opinions; that if our deductions agreed with theirs, that would be a
     happy coincidence, and increase our confidence in them; but if they
     did not, it could not be helped---we must follow our own light.
     Doubtless no man has any right to impose his own deductions upon
     another, in matters of faith. There is an obvious obligation,
     indeed, upon the ignorant to submit to those who are better
     informed; and there is a fitness in the young submitting implicitly
     for a time to the teaching of their elders; but beyond this, one
     man's opinion is not better than another's. But this is not the
     state of the case as regards the primitive Fathers. They do not
     speak of their own private opinion; they do not say, "This is true,
     because we see it in Scripture"---about which there might be
     differences of judgments---but, "this is true, because in matter
     of fact it is held, and has ever been held, by all the Churches,
     down to our times, without interruption, ever since the
     Apostles:"---where the question is merely one of testimony,
     whether they had the means of knowing that it had been and was so
     held; for if it was the belief of so many and independent Churches
     at once, and that as if from the Apostles, doubtless it cannot but
     be true and Apostolic.

     This, I say, is the mode in which the Fathers speak as regards
     doctrine; but it is otherwise when they interpret prophecy. In this
     matter there seems to have been no Catholic, no universal, no openly
     declared traditions; and when they interpret, they are for the most
     part giving, and profess to be giving, either their own private
     opinions, or uncertain traditions. This is what might have been
     expected; for it is not ordinarily the course of Divine Providence
     to interpret prophecy before the event. What the Apostles disclosed
     concerning the future, war, for the most part disclosed by them in
     private, to individuals---not committed to writing, not intended
     for the edifying of the body of CHRIST,--- and was soon lost.
     Thus, in a few verses after the text, St. Paul says, "Remember ye
     not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?" and he
     writes by hints and allusions, not speaking out. And it shows how
     little care was taken to discriminate and authenticate his
     prophetical intimations, that the Thessalonians had taken up an
     opinion, that he had said---what he had not said---that the
     Day of CHRIST was immediately at hand.

     Yet, though the Fathers do not convey to us the interpretation of
     prophecy with the same certainty as they convey doctrine, yet in
     proportion to their agreement, their personal character, and the
     general reception at the time, or the authority of the sources of
     the opinions they are stating, they are to be read with deference;
     for, to say the least, they are as likely to be right as
     commentators now; in some respects more so, because the
     interpretation of prophecy has become in these times a matter of
     controversy and party. And passion and prejudice have so interfered
     with soundness of judgment, that it is difficult to say who is to be
     trusted in it, or whether a private Christian may not be as good an
     expositor as those by whom the office has been assumed.

     1. Now to turn to the passage in question, which I shall examine by
     arguments drawn from Scripture, without being solicitous to agree,
     or to say why I disagree, from modern commentators: "That Day shall
     not come, except there come a falling away first." Here it is said
     that a certain frightful apostasy, and the appearing of the Man of
     sin, the son of perdition, i. e. as is commonly called, Antichrist,
     shall precede the coming of CHRIST. Our SAVIOUR seems to add, that
     it will immediately precede Him, or that His coming will follow
     close upon it; for, after speaking of "false prophets" and "false
     Christs," "showing signs and wonders," "iniquity abounding," and
     "love waxing cold," and the like, He adds, "When ye shall see all
     these things, know that it is near, even at the doors." Again He
     says, "When ye shall see the abomination of desolation....stand in
     the holy place then let them that be in Judea flee into the
     mountains." Indeed, St. Paul implies this also, when he says that
     Antichrist shall be destroyed by the brightness of CHRIST'S
     coming.

     If, then, Antichrist is to come immediately before CHRIST, and to be
     the sign of His coming, it is manifest that he is not come yet, but
     is still to be expected.

     Further, it appears that the time of Antichrist's tyranny will
     be three years and a half, which is an additional reason for
     believing he is not come; for, if so he must have come quite lately,
     his time being altogether so short; and this we cannot say he has.

     Besides, there are two other attendants on his appearance, which
     have not been fulfilled. First, a time of unexampled trouble. "Then
     shall be great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of
     the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be; and except those days
     should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved." This has not
     come. Next, the preaching of the Gospel throughout the
     world---"And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all
     the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end
     come."

     Now it may be objected to this conclusion, that St. Paul says, in
     the passage before us, that "the mystery of iniquity doth already
     work," i. e. even in his day, as if Antichrist had in fact come even
     then. But he would seem to mean merely this, that in his day there
     were shadows and forebodings, earnests and operating elements of
     that which was one day to come in its fulness. Just as the types of
     CHRIST went before CHRIST, so the shadows of Antichrist precede him.
     In truth, every event in this world is a type of those that follow,
     history proceeding forward as a circle ever enlarging. The days of
     the Apostles typified the last days: there were false Christs, and
     troubles, and the true CHRIST came in judgment to destroy the Jewish
     Church. In like manner every age presents its own picture of those
     future events, which alone are the real fulfilment of the prophecy
     which stands at the head of all of them. Hence St. John says,
     "Little children, it is the last time; and as ye have heard that the
     Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists; whereby
     we know that it is the last time." Antichrist was come, and was not
     come; it was, and it was not the last time. In the sense in which
     the Apostle's lay was the end of the world, it was also the
     time of Antichrist.---However, a second objection may be made, as
     follows: St. Paul says, "Now ye know what withholdeth, that he
     (Antichrist) might be revealed in his time." Here a something is
     mentioned as keeping back the manifestation of the enemy of truth.
     The Apostle proceeds: "He that now withholdeth, will, until he be
     taken out of the way." Now this restraining power being generally
     admitted to be the Roman empire, and the Roman empire (it is argued)
     having long been taken out of the way, therefore Antichrist has long
     since come. I grant that "he that withholdeth," or "letteth," means
     the power of Rome, for all the ancient writers so speak of it. I
     grant that as Rome, according to the prophet Daniel's vision,
     succeeded Greece, so Antichrist succeeds Rome, and our SAVIOUR
     CHRIST succeeds Antichrist. But it does not hence follow that
     Antichrist is come; for I do not grant that the Roman empire is
     gone. Far from it: the Roman empire remains even to this day. It had
     a very different fate from the other three monsters mentioned by the
     Prophet; as will be seen by his description of it. "Behold a fourth
     beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had
     great iron teeth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the
     residue with the feet of it: and it was diverse from all the beasts
     that were before it, and it had ten horns." These ten horns, an
     Angel informed him, "are ten kings that shall arise out of this
     kingdom" of Rome. As, then, the ten horns belonged to the beast, and
     were not separate from it, so are the kingdoms into which the Roman
     empire has been divided, part of that empire itself,---a
     continuation of that empire in the view of prophecy, however we
     decide the historical question. And as the horns, or kingdoms, still
     exist, as a matter of fact, consequently we have not yet seen the
     end of the Roman empire. "That which withholdeth" still exists,
     though in its ten horns; till it is removed, Antichrist will not
     come. And out of them he will arise, as the same Prophet informs us:
     "I considered the horns, and behold, there came up among them
     another little horn ...... and behold, in this horn were eyes like
     the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things."

     2. Now, in the next place, what is told us about Antichrist by the
     sacred writers? This first of all, as has been already noticed, that
     he embodies a certain spirit, which existed even in the days of the
     Apostles. "The mystery of iniquity doth already work." "Even now
     there are many Antichrists." And what that spirit is, St. John
     declares in a subsequent chapter. " Every spirit that confesseth not
     that JESUS CHRIST is come in the flesh, is not of GOD; and this is
     that spirit of the Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should
     come, and even now already is it in the world." Here we see what its
     doctrine is to be; but on that I shall not here enlarge. I am
     speaking of its working, which had begun in the days of the
     Apostles, and has doubtless continued ever since. Doubtless this
     malignant principle has been at work since from time to time, though
     kept under by him that "withholdeth." Nay, for what we know, at this
     very time there is a fierce struggle, the spirit of Antichrist
     attempting to rise, and the political power in those countries which
     are prophetically Roman, firm and vigorous in repressing it. What
     that spirit is, it would be beside my purpose here to attempt to
     ascertain, any more than to enlarge upon its doctrine; though
     certainly there is at this very time, as in the days of our fathers,
     a fierce and lawless principle every where at work,---a spirit of
     rebellion against GOD and man, which the powers of government in
     each country can barely keep under with their greatest efforts.
     Whether this which we witness be that spirit of Antichrist, which is
     one day to be let loose, this ambitious spirit, the parent of all
     heresy, schism, sedition, revolution, and war,---whether this be
     so or not, certainly the present framework of society and
     government, as far as it is the representative of Roman power, would
     seem to be that which withholdeth, and Antichrist is that which will
     rise when this restraint fails.

     3. It has been more or less implied in the foregoing remarks, that
     Antichrist is one man, an individual, not a power or a kingdom. Such
     surely is the impression left on the mind by the Scripture notices
     concerning him, after taking fully into account the figurative
     character of prophetical language; and such was the universal belief
     of the early Church. Consider these passages together, which
     describe him, and see whether we must not so conclude. First, the
     tee and following verses: "That day shall not come, except there
     come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son
     of perdition, who is the adversary and rival of all that is called
     GOD or worshipped; so that he sitteth as GOD in the temple of GOD,
     proclaiming himself to be GOD.......Then shall that wicked be
     revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of His mouth,
     and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming......whose
     coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and
     lying wonders." Next, the following passages in the prophet Daniel:
     "Another shall rise after them, and he shall be diverse from the
     first, and he shall subdue three kings. And he shall speak great
     words against the MOST HIGH, and shall wear out the saints of the
     MOST HIGH, and think to change times and laws: and they shall be
     given into his hand until a time and times and the dividing of time.
     But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion,
     to consume and to destroy it unto the end." Again: "In his estate
     shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honour
     of the kingdom; but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the
     kingdom by flatteries......And such as do wickedly against the
     covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries; but the people that do know
     their GOD shall be strong, and do exploits......And the king shall
     do according to his will, and he shall exalt himself, and magnify
     himself above every god, and shall speak marvellous things against
     the GOD of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be
     accomplished......Neither shall he regard the GOD of his fathers,
     nor the desire of women, nor regard any god; for he shall magnify
     himself above all. But in his estate shall he honour the God of
     forces, and a God whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with
     gold and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things." Let
     it be observed, that Daniel elsewhere describes other kings, and
     that the event has shown them to be individuals, as is generally
     confessed. And in like manner St. John: "There was given unto him a
     mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies; and power was given
     unto him to continue forty and two months. And he opened his mouth
     in blasphemy against GOD, to blaspheme His Name, and His tabernacle,
     and them that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him to make war
     with the saints, and to overcome them; and power was given him over
     all kindreds and tongues and nations. And all that dwell upon the
     earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of
     life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world."

     Further, that by Antichrist is meant some one person is made
     probable by the anticipations, which have already occurred in
     history, of its fulfilment in this way. Individuals have arisen
     actually answering in a great measure to the above descriptions; and
     this circumstance creates a probability, that the absolute and
     entire fulfilment which is to come will be in an individual also.
     The most remarkable of these shadows of the coming evil appeared
     before the time of the Apostles, between them and the age of Daniel,
     viz. the heathen king Antiochus, of whom we read in the books of
     Maccabees. This instance is the more to the purpose, because he is
     actually described, (as we suppose) by Daniel, in another part of
     his prophecy, in terms which seem also to belong to Antichrist, and
     as belonging, imply that Antiochus was what he seems to be, a type
     of that more fearful enemy of the Church. This Antiochus was the
     savage persecutor of the Jews, in their latter times, as Antichrist
     will be of the Christians. A few passages from the Maccabees will
     show you what he was. St Paul in the text speaks of an apostasy, and
     of Antichrist as following upon it; thus is the future typified in
     the Jewish history. "In those days went there out of Israel wicked
     men, who persuaded many, saying, Let us go and make a covenant with
     the heathen that are round about us: for since we departed from
     them, we have had much sorrow. So this device pleased them well.
     Then certain of the people were so forward herein, that they went to
     the king, who gave them licence to do after the ordinances of the
     heathen; whereupon they built a place of exercise at Jerusalem
     according to the custom of the heathen; and made themselves
     uncircumcised, and forsook the holy covenant, and joined themselves
     to the heathen, and were sold to do mischief." After this
     introduction the Enemy of truth appears. "After that Antiochus had
     smitten Egypt, he returned again, .... and went up against Israel
     and Jerusalem with a great multitude, and entered proudly into the
     sanctuary, and took away the golden altar, and the candlestick of
     light and all the vessels thereof, and the table of the shewbread,
     and the pouring vessels, and the vials, and the censers of gold, and
     the veil, and the crowns, and the golden ornaments that were before
     the temple, all which he pulled off. And when he had taken all away,
     he went into his own land, having made a great massacre, and spoken
     very proudly." After this, he set fire to Jerusalem, "and pulled
     down the houses and walls thereof on every side.....Then built they
     the city of David with a great and strong wall, ..... and they put
     therein a sinful nation, wicked men, and fortified themselves
     therein." Next, "King Antiochus wrote to his whole kingdom, that all
     should be one people, and every one should leave his laws: so all
     the heathen agreed according to the commandment of the king. Yea,
     many also of the Israelites consented to his religion, and
     sacrificed unto idols, and profaned the sabbath." After this he
     forced these impieties upon the Israelites. All were to be put to
     death who would not "profane the sabbath and festival days, and
     pollute the sanctuary and holy people: and set up altars, and
     groves, and chapels of idols, and sacrifice swine's flesh and
     unclean beasts," and "leave their children uncircumcised." At length
     he set up an idol, or in the words of the history, "the Abomination
     of Desolation upon the altar, and builded idol altars throughout the
     cities of Juda on every side.....And when they had rent in pieces
     the books of the law which they found, they burnt them with fire."
     It is added, "Howbeit many in Israel were fully resolved and
     confirmed in themselves not to eat any unclean thing, wherefore they
     chose rather to die .... and there was very great wrath upon
     Israel." Here we have presented to us some of the lineaments of
     Antichrist, who will be such, and worse than such, as Antiochus.

     The history of the apostate emperor Julian, who lived between 300
     and 400 years after Christ, furnishes another approximation to the
     predicted Antichrist, and an additional reason for thinking he will
     be one person, not a kingdom, power, or the like.

     So again does the false prophet Mahomet, who propagated his
     imposture about 600 years after Christ came.

     And there have been events in our childhood, and in the generation
     before us, which seem to give still additional probability to the
     notion, that Antichrist is one, not many men acting together.

     What I have said upon this subject may be summed up as
     follows:---that the coming of Christ will be immediately preceded
     by a very awful and unparalleled outbreak of evil, called in the
     text an apostasy, a falling away, in the midst of which a certain
     terrible man of sin and child of perdition, the special and singular
     enemy of Christ, or Antichrist, will appear; that this will be when
     revolutions prevail, and the present framework of Society breaks to
     pieces; that at present the Spirit which he will embody and
     represent, is kept under by "the powers that be," but that on their
     dissolution, he will rise out of the bosom of them, and knit them
     together again in his own evil way, under his own rule, to the
     exclusion of the Church.

     4. It would be out of place to say more than this at present. I will
     conclude by directing your attention to one particular circumstance
     contained in the text, which I have already in part commented on.

     It is said there will "come a falling away, and the man of sin will
     be revealed." In other words the man of sin is born of an apostasy,
     or at least comes into power through an apostasy, or is preceded by
     an apostasy, or would not be except for an apostasy. So says the
     inspired text: now observe, how remarkably the course of providence,
     as seen in history, has commented on his prediction.

     First, we have a comment in the instance of Antiochus previous to
     the prophecy, as I have already shown. The Israelites, or at least
     great numbers of them, discarded their own sacred religion, and then
     the enemy was allowed to come in.

     Next the apostate emperor Julian, who attempted to overthrow the
     Church by craft, and introduce paganism back again: he was preceded,
     nay he was nurtured, in the first great heresy which disturbed the
     peace and purity of the Church. About forty years before he came to
     the throne arose the pestilent Arian heresy which denied that CHRIST
     was GOD. It eat its way among the rulers of the Church like a
     canker, and what with the treachery of some and the mistakes of
     others, at one time it was all but dominant throughout Christendom.
     The few holy and faithful men, who witnessed for the Truth, cried
     out, with awe and terror at the apostasy, that Antichrist was
     coming. They called it the "forerunner of Antichrist." And true, his
     Shadow came. Julian was educated in the bosom of Arianism by some of
     its principal upholders. His tutor was the Eusebius from whom its
     partizans took their name; and in due time he fell away to paganism,
     became a hater and persecutor of the Church, and was cut off before
     he had reigned out the brief period which will be the real
     Antichrist's duration.

     The next great heresy, and in its consequences far more lasting and
     far spreading, was of twofold character,---with two heads, as I
     may call them, Nestorianism and Eutychianism, apparently opposed to
     each other, yet acting towards a common end: it in one way or other
     denied the truth of CHRIST'S gracious incarnation, and tended
     to destroy he faith of Christians not less certainly though more
     insidiously than the heresy of Arius. It spread through the East and
     through Egypt, corrupting and poisoning those Churches which had
     once, alas! been the most flourishing, the early abodes and the
     strong holds of revealed truth. Out of this heresy, or at least by
     means of it, the impostor Mahomet sprang, and formed his creed. Here
     is another especial Shadow of Antichrist.

     As to the third and last instance, which I might mention in the
     generation immediately before ourselves, I will but observe that in
     like manner, the Shadow of Antichrist arose out of an apostasy, an
     apostasy to infidel doctrines, perhaps the most flagitious and
     blasphemous which the world has ever seen.

     These instances give us this warning. Is the enemy of CHRIST, and
     His Church, to arise out of a certain special falling away from GOD?
     And is there no reason to fear that some such Apostasy is gradually
     preparing, gathering, hastening on in this very day? For is there
     not at this very time a special effort made almost all over the
     world, that is, every here and there, more or less, in sight or out
     of sight, in this or that place, but most visibly or formidably in
     its most civilized and powerful parts, an effort to do without
     religion? Is there not an opinion avowed and growing, that a nation
     has nothing to do with religion; that it is merely a matter for each
     man's own conscience,---which is all one with saying that we
     may let the truth fail from the earth without trying to continue it?
     Is there not a vigorous and united movement in all countries to cast
     down the Church of Christ from power and place? Is there not a
     feverish and ever busy endeavour to get rid of the necessity of
     religion in public transactions? for example, an attempt to get rid
     of oaths, under a pretence that they are too sacred for affairs of
     common life, instead of providing that they be taken more reverently
     and more suitably? an attempt to educate without religion,---that
     is, by putting all forms of religion together, which comes to the
     same thing? an attempt to enforce temperance, and the virtues which
     flow from it, without religion, by means of societies which are
     built on mere principles of utility? an attempt to make expedience,
     and not truth the end and the rule of measures of state and the
     enactments of law an attempt to make numbers, and not truth, the
     ground of maintaining, or not maintaining this or that creed, as if
     we had any reason whatever in Scripture for thinking that the many
     will be in the right, and the few in the wrong? An attempt to
     deprive the Bible of its one meaning to the exclusion of others, to
     make people think that it may have a hundred meanings all equally
     good, or in other words, that it has no meaning at all, is a dead
     letter, and may be put aside? an attempt to supersede religion
     altogether, as far as it is external or objective, as far as it is
     displayed in ordinances, or can be expressed by written
     words,---to confine it to our inward feelings, and thus,
     considering how transient, how variable, how evanescent our feelings
     are, an attempt in fact, to destroy religion?

     Surely, there is at this day a confederacy of evil, marshalling its
     hosts from all parts of the world, organizing itself, taking its
     measures, enclosing the Church of CHRIST as in a net, and preparing
     the way for a general apostasy from it. Whether this very apostasy
     is to give birth to Antichrist, or whether he is still to be
     delayed, we cannot know; but at any rate this apostasy, and all its
     tokens, and instruments, are of the Evil One and savour of death.
     Far be it from any of us to be of those simple ones, who are taken
     in that snare which is circling around us! Far be it from us to be
     seduced with the fair promises in which Satan is sure to hide his
     poison! Do you think he is so unskilful in his craft, as to ask you
     openly and plainly to join him in his warfare against the Truth? No;
     he offers you baits to tempt you. He promises you civil liberty; he
     promises you equality; he promises you trade and wealth; he promises
     you a remission of taxes; he promises you reform. This is the way in
     which he conceals from you the kind of work to which he is putting
     you; he tempts you to rail against your rulers and superiors; he
     does so himself, and induces you to imitate him; or he promises you
     illumination,---he offers you knowledge, science, philosophy,
     enlargement of mind. He scoffs at times gone by; he scoffs at every
     institution which reveres them. He prompts you what to say, and then
     listens to you, and praises you, and encourages you. He bids you
     mount aloft. He shows you how to become as gods. Then he laughs and
     jokes with you, and gets intimate with you; he takes your hand, and
     gets his fingers between yours, and grasps them, and then you are
     his.

     Shall we Christians, sons of GOD, brethren of CHRIST, heirs of
     glory, shall we allow ourselves to have lot or part in this matter?
     Shall we even with our little finger help on the Mystery of iniquity
     which is travailing for birth, and convulsing the earth with its
     pangs? "Oh my soul come not thou into their secret; unto their
     assembly, mine honour, be not thou united." "What fellowship hath
     righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light
     with darkness? And what concord hath CHRIST with Belial? or what
     part hath he that believeth with an infidel? and what agreement hath
     the temple of GOD with idols? for ye are the temple of the living
     GOD. Wherefore come out from among them and be ye separate .... and
     touch not the unclean thing," lest you be workers together with
     GOD'S enemies, and be opening the way for the Man of sin, the
     son of perdition.
       _______________________________________________________________

                                  SERMON II.

                                I JOHN iv. 3.

     "Every spirit that confesseth not that JESUS CHRIST is come in the
     flesh, is not of GOD, and this is that spirit of Antichrist, whereof
     ye have heard that it should come, and even thou already is it in
     the world."

     ST. JOHN tells us in these words what the characteristic of the
     Antichrist should be who is to come; viz. that he shall openly deny
     our Lord JESUS CHRIST to be the SON of GOD come in the flesh from
     heaven. So exactly and fully was this description to answer to him,
     that to deny CHRIST might be suitably called the spirit of
     Antichrist; and the deniers of Him might be said to have the spirit
     of Antichrist, to be like Antichrist, to be Antichrists. The same
     thing is stated in a former chapter. "Who is the Liar, but he that
     denieth that JESUS is the CHRIST? he is the Antichrist, that denieth
     the FATHER and the SON. Whosoever denieth the SON, the same hath not
     the FATHER;" from which words, moreover, it would appear that
     Antichrist will be led on from rejecting the SON of GOD, to the
     rejection of GOD altogether, either by implication or practically.

     I shall now make some further observations on the characteristic
     marks of the predicted enemy of the Church; and, as in those I made
     last week, I shall confine myself to the interpretations of
     Scripture given by the early Fathers.

     My reason for doing so is simply this,---that on so difficult a
     subject as unfulfilled prophecy, I really can have no opinion of my
     own, nor indeed is it desirable I should have, or at least that I
     should put it forward in any formal way. The opinion of any one
     person, even if he were the most fit to form one, could hardly be of
     any authority, or be worth putting forward by itself; whereas the
     judgment and views of the early Church claim and attract our
     especial regard, because for what we know they may be in part
     derived from traditions of the Apostles, and because they are put
     forward far more consistently and unanimously than those of any
     other set of teachers. Thus they have greater claims on our
     attention than those of other writers, be their claims little or
     great; if they are little, those of others are still less. The only
     really strong claim which can be made on our belief, is the clear
     fulfilment of the prophecy. Did we see all the marks of the prophecy
     satisfactorily answered in the past history of the Church, then we
     night dispense with authority in the parties setting the proof
     before us. This condition however can hardly be fulfilled, because
     the date of Antichrist comes close upon the coming of CHRIST in
     judgment, and therefore cannot have happened so as to allow of being
     appealed to. Nor is any history produceable which fulfils all the
     marks of Antichrist clearly, though some are fulfilled here and
     there. Nothing then is left us, (if we are to take up any opinion at
     all,---if we are to profit, as Scripture surely intends, by its
     warnings concerning the evil which is to come), but to go by the
     judgment of the Fathers, whether that be of special authority in
     this matter or not. To them therefore I had recourse last week, and
     now shall have recourse again. To continue then the subject with the
     early Fathers as my guides.

     1. It seems clear that St. Paul and St. John speak of the same enemy
     of the Church, from the similarity of their descriptions. They both
     say, that the spirit itself was already at work in their day. "That
     spirit of the Antichrist," says St. John in the text, "is now
     already in the world." "The mystery of iniquity doth already work,"
     says St. Paul. And they both describe the enemy as characterized by
     the same especial sin, open infidelity. St. John says, that "he is
     the Antichrist that denieth the FATHER and the SON:" while St. Paul
     speaks of him in like manner as "the adversary and rival of all that
     is called GOD, or worshipped;" that "he sitteth as GOD in the temple
     of GOD, setting forth himself that he is GOD." In both these
     passages, the same blasphemous denial of GOD and religion is
     described; but St. Paul adds, in addition, that he will oppose all
     existing religion, true or false, "all that is called God, or
     worshipped."

     Two other passages of Scripture may be adduced, predicting the same
     reckless impiety; one from the eleventh chapter of Daniel: "The king
     shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt himself and
     magnify himself above every god, and shall speak marvellous things
     against the GOD of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be
     accomplished.... Neither shall he regard the GOD of his fathers, nor
     the Desire of women (that is, as it would appear, the Messiah, to be
     His mother being the especial privilege and object of hope among the
     Jewish women), nor regard any god---for he shall magnify himself
     above all."

     The other passage is faintly marked with any prophetic allusion in
     itself, except that all our SAVIOUR'S sayings have a deep
     meaning, and the Fathers take this in particular to have such. "I am
     come in MY FATHER'S Name, and ye receive Me not; if another
     shall come in his own name, him ye will receive." This they consider
     to be a prophetic allusion to Antichrist, whom the Jews were to
     mistake for the Christ. He is to come "in his own name." Not from
     GOD, as even the SON of GOD came, who if any might have come in the
     power of His essential divinity, not in GOD'S Name, not with
     any pretence of a mission from Him, but in his own name, by a
     blasphemous assumption of divine power, thus will Antichrist come.

     To the above passages may be added those which speak generally of
     the impieties of the last age of the world, impieties which we may
     believe will usher in and be completed in Antichrist:

     "Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.....
     Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried: but the wicked
     shall do wickedly; and none of the wicked shall understand, but the
     wise shall understand." "In the last days perilous times shall come,
     for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
     proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
     without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers,
     incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
     heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of GOD,
     having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof:" "scoffers
     walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of
     His coming?" "despising government, presumptuous. . . self-willed,
     not afraid to speak evil of dignities.... promising men liberty,
     while themselves the servants of corruption:" and the like.

     2. I just now made mention of the Jews: it may be well then to state
     what was held in the early Church concerning Antichrist's
     connexion with them.

     Our LORD foretold that many should come in His name, saying "I am
     Christ." It was the judicial punishment of the Jews, as of all
     unbelievers in one way or another, that having rejected the true
     Christ, they should take up with a false one; and Antichrist will be
     the complete and perfect seducer, towards whom all previous ones are
     approximations, according to the text just quoted, "If another shall
     come in his own name, him ye will receive." To the same purport are
     St. Paul's words after describing Antichrist; "whose coming," he
     says, "is . . . with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them
     that perish, because they received not the love of the Truth, that
     they might be saved. And for this cause GOD shall send them strong
     delusion that they should believe a lie, that they all might be
     damned who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
     unrighteousness."

     Hence, considering that Antichrist would pretend to be the Messiah,
     it was of old the received notion that he was to be of Jewish race
     and to observe the Jewish rites.

     Further, St. Paul says that Antichrist should "sit in the Temple of
     God;" that is, according to the earlier Fathers, in the Jewish
     Temple. Our Saviour's own words may be taken to support this
     notion, because He speaks of "the Abomination of Desolation,"
     (which, whatever other meanings it might have, in its fulness
     denotes Antichrist,) "standing in the holy place." Further, the
     persecution of CHRIST'S witnesses which Antichrist will make,
     is described by St. John as taking place in Jerusalem. "Their dead
     bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, (which spiritually
     is called Sodom and Egypt,) where also our LORD was crucified."

     Now here a remark may be made. At first sight, I suppose, we should
     not consider that there was much evidence from the Sacred Text for
     Antichrist taking part with the Jews, or having to do with their
     Temple. It is, then, a very remarkable fact that the apostate
     emperor Julian, who was a type and earnest of the great enemy,
     should, as he did, have taken part with the Jews, and set about
     building their Temple. Here the history is a sort of comment on the
     prophecy, and sustains and vindicates the early interpretations of
     it which I am relating. Of course I must be understood to mean, and
     a memorable circumstance it is, that this belief of the Church that
     Antichrist should be connected with the Jews, was expressed long
     before Julian's time, and that we still possess the works in
     which it is contained. We have the writings of two Fathers, both
     Bishops and martyrs of the Church, who lived at least one hundred
     and fifty years before Julian, and less than one hundred years after
     St. John. They both distinctly declare Antichrist's connection
     with the Jews.

     The one of them speaks as follows: "In the Temple which is at
     Jerusalem the adversary will sit, endeavouring to show himself to be
     the Christ."

     And the other says, "Antichrist will be he who shall resuscitate the
     kingdom of the Jews."

     What makes this still more observable is that the recent Shadow of
     Antichrist, whom our fathers or we ourselves saw, by a sort of
     fatality (so to speak) took up the cause of the Jews and was almost
     hailed by them as their Messiah, and seemed to be drawn irresistibly
     towards and to hover about the Holy Land, which the early Church
     considered would be the scene of Antichrist's exploits.

     3. Next let us ask, Will Antichrist profess any sort of religion at
     all? Neither true God nor false God will he worship: so far is
     clear, and yet something more, and that obscure, is told us. Indeed,
     as far as the prophetic accounts go, they seem at first sight
     incompatible with each other. Antichrist is to "exalt himself over
     all that is called God or worshipped." He will set himself forcibly
     against idols and idolatry, as the early teachers agree in
     declaring. Yet in the book of Daniel we read, "In his estate shall
     he honour the God of forces; and a God whom his fathers knew not
     shall he honour with gold and silver, and with precious stones and
     pleasant things. Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a
     strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory."
     What is meant by the words translated "God of forces," and
     afterwards called "a strange God," is quite hidden from us, and
     probably will be so till the event; but any how some sort of false
     worship is certainly predicted as the mark of Antichrist, with this
     prediction the contrary way, that he shall set himself against all
     idols, as well as against the true GOD. Now it is not at all
     extraordinary that there should be this contrariety in the
     prediction, for we know generally that infidelity leads to
     superstition, and that the men most reckless in their blasphemy are
     cowards also. They cannot be consistent if they would. But let me
     notice here again a remarkable coincidence, which is contained in
     the history of the last fifty years,---a coincidence between
     actual events and prophecy sufficient to show us that the apparent
     contradiction in the latter may easily be reconciled, though
     beforehand we nay not see how; sufficient to remind us that the
     all-watchful eye, and the all-ordaining hand of GOD is still over
     the world, and that the seeds sown in prophecy above two thousand
     years since, are not dead, but from time to time, by blade and
     tender shoot, give earnest of the future harvest. Surely the world
     is impregnated with unearthly elements, which ever and anon, in
     unhealthy seasons, give lowering and muttering tokens of the wrath
     to come!

     In that great and famous nation which is near us, once great for its
     love of CHRIST'S Church, since memorable for deeds of
     blasphemy, which lead me here to mention it, and now, when it should
     be pitied and prayed for, made unhappily our own model in too many
     respects,---followed when it should be condemned, and admired
     when it should be excused,---in the capital of that powerful and
     celebrated nation, there took place, as we all well know, within the
     last fifty years, an open apostasy from Christianity; not from
     Christianity only, but from every kind of worship which might retain
     any semblance or pretence of the great truths of religion. Atheism
     was absolutely professed; ---yet in spite of this, it seems a
     contradiction in terms to say it, a certain sort of worship, and
     that, as the prophet expresses it, "a strange worship," was
     introduced. Observe what this was.

     I say, they avowed on the one hand Atheism. They prevailed upon an
     unhappy man, whom their proceedings lad forced upon the Church as an
     Archbishop, to come before them in public and declare that there was
     no God, and that what he had hitherto taught was a fable. They wrote
     up over the burial places that death was an eternal sleep. They
     closed the Churches, they seized and desecrated the gold and silver
     plate belonging to them, turning these sacred instruments, like
     Belshazzar, to the use of their impious revellings; they formed mock
     processions, clad in priestly garments, and singing profane hymns.
     They annulled the divine ordinance of marriage, resolving it into a
     mere civil contract to le made and dissolved at pleasure. These
     things are but a part of their enormities.

     On the other hand, after having broken away from all restraint
     towards GOD and man, they gave a name to the reprobate state itself
     into which they had thrown themselves, and exalted it, that very
     negation of religion, or rather that real and living blasphemy, into
     a kind of God. They called it LIBERTY, and they literally worshipped
     it as a divinity. It would almost be incredible, that men who had
     flung off all religion should be at the pains to assume a new and
     senseless worship of their own devising, whether in superstition or
     in mockery, were not events so recent and so notorious. After
     abjuring our LORD and SAVIOUR, and blasphemously declaring Him to be
     an impostor, they proceeded to decree, in the public assembly of the
     nation, the adoration of Liberty and Equality as divinities; and
     they appointed festivals besides in honour of Reason, the Country,
     the Constitution, and the Virtues. Further, they determined that
     tutelary gods, even dead men, may be canonized, consecrated, and
     worshipped; and they enrolled in the number of these some of the
     most notorious infidels and profligates of the last century. The
     remains of the two principal of these were brought in solemn
     procession into one of their Churches, and placed upon the holy
     altar itself; incense was offered to them, and the assembled
     multitude bowed down in worship before one of them,---before what
     remained on earth of an inveterate enemy of CHRIST.

     Now, I do not mention all this as considering it the fulfilment of
     the prophecy, nor, again, as if the fulfilment when it comes will be
     in this precise way, but merely to point out, what the course of
     events has shown us in these latter times, that there are ways of
     fulfilling sacred announcements that seem at first sight
     contradictory,---that men may oppose every existing worship, true
     and false, and yet take up a worship of their own from pride,
     wantonness, policy, superstition, fanaticism, or other reasons.

     And further, let it be remarked that there was a tendency in the
     infatuated people I have spoken of, to introduce the old Roman
     democratic worship, as if further to show us that Rome, the fourth
     monster of the prophet's vision, is not dead. They even went so
     far as to restore the worship of one of the Roman divinities (Ceres)
     by name, raised a statue to her, and appointed a festival in her
     honour. This indeed was inconsistent with exalting themselves "above
     all that is called God;" but I mention it, as I have said, not as
     throwing light upon the prophecy, but to show that the spirit of old
     Rome has not passed from the world, though its name is almost
     extinct.

     Still further, it is startling to observe, that that former apostate
     in the early times, the Emperor Julian, he too was engaged in
     bringing back Roman Paganism.

     Further still, let it he observed that Antiochus too, the Antichrist
     before CHRIST, the persecutor of the Jews, he too signalised himself
     in forcing the Pagan worship upon them, introducing it even into the
     Temple.

     We know not what is to come; but this we may safely say, that,
     improbable as it is that Paganism should ever be publicly restored
     and enforced by authority for any time, however short, even three
     years and a half, yet it is far less improbable now than it was
     fifty years ago, before the event occurred which I have referred to.
     Who would not have been thought a madman or idiot, before that
     period, who had conjectured such a portentous approximation to
     Paganism as actually took place.

     4. Now let us recur to the ancient Fathers, and see whether their
     further anticipations do not run parallel to the events which have
     since happened.

     Antichrist, as they considered, will come out of the Roman Empire
     just upon its destruction;---that is, the Roman Empire will in
     its last days divide itself into ten parts, and the enemy will come
     up suddenly out of it upon these ten, and subdue three of them, or
     all of them perhaps, and (as the prophet continues) "shall speak
     great words against the MOST HIGH, and shall wear out the saints of
     the MOST HIGH, and think to change times and laws, and they shall be
     given into his hand until a time, times, and the dividing of time."
     Now it is very observable that one of the two early Fathers whom I
     have already cited , expressly says that the ten states (the "toes"
     of Dan. ii.) which will at length appear, shall be democracies. I
     say this is observable, considering the present state of the world,
     the tendency of things in this day towards democracy, and the
     instance which has been presented to us of democracy within the last
     fifty years, in those occurrences in France to which I have already
     alluded.

     Another expectation of the early Church was that the Roman monster,
     after remaining torpid for centuries, would wake up at the end of
     the world, and be restored in all its laws and forms; and this too,
     considering those same recent events to which I have alluded, is
     certainly worth noticing also. One of the Fathers whom I have
     already quoted, expressly deduces from a passage in the xiiith
     chapter of the Apocalypse, that "the system of Augustus, who was
     founder of the Roman Empire, shall be adopted and established by him
     (Antichrist), in order to his own aggrandizement and glory. This is
     the fourth monster whose head was wounded and healed; in that the
     empire was destroyed and came to nought, and was divided into ten.
     But at this time Antichrist, as being a man of resources, will heal
     and restore it; so that it will be active and vigorous once more
     through the system which he establishes.

     I will but notice one other expectation falling in with the
     foregoing notion of the re-establishment of Roman power, entertained
     by the Fathers whom I have cited several times; viz. one concerning
     the name of Antichrist, as spoken of in the xiiith chapter of
     Revelations: "Here is wisdom," says the inspired text, "let him that
     hath understanding count the number of the beast, for it is the
     number of a man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six."
     They both give a name, (the letters of which together in Greek make
     up this number) characteristic of the position of Antichrist as the
     head of the Roman Empire in its restored state, viz. the word
     Latinus, or the Latin king.

     The earlier of these Fathers speaks as follows: "Expect that the
     empire will first be divided into ten kings; then while they are
     reigning and beginning to settle and aggrandize themselves, suddenly
     one will come and claim the kingdom, and frighten them, having for
     his name the very number 666; him recognize as the Abomination of
     Desolation. This is implied in the Apostle's saying, ;When
     they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall come
     on them." Then he goes on to mention, together with two other words,
     the name of Latinos as answering to the number, and says of it,
     "This is very probable since it is the name of the last
     empire;---for the Latins (that is, the Romans) are now in power."

     The other Father thus speaks: "Since.....the wound of the first
     monster was healed .....and it is plain that the Latins are that
     empire, therefore he is called the Latin King (Latinus), the name
     passing from the empire to an individual." Whether this anticipation
     will be fulfilled or not, we cannot say. I only mention it as
     showing the belief of the Fathers in the restoration and
     re-establishment of the Roman empire, which has certainly since
     their day been attempted.

     It seems then, on the whole, that, as far as the testimony of the
     early Church goes, Antichrist will be an open blasphemer, opposing
     himself to every existing worship, true and false,---a
     persecutor, a patron of the Jews, and a restorer of their worship,
     and, further, the author of a novel kind of worship. Moreover, he
     will appear suddenly, at the very end of the Roman empire, which
     once was and now sleeps; that he will knit it into one, and engraft
     his Judaism and his new worship (a sort of Paganism, it may be) upon
     the old discipline of Caesar Augustus; that in consequence he will
     earn the title of the Latin or Roman King, as best expressive of his
     place and character; lastly, that he will pass away as suddenly as
     he came.

     Now concerning this, I repeat, I do not wish to pronounce how far
     the early Church was right or wrong in these anticipations, though
     events since have variously tended to strengthen its general
     interpretations of Scripture prophecy.

     It may be asked, What practical use is there in speaking of these
     things, if they be doubtful? With a short notice of this objection,
     I shall conclude.

     First, it is not unprofitable to bear in mind that we are still
     under what may be called a miraculous system. I do not mean to
     maintain that literal miracles are taking place now, but that our
     present state is a portion of a providential course, which began in
     miracle, and at least at the end of the world, if not before, will
     end in miracle. The particular expectations above detailed may be
     right or wrong; yet an Antichrist, whoever and whatever he be, is to
     come; marvels are to come; the old Roman empire is not extinct; the
     devil, if bound, is bound but for a season; the contest of good and
     evil is not ended. I repeat it, in the present state of things, when
     the great object of education is supposed to be the getting rid of
     things supernatural, when we are bid to laugh and jeer at believing
     every thing we do not see, are told to account for every thing by
     things known and ascertained, and to assay every statement by the
     touchstone of experience, I must think that this vision of
     Antichrist, as a supernatural power to come, is a great providential
     gain, as being a counterpoise to the evil tendencies of the age.

     And next, it must surely be profitable for our thoughts to be sent
     backward and forward to the beginning and the end of the Gospel
     times, to the first and second coming of CHRIST. What we want, is to
     understand that we are in the place in which the early Christians
     were, with the same covenant, ministry, sacraments, and
     duties;---to realize a state of things long past away; ---to
     feel that we are in a sinful world, a world lying in wickedness;
     ---to discern our position in it, that we are witnesses in it,
     that reproach and suffering are our portion,---so that we must
     not "think it strange" if they come upon us, but a kind of gracious
     exception if they do not;---to have our hearts awake, as if we
     had seen CHRIST and His Apostles, and seen their miracles,---
     awake to the hope and waiting for His second coming, looking out for
     it, nay, desiring to see the tokens of it thinking often and much of
     the judgment to come, dwelling on and adequately entering into the
     thought, that we individually shall be judged. All these surely are
     acts of true and saving faith; and this is one substantial use of
     the Book of Revelations, and other prophetical parts of Scripture,
     quite distinct from our knowing their real interpretation, viz. to
     take the veil from our eyes, to lift up the covering which lies over
     the face of the world, and make us see, day by day, as we go in and
     out, as we get up and lie down, as we labour, and walk, and rest,
     and recreate ourselves, the Throne of GOD set up in the midst of us,
     His majesty and His judgments, His SON'S continual intercession
     for the elect, their trials, and their victory.

     May GOD enable us all thus to walk by faith, not by sight, and live
     in the past and future, not in the present!
       _______________________________________________________________

                                 SERMON III.

                          THE RELIGION OF ANTICHRIST

                                REV. xvii. 18.

     "The woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over
     the kings of the earth."

     THE city spoken of in these words is evidently Rome, which was then
     the seat of empire all over the earth,---which was supreme even
     in Judaea. We hear of the Romans all through the Gospels and Acts.
     Our SAVIOUR was born when His mother, the Blessed Virgin, and
     Joseph, were brought up to Bethlehem to be taxed by the Roman
     governor. He was crucified under Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor.
     St. Paul was at various times protected by the circumstance of his
     being a Roman citizen; on the other hand, when he was seized and
     imprisoned, it was by the Roman governors, and at last he was sent
     to Rome itself, to the emperor, and eventually martyred there,
     together with St. Peter. Thus the sovereignty of Rome, at the time
     when CHRIST and His Apostles preached and wrote, which is a matter
     of historical notoriety; is forced on our notice in the New
     Testament itself. It is undeniably meant in the text, by the great
     city which reigneth over the kings of the earth.

     The connexion of Rome with the reign and exploits of Antichrist, is
     so often brought before us in the controversies of the day, that it
     may be well, after what I have already had occasion to say on the
     subject of the last enemy of the Church, to consider now what
     Scripture prophecy says concerning Rome; which I shall attempt to
     do, as before, with the guidance of the early Fathers.

     Now let us observe what the Chapter says, in which the text occurs,
     concerning Rome, and what we may deduce from it.

     This great city is described under the image of a woman, cruel,
     profligate, and impious. She is described as arrayed in all worldly
     splendour and costliness, in purple and scarlet, in gold and
     precious stones, and pearls, as shedding and drinking the blood of
     the saints, till she was drunken with it Moreover she is called by
     the name of "Babylon the Great," to signify her power, wealth,
     profaneness, pride, sensuality, and persecuting spirit, after the
     pattern of that former enemy of the Church. I need not here relate
     how all this really answered to the character and history of Rome at
     the time St. John spoke of it. There never was a more ambitious,
     haughty, hardhearted, and worldly people than the Romans; never any,
     for none else had ever the opportunity, which so persecuted the
     Church. Christians suffered ten persecutions at their hands, as they
     are commonly reckoned, and very horrible ones, extending over two
     hundred and fifty years. The day would fail to go through an account
     of the tortures they suffered from Rome; so that the Apostle's
     description was as signally fulfilled afterwards as a prophecy, as
     it was accurate at the time as an historical notice.

     This guilty city, represented by St. John as an abandoned woman, is
     said to be seated on "a scarlet-coloured monster, full of names of
     blasphemy, having seven beads and ten horns." Here we are sent back
     by the prophetic description to the seventh chapter of Daniel, in
     which the four great empires of the world are shadowed out under the
     figure of four beasts, a lion, a bear, a leopard, and a nameless
     monster, "diverse" from the rest, "dreadful and terrible, and strong
     exceedingly;" "and it had ten horns." This surely is the very same
     beast which St. John saw: the ten horns mark it. Now this fourth
     beast in Daniel's vision is the Roman empire; therefore "the
     beast" on which the woman sat, is the Roman empire. And this agrees
     very accurately with the actual position of things in history; for
     Rome, the mistress of the world, might well be said to sit upon, and
     be carried about triumphantly on that world which she had subdued,
     and made her creature. Further, the prophet Daniel explains the ten
     horns of the beast to be "ten kings that shall arise" out of this
     empire; in which St. John agrees, saying, "The ten horns which thou
     sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet, but
     receive power as kings one hour with the beast." Moreover, in a
     former vision Daniel speaks of the empire as destined to be
     "divided," as "partly strong and partly broken." Further still, this
     empire, the beast of burden of the woman, was at length to rise
     against her and devour her, as some savage animal might turn upon
     its keeper; and it was to do this in the time of its divided or
     multiplied existence. "The ten horns which thou sawest upon the
     beast, these shall hate" her, "and shall make her desolate and
     naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn her with fire." Such was to
     be the end of the great city. Lastly, three of the kings, perhaps
     all, are said to be subdued by Antichrist, who is to come up
     suddenly while they are in power; for such is the course of
     Daniel's prophecy---"Another shall rise after them, and he
     shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three kings,
     and he shall speak great words against the MOST HIGH, and shall wear
     out the saints of the MOST HIGH, and think to change times and laws;
     and they shall be given into his hands until a time, times, and the
     dividing of time." This power, who was to rise upon the kings, is
     Antichrist; and I would have you observe how Rome and Antichrist
     stand towards each other in the prophecy. Rome is to fall before
     Antichrist rises; for the ten kings are to destroy Rome, and
     Antichrist is then to appear and supersede the ten kings. As far as
     we dare judge from the words, this seems clear. St. John says, "the
     ten horns shall hate and devour" the woman: and Daniel says, "I
     considered the horns, and behold, there came up among them another
     little horn" with "eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking
     great things:"---that is Antichrist.

     Now then, let us consider how far these prophecies have been
     fulfilled, and what seems to remain.

     In the first place, the Roman empire did break up, as foretold. It
     divided into a number of separate kingdoms, such as our own, France,
     and the like; yet it is difficult to number ten accurately and
     exactly. Next, though Rome certainly has been desolated in the most
     fearful and miserable way, yet it has not exactly suffered from ten
     parts of its own former empire, but from barbarians who came down
     upon it from regions external to it; and, in the third place, it
     still exists as a city, whereas it was to be "desolated, devoured,
     and burned with fire." And, fourthly, there is one point in the
     description of the ungodly city, which has hardly been fulfilled at
     all in the case of Rome. She had "a golden cup in her hand full of
     abominations," and made "the inhabitants of the earth drunk with the
     wine of her fornication;" expressions which imply surely some
     seduction or delusion which she was enabled to practise upon the
     world, and which, I say, has not been fulfilled in the case of that
     great imperial city upon seven hills of which St. John spake. Let us
     consider some of these points more at length.

     I say, the Roman empire has scarcely yet been divided into ten. The
     prophet Daniel is conspicuous among the inspired writers for the
     clearness and exactness of his predictions; so much so, that some
     infidels, overcome by the truth of them, could only take refuge in
     the unworthy, and at the same time most unreasonable and untenable
     supposition, that they were written after the events which they
     profess to foretell. But we have had no such exact fulfilment in
     history of the ten kings; therefore we must suppose that it is yet
     to come. With this accords the ancient notion, that they were to
     come at the end of the world, and last but a short time, Antichrist
     coming upon them. There have, indeed, been approximations to the
     number, yet, I conceive, nothing more. Now observe how the actual
     state of things corresponds to the prophecy and to the primitive
     interpretation of it. It is difficult to say whether the Roman
     empire is gone or not: in one sense, it is,---for it is divided
     into kingdoms; in another sense, it is not,---for the date cannot
     be assigned at which it came to an end, and much might be said in
     various ways, to show that it might be considered still existing,
     though in a mutilated and decayed state. But if this be so, and if
     it is to end in ten vigorous kings, as Daniel says, then it must one
     day revive. Now observe, I say, how the prophetic description
     answers to this account of it. "The Beast," that is, the Roman
     empire, "the Monster that thou sawest, was and is not, and shall
     ascend out of the abyss, and go into perdition." Again, mention is
     made of "the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is." Again, we are
     expressly told that the ten kings and the empire shall rise
     together; the kings appearing at the time of the monster's
     resurrection, not in its languid and torpid state. "The ten kings
     ...... have received no kingdom as yet, but receive power as kings
     one hour with the beast." It then, the Roman power is still
     prostrate, the ten kings have not come; and if the ten kings have
     not come, the destined destroyers of the woman, the full judgments
     upon Rome, have not yet come.

     Thus the full measure of judgment has not fallen upon Rome; yet her
     sufferings, and the sufferings of her empire, have been very severe.
     St. Peter seems to predict them, in his First Epistle, as then
     impending. He seems to imply, that CHRIST'S visitation, which
     was then just occurring, was no local or momentary vengeance upon
     one people or city, but a solemn and extended judgment of the whole
     earth, though beginning at Jerusalem. "The time is come," he says,
     "when judgment must begin at the house of GOD (at the sacred city);
     and, if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that
     obey not the Gospel of GOD? And if the righteous scarcely be saved"
     (i. e. the remnant who should go forth of Zion, according to the
     prophecy, that chosen seed in the Jewish Church which received
     CHRIST when He came, and took the new name of Christians, and shot
     forth and grew far and wide into a fresh Church, or, in other words,
     the elect whom our SAVIOUR speaks of as being involved in all the
     troubles and judgments of the devoted people, yet carried safely
     through); "if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
     ungodly and the sinner appear,"---the inhabitants of the world at
     large?

     Here is intimation of the presence of a fearful scourge, which was
     then going over all the ungodly world, beginning at apostate
     Jerusalem, and punishing it. Such was the case: vengeance first fell
     upon the once holy city, which was destroyed by the Romans: it
     proceeded next against the executioners themselves. The empire was
     disorganized, and broken to pieces with dissensions and
     insurrections, with plagues, famines, and earthquakes, while
     countless hosts of barbarians attacked it from the north and east,
     and portioned it out, and burned and pillaged Rome itself. The
     judgment, I say, which began at Jerusalem, steadily tracked its way
     for centuries round and round the world, till at length, with
     unerring aim, it smote the haughty mistress of all nations herself,
     the guilty woman seated upon the fourth monster which Daniel saw. I
     will mention one or two of these fearful inflictions.

     Hosts of barbarians came down upon the civilized world, the Roman
     empire. One multitude,---though multitude is a feeble word to
     describe them,---invaded France, which was living in peace and
     prosperity under the shadow of Rome. They desolated and burned town
     and country. Seventeen provinces were made a desert. Eight
     metropolitan cities were set on fire and destroyed. Multitudes of
     Christians perished even in the churches.

     The fruitful coast of Africa was the scene of another of these
     invasions. The barbarians gave no quarter to any who opposed them.
     They tortured their captives of whatever age, rank, and sex, to
     force them to discover their wealth. They drove away the inhabitants
     of the cities to the mountains. They ransacked the churches. They
     destroyed even the fruit-trees, so complete was the desolation.

     Of judgments in the course of nature, I will mention three out of a
     great number. One, an inundation from the sea in all parts of the
     Eastern empire. The water overflowed the coast for two miles inland,
     sweeping away houses and inhabitants along a line of some thousand
     miles. One great city (Alexandria) lost fifty thousand persons.

     The second, a series of earthquakes; some of which were felt all
     over the empire. Constantinople was thus shaken above fort.y days
     together. At Antioch 250,000 persons perished in another.

     And in the third place a plague, which lasted (languishing and
     reviving) through the long period of fifty-two years. In
     Constantinople during three months there died daily 5000, and at
     length 10,000 persons. I give these facts from a modern writer, who
     is neither favourable to Christianity, nor credulous in matters of
     historical testimony. In some countries the population was wasted
     away altogether, and has not recovered to this day.

     Such were the scourges by which the fourth monster of Daniel's
     vision was brought low, "the LORD GOD'S sore judgments, the
     sword, the famine, and the pestilence." Such was the process by
     which "that which letteth," (in St. Paul's language) began to
     be "taken away;" though not altogether removed even at this day.

     And, while the world itself was thus plagued, not less was the
     offending city which had ruled it. Rome was taken and plundered
     three several times. The inhabitants were murdered, made captives,
     or obliged to fly all over Italy. The gold and jewels of the queen
     of the nations, her precious silk and purple, and her works of art
     were carried off or destroyed.

     These are great and notable events, and certainly form part of the
     predicted judgment upon Rome; at the same time they do not
     adequately fulfil the prophecy, which says expressly, on the one
     hand, that the ten portions of the empire itself which hath almost
     been slain, shall rise up against the city, and "make her desolate
     and burn her with fire," which they have not yet done; and on the
     other hand, that the city shall experience a total destruction,
     which has not yet befallen her, for she still exists. St.
     John's words on the latter point are clear and determinate.
     "Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen; and is become the
     habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage
     of every unclean and hateful bird;" words which would seem to refer
     us to the curse upon the literal Babylon; and we know how it was
     fulfilled. The prophet Isaiah had said, that in Babylon "wild beasts
     of the desert should lie there, and their houses be full of doleful
     creatures, and owls should dwell there, and satyrs" or devils,
     "should dance there." And we know that all this has happened to
     Babylon; it is a heap of ruins; no man dwells there; nay it is
     difficult to say even where exactly it was placed, so great is the
     desolation. Such a desolation St. John seems to predict, concerning
     the guilty persecuting city we are considering; and in spite of what
     she has suffered, such a desolation has not come upon her yet.
     Again, "she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the LORD
     GOD, who judgeth her." Surely this implies utter destruction,
     annihilation. Again, "a mighty angel took up a stone, like a great
     millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence
     shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no
     more at all."

     To these passages I would add this reflection. Surely Rome is spoken
     of in Scripture as a more inveterate enemy of GOD and His saints
     even than Babylon, as the great pollution and bane of the earth: if
     then Babylon has been destroyed wholly, much more, according to all
     reasonable conjecture, will Rome be destroyed one day.

     It may be further observed, that serious men in the early Church
     certainly thought that the barbarian invasions were not all that
     Rome was to receive in the way of vengeance, but that GOD would one
     day destroy it by the fury of the elements. "Rome," says one of
     them, at a time when a barbarian conqueror had possession of the
     city, and all things seemed to threaten its destruction, "Rome shall
     not be destroyed by the nations, but shall consume away internally,
     worn out by storms of lightning, whirlwinds, and earthquakes."

     This is what may be said on the one side, but after all something
     may be said on the other; not indeed to show that the prophecy is
     already fully accomplished, for it certainly is not, but to show
     that, granting this, what accomplishment remains has reference not
     to Rome, but to some other object or objects of divine vengeance. I
     shall explain my meaning under two heads.

     1. First, why has not Rome been destroyed hitherto? how was it that
     the barbarians left it? Babylon sunk under the avenger whom GOD
     brought against it---Rome has not: why is this? for if there has
     been a something to procrastinate the vengeance due to Rome
     hitherto, peradventure that obstacle may act again and again, and
     stay the uplifted hand of divine wrath till the end come. The cause
     seems to be simply this, that when the barbarians came down, GOD had
     a people in that city. Babylon was a mere prison of the Church; Rome
     had received her as a guest. The Church dwelt in Rome, and while her
     children suffered in the heathen city from the barbarians, so again
     they were there the life and the salt of the city where they
     suffered.

     Christians understood this at the time, and availed themselves of
     their position. They remembered Abraham's intercession for
     Sodom, and the gracious announcement made him, that had there been
     ten righteous men therein, it would have been saved.

     When the city was worsted, threatened, and at length overthrown, the
     Pagans had cried out that Christianity was the cause of this. They
     said they had always flourished under their idols, and that these
     idols and devils (gods as they called them) were displeased at them
     for the numbers among them who had been converted to the faith of
     the Gospel, and had in consequence deserted them, given them over to
     their enemies, and brought vengeance upon them. On the other hand,
     they scoffed at the Christians, saying, in effect, "Where is now
     your GOD? Why does He not save you? You are not better off than
     we;"---like the impenitent thief, "If Thou be the CHRIST, save
     Thyself and us;" or, like the multitude, "If He be the SON of GOD,
     let Him come down from the Cross." This was during the time of one
     of the most celebrated bishops and doctors of the Church, St.
     Austin; and he replied to their challenge. He replied to them, and
     to his brethren also, some of whom were offended and shocked that
     such calamities should have happened to a city which had become
     Christian. He pointed to the cities which had already sinned and
     been visited, and showed that they had altogether perished, whereas
     Rome was still preserved. Here then he said was the very fulfilment
     of the promise of GOD, announced to Abraham; for the sake of the
     Christians in it, Rome was chastised, not overthrown utterly.

     Historical facts support St. Augustine's view of things: GOD
     showed visibly, not only provided secretly, that the Church should
     be the salvation of the city. The fierce conqueror, Alaric, who
     first came against it, exhorted his troops, "to respect the Churches
     of the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, as holy and inviolable
     sanctuaries;" and he gave orders that a quantity of plate
     consecrated to St. Peter should be removed into his Church from the
     place where it had been discovered.

     Again, fifty years afterwards, when Attila was advancing against the
     city, the bishop of Rome of the day, St. Leo, formed one of a
     deputation of three, who went out to meet him, and was successful in
     arresting his purpose. A few years afterwards, Genseric, the most
     savage of the barbarian conquerors, appeared before the defenceless
     city. The same fearless prelate went out to meet him at the head of
     his clergy, and though he did not avail to save the city from
     pillage, yet he gained a promise that the unresisting multitude
     should be spared, the buildings protected from fire, and the
     captives from torture 2. Thus from the Goth, Hun, and Vandal, did
     the Christian Church shield the guilty city in which she dwelt. What
     a wonderful rule of GOD'S providence is herein displayed, which
     occurs daily! the Church sanctifies yet suffers with the world,
     sharing its sufferings yet lightening them. In the case before us,
     it has (if we may humbly say it,) suspended, to this day, the
     vengeance destined to fall upon her who was drunk with the blood of
     the martyrs of JESUS. What vengeance has never fallen; it is still
     suspended; nor can reason be given why Rome has not fallen under the
     rule of GOD'S general dealings with His rebellious creatures,
     and suffered (according to the prophecy), the fulness of GOD'S
     wrath begun in her, except that a Christian Church is still in that
     city, sanctifying it, interceding for it, saving it. That part of
     the Christian Church, (alas!) has in process of time become infected
     with the sins of Rome itself, and learned to be ambitious and cruel
     after the fashion of those who possessed the place aforetimes. Yet
     if it were what some would make it, it it were as reprobate as
     heathen Rome itself, what stays the judgment long ago begun? why
     does not the Avenging Arm, which made its first stroke ages since,
     deal its second and its third, till the city has fallen? why is not
     Rome as Sodom and Gomorrah, if there be no righteous men in it?

     This then is the first remark I would make as to the fulfilment of
     the prophecy which is yet co come; perchance, through GOD'S
     mercy, it may be procrastinated even to the end, and never be
     fulfilled. Of this we can know nothing one way or the other.

     Secondly, let it be considered, that as Babylon is a type of Rome,
     and of the world of sin and vanity, so Rome in turn nay be a type
     also, whether of some other city, or of a proud and deceiving world.
     The woman is said to be Babylon as well as Rome, and as she is
     something more than Babylon, namely, Rome, so again she may be
     something more than Rome, which is yet to come. Various great cities
     in Scripture, are made, in their ungodliness and ruin, types of the
     world itself. Their end is described in figures which in their
     fulness apply only to the end of the world; the sun and moon are
     said to fall, the earth to quake, and the stars to fall from heaven.
     As then their ruin prefigures a greater and wider judgment, so the
     chapters of which the text forms a part may have a further
     accomplishment not in Rome, but in the world itself, or some other
     great city to which we cannot at present apply them, or to all the
     great cities of the world together, and to the spirit that rules in
     them, their avaricious, luxurious, self dependent, irreligious
     spirit. And in this sense is already fulfilled a portion of the
     chapter before us, which does not apply to heathen Rome; I mean the
     description of the woman as making men drunk with her sorceries and
     delusions; for such, surely, nothing but an intoxication is that
     arrogant, ungodly, falsely liberal, and worldly spirit, which great
     cities spread through a country.

     To sum up what I have said. The question asked was, Is not (as is
     commonly said and believed among us) Rome mentioned in the
     Apocalypse, as having especial share in the events which will come
     at the end of the world by means or after the time of Antichrist. I
     answer this, that Rome's judgments have come on her in great
     measure, when her empire was taken from her; that her persecutions
     of the Church have been in great measure judged, and the Scripture
     predictions concerning her fulfilled; that whether or not, she shall
     be further judged depends on two circumstances, first, whether "the
     righteous men" in the city who saved her when her judgment first
     came may not, through GOD'S great mercy, be allowed to save her
     still; next, whether the prophecy relates in its fulness to Rome or
     to some other object or objects of which Rome is a type. And
     further, I say, that if Rome is still to be judged, this must be
     before Antichrist comes, because Antichrist comes upon and destroys
     the ten kings, and lasts but a short space, but the ten kings are to
     destroy Rome. On the other hand, so far would seem to be clear, that
     the prophecy itself has not been fully accomplished, whatever we
     decide about Rome's concern in it. The Roman empire has not yet
     been divided into ten heads, nor has it yet risen against the woman,
     whoever she stands for, nor has the woman yet received her ultimate
     judgment.

     We are warned against sharing in her sins, and in her punishment.
     How shall we feel when the end comes, if we be found mere children
     of this world and of its great cities; with tastes, opinions,
     habits, such as are found in its cities; with a heart dependent on
     human society, and a reason moulded by it! What a miserable lot will
     be ours at the last day, to find ourselves before our Judge, with
     all the low feelings, principles, and aims which the world
     encourages; with our thoughts wandering (if that be possible then),
     wandering after vanities; with thoughts which rise no higher than
     the consideration of our own comforts, or our gains; with a haughty
     contempt for the Church, her ministers, her lowly people; a love of
     rank and station, an admiration of the splendour and the fashions of
     the world, an affectation of refinement, a dependence upon our
     powers of reason, an habitual self-esteem, and an utter ignorance of
     the number and the heinousness of the sins which lie against us! And
     when the judgment is over, and the saints have gone up to heaven,
     and there is silence and darkness where all was so full of life and
     expectation, where shall we find ourselves? Men now give fair names
     to sins and sinners; but then all the citizens of Babylon will
     appear in their true colours, as the word of GOD exhibits them, "as
     dogs, and sorcerers, And whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters,
     and lovers and makers of lies."
       _______________________________________________________________

                                  SERMON IV.

                        THE PERSECUTION OF ANTICHRIST.

                                 DAN. xii. 1.

     "There shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was
     a nation even to that same time; and at that time thy people shall
     be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book."

     WE have been so accustomed to hear of the persecutions of the
     Church, both from the New Testament and from the history of
     Christianity, that it is well if we have not at length come to
     regard the account as words of course, to speak of them without
     understanding what we say, and to receive no practical benefit from
     having been told of them: much less are we likely to take them for
     what they really are, a characteristic mark of Christ's Church.
     They are not indeed the necessary lot of the Church, but at least
     one of her appropriate badges; so that on the whole, looking at the
     course of history, you might set down persecution as one of the
     peculiarities by which you recognize her. And our Lord seems to
     intimate how becoming, how natural persecution is to the Church, by
     placing it among His Beatitudes. "Blessed are they who are
     persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom
     of heaven;" giving it the same high and honourable rank in the
     assemblage of evangelical graces, which the Sabbath holds among the
     ten Commandments,--- I mean, as a sort of sign and token of His
     followers, and, as such, placed in the moral code, though in itself
     external to it.

     He seems to show us this in another way, viz., as intimating to us
     the fact, that in persecution the Church begins and ends. He left
     her in persecution, and He will find her in persecution. He
     recognizes her as His own,---He framed, and He will claim
     her,---as a persecuted Church, bearing His Cross. And that awful
     relic of Him which He gave her, and which she is found with at the
     end, she cannot have lost by the way.

     The text speaks of the great persecution yet to come---and seems
     referred to by our LORD in His solemn prophecy before His passion,
     in which He comprises both series of events, both those which
     attended His first, and those which will attend at His second
     coming---both persecutions of His Church, the early and the late.
     He speaks as follows: "Then shall be great tribulation, such as was
     not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever
     shall be; and except those days should be shortened, there should no
     flesh be saved; but for the elect's sake those days shall be
     shortened."

     Having been led, at this season of the year, to speak of that
     dreadful visitation which will precede the return of CHRIST to judge
     the world, I mean the coming of Antichrist, I will end the subject
     now with a few brief remarks on the persecution which will attend
     it. In saying that a persecution will attend it, I do but speak the
     opinion of the early Church, as I have tried to do all along, and
     shall do in what follows.

     First, I will cite some of the principal texts which seem to refer
     to this last persecution.

     "Another shall rise after them, and .... he shall speak great words
     against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most
     High, and think to change times and laws; and they shall be given
     into his hand until a time, times, and the dividing of
     time:"---i. e. three years and a half.

     "They shall pollute the Sanctuary of strength, and shall take away
     the Daily Sacrifice, and they shall place the Abomination that
     maketh desolate, and such as do wickedly against the Covenant shall
     he corrupt by flatteries; but the people that do know their GOD
     shall be strong and do exploits. And they that understand among the
     people, shall instruct many; yet they shall fall by the sword, and
     by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days."

     "Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked
     shall do wickedly . . . and from the time that the Daily Sacrifice
     shall be taken away, and the Abomination that maketh desolate set
     up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days."

     "Then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the
     beginning of the world," and so on, as I just now read it.

     "The beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war
     against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. .... And they
     that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry,
     and shall send gifts one to another, because these two prophets
     tormented them that dwelt on the earth."

     "And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place
     prepared of GOD, that they should feed her there a thousand two
     hundred and threescore days."

     "And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and
     blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two
     months. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against GOD, to
     blaspheme His name, and His tabernacle, and them that dwell in
     heaven: and it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and
     to overcome them . . . and all that dwell upon the earth shall
     worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the
     Lamb slain from the foundation of the world."

     "I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
     bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand; and he laid hold on
     the dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and
     bound him a thousand years....and after that he must be loosed a
     little season .... and shall go out to deceive the nations which are
     in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them
     together to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.
     And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp
     of the saints about, and the beloved city."

     These passages were understood by the early Christians to relate to
     the persecution, which was to come in the last times; and they seem,
     evidently, to bear upon them that meaning. Our SAVIOUR'S words,
     indeed, about the fierce trial which was coming, might seem at first
     sight to refer to the early persecutions, those to which the first
     Christians were exposed; and doubtless so they do: yet, violent as
     these persecutions were, they were not considered by those who
     suffered them to be the proper fulfilment of the prophecy; and this
     surely is itself a strong reason for thinking they were not so. And
     it is confirmed by parallel passages, such as the text, which
     certainly speak of a persecution still future; yet surely our
     SAVIOUR used the very words of the text, and referred to what it
     refers to; and therefore, whatever partial accomplishment His
     prediction had in the early Church, He surely speaks of nothing
     short of the last persecution when His words are viewed in their
     full scope. He says, "There shall be great tribulation, such as was
     not since the beginning of the world to this time, lo, nor ever
     shall be: and except those days should be shortened, there should no
     flesh be saved; but for the elect's sake those days shall be
     shortened." And immediately after, "There shall arise false Christs
     and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch
     that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect." In
     accordance with this language, the text says, "There shall be a time
     of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation, even to that
     same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one
     that shall be found written in the book." One of the passages I
     quoted from the Revelations says the same, and as strongly: "It was
     given him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them....and
     all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, whose names are not
     written in the book of life."

     Let us then apprehend and realize the idea, thus clearly brought
     before us, that, sheltered as the Church has been from persecution
     for 1500 years, yet a persecution awaits it, before the end, fierce
     and more perilous than any which occurred at its first rise.

     Further, this persecution is to be attended with the cessation of
     all religious worship "They shall take away the Daily
     Sacrifice,"---words which the early Fathers interpret to mean,
     that Antichrist will suppress for three years and a half all
     religious worship. St. Augustin questions whether baptism even will
     be administered to infants during that season.

     And further, we are told: "They shall place the Abomination that
     maketh desolate,"---they shall "set it up:" our SAVIOUR declares
     the same. What this means we cannot pronounce. In the former
     fulfilment of this prophecy, it has been the introduction of heathen
     idols into GOD'S house.

     Moreover the reign of Antichrist will be supported, it would appear,
     with a display of miracles, such as the magicians of Egypt effected
     against Moses. On this subject, of course, we wait for a fuller
     explanation of the prophetical language, such as the event alone can
     give us. So far, how ever, is clear, that whether real miracles or
     not, whether pretended, or the result, as some have conjectured, of
     discoveries in physical science, they will produce the same effect
     as if they were real, viz. the overpowering the imaginations of such
     as have not the love of GOD deeply lodged in their hearts,---of
     all but the elect. Scripture is remarkably precise and consistent in
     this prediction. "Signs and wonders," says our LORD, "insomuch that,
     if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect." St. Paul
     speaks of Antichrist as one "whose coming is after the working of
     Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
     deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they
     received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved. And
     for this cause GOD shall send them strong delusion, that they should
     believe a lie." And St. John: "He doeth great wonders, so that He
     maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men,
     and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those
     miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast."

     In these four respects, then, not to look for others, will the last
     persecution be more awful than any of the earlier ones: in its being
     in itself fiercer and more horrible; in its being attended by a
     cessation of the ordinances of grace, "the Daily Sacrifice;" and by
     an open and blasphemous establishment of infidelity, or some such
     enormity, in the holiest recesses of the Church; lastly, in being
     supported by a power of working miracles. Well is it for Christians
     that the days are shortened!---shortened for the elect's
     sake, lest they should be overwhelmed,--- shortened, as it would
     seem, to three years and a half.

     Much might be said, of course, on each of these four particulars;
     but I will confine myself to making one remark on the first of them,
     the sharpness of the persecution.---It is to be worse than any
     persecution before it. Now, to understand the force of this
     announcement, we should understand in some degree what those former
     persecutions were.

     This it is very difficult to do in a few words; yet a very slight
     survey of the history of the Church will convince us that cruelties
     more shocking than those which the early Christians suffered from
     their persecutors, are beyond our conception beforehand. St.
     Paul's words, speaking of the persecutions prior to his time,
     but faintly describe the trial which came upon the Church in his day
     and afterwards. He says of the Jewish saints, "They were tortured,
     not accepting deliverance" ...... they "had trials of cruel mockings
     and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment: they were
     stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the
     sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, being
     destitute, afflicted, tormented." Such were the trials of the
     Prophets under the Law, who in a measure anticipated the Gospel, as
     in doctrine, so in suffering; yet the suffering, when the Gospel
     came, was as much sharper, as the doctrine was clearer, than their
     foretaste of either.

     To show you to what extent the early persecutions went, I will read
     you part of an account of one of them in the south of France; and,
     as I read it, would have you bear in mind the declaration in the
     text, that there is some suffering still to come, to which none
     which has hitherto happened, is worthy to be compared, and therefore
     not even what I am now going to read. It is written by
     eye-witnesses.

     " ... The rage of the populace, governor, and soldiers, especially
     lighted on Sanctus, a deacon; on Maturus, a late convert; on
     Attalus, and on Blandina, a slave, through whom CHRIST showed that
     the things which are lowly esteemed among men, have high account
     with GOD. For when we were all in fear, and her own mistress was in
     agony for her, lest she should be unable to make even one bold
     confession, from the weakness of her body, Blandina was filled with
     such strength, that even those, who tortured her by turns, in every
     possible way, from morning till evening, were wearied and gave it
     up, confessing she had conquered them. And they wondered at her
     remaining still alive, her whole body being mangled and pierced in
     every part. But that blessed woman, like a brave combatant, renewed
     her strength in confessing; and it was to her a recovery, a rest,
     and a respite, to say, ;I am a Christian.' Sanctus also
     endured exceedingly all the cruelties of men with a noble
     patience...... and to all questions would say nothing but ;I am
     a Christian.' When they had nothing left to do to him, they
     fastened red hot plates of brass on the tenderest parts of his body.
     But though his limbs were burning, he remained upright and
     unshrinking, steadfast in his confession, bathed and strengthened
     from heaven with that fountain of living water that springs from the
     well of CHRIST. But his body bore witness of what had been done to
     it, being one entire wound, and deprived of the external form of
     man."

     After some days they were taken to the shows where the wild beasts
     were, and went through every torture again, as though they had
     suffered nothing before. Again they were scourged, forced into the
     iron chair (which was red hot), dragged about by the beasts, and so
     came to their end. "But Blandina was hung up upon a cross, and
     placed to be devoured by the beasts that were turned in." Afterwards
     she was scourged; at last placed in a basket and thrown to a bull,
     and died under the tossings of the furious animal. But the account
     is far too long and minute, and too dreadful, to allow of my going
     through it. I give this merely as a specimen of the sufferings of
     the early Christians, from the malice of the devil.

     Take again the sufferings which the Arian Vandals inflicted at a
     later time. Out of four hundred and sixty Bishops in Africa, they
     sent forty-six out of the country to an unhealthy place, and
     confined them to hard labour, and three hundred and two to different
     parts of Africa. After an interval of ten years, they banished two
     hundred and twenty more. At another time they tore above four
     thousand Christians, clergy and laity, from their homes, and marched
     them across the sands, till they died either of fatigue or ill
     usage. They lacerated others with scourges, burned them with hot
     iron, and cut off their limbs.

     Hear how one of the early Fathers, just when the first persecution
     was ceasing, meditates on the prospect lying before the Church,
     looking earnestly at the events of his own day, in order to discover
     from them, if he could, whether the predicted evil was coming.

     "There will be a time of affliction, such as never happened since
     there was a nation upon the earth till that time. The fearful
     monster, the great serpent, the unconquerable enemy of mankind,
     ready to devour......The LORD knowing the greatness of the enemy, in
     mercy to the religious, says, ;Let those that are in Judaea
     flee to the mountains.' However, if any feel within him a
     strong heart to wrestle with Satan, let him remain (for I do not
     despair of the Church's strength of nerve), let him remain, and
     let him say, ;Who shall separate us from the love of
     CHRIST?'......Thanks to GOD, who limits the greatness of the
     affliction to a few days, for the elect's sake those days shall
     be cut short. Antichrist shall reign only three years and a half," a
     time, times, and the dividing of time......"Blessed surely he who
     then shall be a martyr for CHRIST! I consider that the martyrs at
     that season will be greater than all martyrs; for the former ones
     wrestled with man only, but these, in the time of Antichrist, will
     battle with Satan himself personally. Persecuting emperors
     slaughtered the former; but they did not pretend to raise the dead,
     nor made show of signs and wonders: but here there will be the
     persuasion both of force and of fraud, so as to deceive, if
     possible, even the elect. Let no one at that day say in his heart,
     ;What could CHRIST do more than this by what virtue worketh he
     these things? Unless GOD willed it, He would not have permitted
     it.' No: the Apostle forewarns you, saying beforehand,
     ;GOD shall send them a strong delusion,'---not that
     they may be excused, but condemned; those, who believe not in the
     Truth, that is, the true CHRIST, but take pleasure in
     unrighteousness, that is, in Antichrist......Prepare thyself,
     therefore, O man! thou hearest the signs of Antichrist; nor remind
     only thyself of them, but communicate them liberally to all around
     thee. If thou hast a child according to the flesh, delay not to
     instruct him. If thou art a teacher, prepare also thy spiritual
     children, lest they take the false for the True. For ;the
     mystery of iniquity doth already work.' I fear the wars of the
     nations; I fear the divisions among Christians; I fear the hatred
     among brethren. Enough; but GOD forbid that it should be fulfilled
     in our day. However, let us be prepared."

     To these observations I will add only two remarks: first, that it is
     quite certain, that if such a persecution has been foretold, it has
     not yet come, and therefore is to come. We may be wrong in thinking
     that Scripture foretels it, though it has been the common belief, I
     may say, of all ages; but if there be, it is still future. So that
     every generation of Christians should be on the watch-tower, looking
     out,---nay, the more and more, as time goes on.

     Next, I observe that signs do occur from time to time, not to enable
     us to fix the day, for that is hidden, but to show us it is coming.
     The world grows old---the earth is crumbling away---the night
     is far spent---the day is at hand. The shadows begin to
     move---the old forms of empire which have lasted ever since
     CHRIST was with us, heave and tremble before our eyes, and nod to
     their fall. They are they which keep CHRIST from us--- He is
     behind them. When they go, Antichrist will be released from that
     which letteth, and after his short but fearful season CHRIST will
     come.

     For instance: one sign is the present state of the Roman Empire, if
     it may be said to exist, though it does exist; but it is like a man
     on his death-bed, who after many throes and pangs, at last goes off
     when you least expect, or perhaps you know not when. You watch the
     sick man, and you say every day will be the last; yet day after day
     goes on---you know not when the end will come ---he lingers
     on---gets better---relapses,---yet you are sure after all
     he must die---it is a mere matter of time, you call it a matter
     of time: so is it with the old Roman Empire, which now lies so still
     and helpless. It is not dead, but it is on its death-bed. We suppose
     indeed that it will not die without some violence even yet, without
     convulsions. Antichrist is to head it; yet in another sense it dies
     to make way for Antichrist, and this latter form of death is surely
     hastening on, whether it comes a few years sooner or later. It may
     outlast our time, and the time of our children; for we are creatures
     of a day, and a generation is like the striking of a clock; but it
     tends to dissolution, and its hours are numbered.

     Again, another anxious sign at the present time is what appears in
     the approaching destruction of the Mahometan power. This too may
     outlive our day; still it tends visibly to annihilation, and as it
     crumbles, perchance the sands of the world's life are running
     out.

     And lastly, not to mention many other tokens which might be observed
     upon, here is this remarkable one. In one of the passages I just now
     read from the book of Revelations, it is said that in the last
     times, and in order to the last persecution, Satan, being loosed
     from his prison, shall deceive the nations in the extremities of the
     earth, Gog and Magog, and bring them to battle against the Church.
     These words had been already used by the prophet Ezekiel, who
     borrows the latter of them from the tenth chapter of Genesis. We
     read in that chapter that after the flood the sons of Japheth were
     Gomer, and Magog, and Madan, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and
     Tiras." Magog is supposed to be the ancestor of the nations in the
     north, the Tartars or Scythians. Whatever then Gog means, which is
     not known, here is a prophecy that the northern nations should be
     stirred up against the Church, and be one of the instruments of its
     suffering. And it is to le observed that twice since that prophecy
     was delivered, the northern nations have invaded the Church, and
     both times they have brought with them, or rather (as the text in
     the Revelations expresses it) they have been deceived into an
     Antichristian delusion,---been deceived into it, not invented it.
     The first irruption was that of the Goths and Vandals in the early
     times of the Church, and they were deceived into and fought for the
     Arian heresy. The next was that of the Turks, and they in like
     manner were deceived into and fought for Mahomedanism. Here then
     history since, as in other instances, is in part a comment upon the
     prophecy. Now, I do not mean that as to the present time, we see how
     this is to be accomplished in its fulness, after the pattern of the
     Shadows which have gone before. But thus much we see---we see
     that in matter of fact the nations of the North are gathering
     strength, and beginning to frown over the seat of the Roman Empire
     as they never have done since the time when the Turks came down.
     Here then we have a sign of Antichrist's appearance---I do
     not say of his instant coming, or his certain coming, for it may
     after all be but a type or shadow: still, so far as it goes, it is a
     preparation, a warning, a call to sober thought---just as a cloud
     in the sky (to use our Lord's instance) warns us about the
     weather. It is no sure proof of what is to be, but we think it
     prudent to keep our eye upon it.

     This is what I have to say about the last persecution and its signs.
     And surely it is profitable to think about it, though we be quite
     mistaken in the detail. For instance, after all it may not be a
     persecution of blood and death, but of craft and subtilty
     only---not of miracles, but of natural wonders and powers of
     human skill, human acquirements in the hands of the devil. Satan may
     adopt the more alarming weapons of deceit---he may hide
     himself---he may attempt to seduce us in little things, and so to
     move the Church, not all at once, but by little and little from her
     true position. I do believe he has done much in this way in the
     course of the last few centuries. I believe he has moved every part
     of the Church, this way or that way, but some way or other from the
     truth as it is in JESUS, from the old faith on which it was built
     "before the division of the east and west." It is his policy to
     split us up and divide us, to dislodge us gradually from our rock of
     strength. And if there is to be a persecution, perhaps it will be
     then; then, perhaps, when we are all of us in all parts of
     Christendom so divided, and so reduced, so full of schism, so close
     upon heresy. When we have cast ourselves upon the world and depend
     for protection upon it, and have given up our independence and our
     strength, then he may burst upon us in fury as far as God allows
     him. Then suddenly the Roman Empire nay break; up, and Antichrist
     appear as a persecutor, and the barbarous nations around break in.
     But all these things are in GOD'S hand and GOD'S
     knowledge, and there let us leave them.

     This alone, I will say, in conclusion, as I have already said
     several times, that such meditations as these may be turned to good
     account. What a curb upon our self-willed, selfish hearts, to
     believe that a persecution is in store for the Church, whether or
     not it comes in our days! Surely with this thought before us, we
     cannot bear to give ourselves up to thoughts of ease and comfort, of
     making money, settling well, or rising in the world. Surely with
     this thought before us, we cannot but feel that we are, what all
     Christians really are in the best estate, (nay rather would wish to
     be had they their will, if they be Christians in heart) pilgrims,
     watchers waiting for the morning, waiting for the light, eagerly
     straining our eyes for the first dawn of day---looking out for
     our SAVIOUR'S coming, His glorious advent, when He will end the
     reign of sin and wickedness, accomplish the number of His elect, and
     perfect those who at present struggle with infirmity, yet in their
     hearts love and obey Him.

     May He perform all this in His own good time, according to His
     infinite mercies! May He give us strength according to our days, and
     peace at the last!

                                    NOTE.

     The following passage from Bishop Horsley's Letters, published
     in the British Magazine for 1839, is very remarkable, considering it
     was written nearly forty years since. It is here quoted as bearing
     on the subject of the foregoing Sermons.

     "The Church of GOD on earth will be greatly reduced, as we may well
     imagine, in its apparent numbers, in the times of Antichrist, by the
     open desertion of the powers of the world. This desertion will begin
     in a professed indifference to any particular form of Christianity,
     under the pretence of universal toleration; which toleration will
     proceed from no true spirit of charity and forbearance, but from a
     design to undermine Christianity, by multiplying and encouraging
     sectaries. The pretended toleration will go far beyond a just
     toleration, even as it regards the different sects of Christians.
     For governments will pretend an indifference to all, and will give a
     protection in preference to none. All establishments will be laid
     aside. From the toleration of the most pestilent heresies, they will
     proceed to the toleration of Mahometanism, Atheism, and at last to a
     positive persecution of the truth of Christianity. In these times
     the Temple of GOD will be reduced almost to the Holy Place, that is,
     to the small number of real Christians who worship the FATHER in
     spirit and in truth, and regulate their doctrine and their worship,
     and their whole conduct, strictly by the word of GOD. The merely
     nominal Christians will all desert the profession of the truth, when
     the powers of the world desert it. And this tragical event I take to
     be typified by the order to St. John to measure the Temple and the
     Altar, and leave the outer court (national Churches) to be trodden
     under foot by the Gentiles. The property of the clergy will be
     pillaged, the public worship insulted and vilified by these
     deserters of the faith they once professed, who are not called
     apostates, because they never were in earnest in their profession.
     Their profession was nothing more than a compliance with fashion and
     public authority. In principle they were always, what they now
     appear to be, Gentiles. When this general desertion of the faith
     takes place, then will commence the sackcloth ministry of the
     witnesses....There will be nothing of splendour in the external
     appearance of these Churches; they will have no support from
     governments, no honours, no emoluments, no immunities, no authority,
     but that which no earthly power can take away, which they derive
     from Him who commissioned them to be his witnesses." B.M. vol. v. p.
     520.

     There are reasons, not necessary here to mention, for adding, that
     these Sermons were written several years since.

     OXFORD,
     The Feast of St. Peter.
     1838
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
