

                             Project Canterbury
                            Tracts for the Times

                               Tract Number 82

    Letter to A Magazine on the Subject of Dr. Pusey's Tract on Baptism.

                           [By John Henry Newman]
     __________________________________________________________________

   IN answer to a Correspondent who had asked, "on what authority,"
   certain "statements" in Dr. Pusey's Tract on Baptism, pp. 133--135,
   rested, the Editor of the Magazine in question had made the following
   remarks:--

     We are not sure that we perfectly understand all H. C.'s remarks;
     and we differ from his opinion that Bishop Burnet "ought to be
     allowed to have great weight in controversies respecting the
     doctrines of our Church." But, in reply to the question which he
     puts to us, as to "what authority" the doctrine which he quotes from
     the Oxford Tracts rests upon, we can only say, Upon the authority of
     the darkest ages of Popery, when men had debased Christianity from a
     spiritual system, a "reasonable service," to a system of forms, and
     ceremonial rites, and opera operata influences; in which, what
     Bishop Horsley emphatically calls "the mysterious intercourse of the
     soul with its Creator," was nearly superseded by an intervention of
     "the church"--not as a congregation of faithful men, in which the
     pure word of God is preached, and the sacraments are "duly
     administered according to Christ's ordinance," as the Church of
     England defines it--but as a sort of "mediator between God and man,"
     through whom all things relating to spiritual life were to be
     conveyed. Those who could not understand that "God is a Spirit, and
     they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth," and
     those who had neither the reality nor "the appearance of spiritual
     life," readily allied themselves to a religion of ceremonials, in
     which the Church stood in the place of God. And as the Popish
     priesthood found their gain in encouraging these ritual and
     non-spiritual views 6f Christianity, they eventually prevailed
     throughout Christendom, till the Reformation restored the pure light
     of Scripture, and taught men to look less to the priest and more to
     God; less to "outward and visible signs," and more to "inward and
     spiritual graces;" and not to infer, that, because their names stood
     upon the register of baptism, it was therefore enrolled in the
     Lamb's book of life, when there was no "appearance" of spiritual
     vitality in their heart or conduct.

     This fatal reliance upon signs, to the forgetfulness of the things
     signified, was rendered more proclivous, from the circumstance that
     in the early church persecution so purified its ranks, that there
     was little temptation for men to call themselves Christians who were
     not such in heart; and as adult converts were the first candidates
     for baptism, the outward and visible sign of regeneration was not
     resorted to till the inward and spiritual grace was already actually
     possessed; for there had been spiritually "a death unto sin and a
     new birth unto righteousness," before the party applied to make a
     public confession of his faith in Christ, at the risk of subjecting
     himself to all the secular perils which it involved.

     We have devoted so many scores, nay, hundreds, of pages to the
     questions propounded in the extract from the Oxford Tracts
     (especially at the time of the Baptismal Controversy, upon occasion
     of Bishop Mant's tract, when not a few of our readers were
     thoroughly wearied with the discussion), that we are not anxious to
     obtrude a new litigation; but we have readily inserted the extract
     furnished by our correspondent, because, nothing that we could say
     would so clearly show the unscriptural character of the whole system
     of the Oxford Tracts, as to let them speak for themselves. When the
     Christian reader learns that Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and Job,
     and David, and Isaiah, and Daniel, were not regenerate persons, were
     not sons of God, were not born again, but that Voltaire was all
     this, because he had been baptized by a Popish priest, we may surely
     leave such an hypothesis to be crushed by its own weight. It is the
     very bathos of theology, an absurdity not worthy to be gravely
     replied to, that men were "sanctified," "greatly sanctified;" were
     the friends of God, that "the Spirit of God dwelt in their hearts,
     and wrought therein incorruption, self-denial, patience, and
     unhesitating, unwearied faith;" who yet, having been "by nature born
     in sin, and the children of wrath," and never having been baptized,
     so as to be made "the children of grace," were still "unregenerate,"
     and therefore, in Scripture language, "children of the devil."
     Sanctified, unregenerate friends of God! The Spirit of God dwelling
     in men, who, not being "born again," were of necessity, being still
     in their natural condition, "children of the devil!" What next?

     We defy a score of Dr. Hampdens, even were they to give lectures in
     favour of pure Socinianism, to do so much mischief to the cause of
     religion, in a high academical station, as is done by setting forth
     such doctrine as that contained in the following passage from one of
     the Oxford Tracts;--for Socinianism makes no pretensions to be the
     doctrine of the Church of England, nor do any members of that church
     profess to find it in Scripture; whereas the absurdity, the
     irrational fanaticism, the intellectual drivelling under the abused
     name of faith, which dictates such sentiments as the following, must
     disgust every intelligent man, and make him an infidel, if he is
     really led to believe that Christianity is a system so utterly
     opposed to common sense. The writer complains, that "We have almost
     embraced the doctrine, that God conveys grace only through the
     instrumentality of the mental energies, that is, through faith,
     prayer, active spiritual contemplations, or (what is called)
     communion with God, in contradiction to the primitive view,
     according to which the church and her Sacraments are the ordained
     and direct visible means of conveying to the soul what is in itself
     supernatural and unseen. For example, would not most men maintain,
     on the first view of the subject, that to administer the Lord's
     Supper to infants, or to the dying and insensible, however
     consistently pious and believing in their past lives, was a
     superstition? and yet both practices have the sanction of primitive
     usage. And does not this account for the prevailing indisposition,
     to admit that Baptism conveys regeneration? Indeed, this may even be
     set down as the essence of Sectarian doctrine (however its mischief
     may be restrained or compensated, in the case of individuals), to
     consider faith, and not the Sacraments, as the instrument of
     justification and other Gospel

     Did ever any man, but the most ignorant Popish fanatic, till these
     our modern days, write thus? Administering the Lord's Supper (by
     which we feed upon Christ, "by faith, with thanksgiving"--that is,
     in a purely spiritual banquet) to infants, or to the dying or
     insensible, is not superstition, if it can be proved that there were
     in some former age some persons weak and ignorant enough to act or
     advocate such folly and impiety! Why not equally vindicate the
     Pope's sprinkling holy water upon the horses, or St. Anthony's
     preaching to the fishes? We will only say, Let those who adopt a
     portion of this scheme, and not the whole, mark well whither they
     are tending. Upon the showing of the Oxford Tracts themselves, the
     whole system hangs together. You are to adopt some irrational
     mystical system, by which grace is conveyed--not through "faith,
     prayer, active spiritual contemplations, or (what is called)
     communion with God," but--in the same manner that the Lord's Supper
     conveys grace when administered to an infant, or an insensible
     person. We have never been extreme in our views respecting the
     language used in our Liturgy concerning Baptism. We have thought
     that the words might be consistently used, either in reference to
     the undoubted privileges of Christian baptism; or in faith and
     charity, upon the principle stated in the Catechism, where it is
     said, "Why then are infants baptized, when, by reason of their
     tender age, they cannot perform them? (faith and repentance.)
     Because they promise them both by their sureties; which promise,
     when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform." Upon either
     of these principles we can cheerfully use our Baptismal Service. But
     if the use of it is to sanction the doctrine stated in this tract;
     if we are to believe that baptism "conveys to the soul what is in
     itself supernatural and unseen," in the selfsame way that the Popish
     wafer is alleged to convey grace to infants and insensible
     persons--(why not to idiots?)--and if our Church Service is to be
     tortured to bear this meaning; then we confess, that the sooner such
     a stumbling-block is removed the better. The Oxford Tract writers
     will not allow us to connect the outward and visible sign of
     Baptism, or the Lord's Supper, with the inward and spiritual grace,
     through the medium of "faith, prayer, active spiritual
     contemplations, or (what is called) communion with God," but only
     through the selfsame channel by which "primitive usage" supposed
     grace to flow to an infant or insensible person, when operated upon
     with the holy Eucharist. Nay, they sneer at and ridicule "what is
     called" communion with God (poor Bishop Horsley's "mysterious
     intercourse of the soul with its Creator"), as being something so
     "called," but without warrant; whereas true communion with God is
     through the intervention of "the Church:" by which intervention
     there is this communion when the priest puts a consecrated wafer
     upon the lips of an infant or insensible person. The Church of
     England teaches, after Holy Scripture, that we are "justified by
     faith;" Professor Pusey teaches that the Sacraments are the
     appointed instruments of justification. The learned Professor ought
     to lecture at Maynooth, or the Vatican, and not in the chair of
     Oxford, when he puts forth this Popish doctrine. It is afflicting
     beyond expression to see OUT Protestant Church--and in times like
     these--agitated by the revival of these figments of the darkest ages
     of Papal superstition. Well may Popery flourish! well may Dissent
     triumph! well may Unitarianism sneer! well may all Protestantism
     mourn, to see the spot where Cranmer and Latimer shed their blood
     for the pure Gospel of Christ, overrun (yet not overrun, for,
     blessed be God, the infection is not--at least so we trust--widely
     spread) with some of the most vain and baneful absurdities of
     Popery. We ask Professor Pusey how, as a conscientious man, he
     retains any office in a church which requires him to subscribe to
     all the Thirty-nine Articles, and to acknowledge as Scriptural the
     doctrines set forth in the Homilies? Will any one of the writers, or
     approvers of the Oxford Tracts, venture to say that he does really
     believe all the doctrines of the Articles and Homilies of our
     Church? He may construe some of the offices of the Church after his
     own manner; but what does he do with the Articles and Homilies? We
     have often asked this question in private, but could never get an
     answer. Will any approver of the Oxford Tracts answer it in print?
     The demand here made had been met; and the following number of the
     Magazine had contained the following notice on the subject.
     In reply to the communication of the Rev.------, of------College,
     requesting to know whether we will insert a letter in which he says
     he is prepared "both as regards Dr. Pusey and the Oxford Tracts" to
     furnish an answer to our inquiry, how the writers reconcile some of
     the statements in them respecting the Sacraments, with some of those
     in the Articles and Homilies; we can only say, that we are surprised
     that he should think it necessary to ask the question; for what
     honesty or love of truth would there be in our putting a query, and
     refusing to insert a responsible and properly written reply?
     The following letter was the consequence of this permission.

     Letter to the Editor of the ----- -------.

     PART I.

     ------ College, Jan. 11, 1837.

     Sir,--Through that courtesy, which is on the whole characteristic of
     your Magazine, in dealing with opponents, I am permitted to answer
     in its pages the challenge, made in a late number, to Dr. Pusey and
     the writers of the Tracts for the Times, on certain points of their
     theology. The tone of that challenge, I must own, or rather the
     general conduct of your Magazine towards the Tracts, since their
     first appearance, has been an exception to its usual mildness and
     urbanity. However, I seize, as an ample amends, this opportunity of
     a reply, which, if satisfactory, will, as appearing in its pages, be
     rather a retractation on your part than an explanation on mine.

     One would think that the Tracts had introduced some new articles of
     faith into English theology, such surprise have they excited in some
     quarters; yet, much as they have been censured, no attempt, that I
     know of, has been made to prove against them--I will not say,
     article of faith, but--even any theological opinion, which is not
     consonant to that religious system which has been received among us
     since the date of the Ecclesiastical Polity. Indeed, nothing is more
     striking than the contrast exhibited in the controversy between the
     great definiteness and precision of the feelings, and the vagueness
     of the outcry, raised against these Tracts. From the excitement on
     the subject for the last three years, one would think nothing was
     more obvious and tangible than the offence they contained; yet
     nothing, not only to refute, but even to describe their errors
     definitely, has yet been attempted. Extracts have been made; abuse
     has been lavished; invidious associations excited; irony and sarcasm
     have lent their aid: their writers have been called Papists, and
     Non-jurors, and Lauds, and Sacheve-rells, and that not least of all
     by your own Magazine: yet I much doubt whether, as far as you have
     thrown light on the subject, its readers have, up to this hour, any
     more definite idea of the matter than they have of Sacheverell
     himself, or of the Non-jurors, or of any other vague name which is
     circulated in the world, meaning the less the oftener it is used. If
     they were examined, perhaps they would not get beyond this round of
     titles and epithets: or, at the utmost, we should but hear that the
     Tracts were corruptions of the Gospel, human inventions, systems of
     fallible men, and so forth. These are the fine words which you give
     them to feed upon, for bread.

     Even now, Mr. Editor, when you make your formal challenge concerning
     Dr. Pusey, you do not distinctly and pointedly say, as a man who was
     accusing, not declaiming, what you want answered. You ask, "will any
     of the writers or approvers of the Oxford Tracts venture to say that
     he [Dr. Pusey] does really believe all the doctrines of the Articles
     and Homilies of our church?" [The Editor meant by "he," not Dr.
     Pusey, but "any of the writers," &c.] How unsuitable is this! Why do
     you not tell us which doctrine of the Articles you have in your
     mind, and then prove your point, instead of leaving us to guess it?
     One used to think it was the business of the accuser to bring proof,
     and not to throw upon the accused the onus of proving a negative.
     What! am I, as an approver of the Tracts, to go through the round of
     doctrines in Articles and Homilies, measuring Dr. Pusey first by
     one, then by the other, while the -------- sits still, as judge
     rather than accuser? What! are we not even to have the charge told
     us, let alone the proof? No; we are to find out both the dream and
     the interpretation.

     So much for the formal challenge which your Magazine puts forth; and
     I can find nothing, either in the remarks which precede it, nor in
     its acceptance of my offer, precisely coming to the point, and
     informing me what the charge against Dr. Pusey is. It is connected
     with the Sacraments: you wish him and his friends, according to your
     subsequent notice, "to reconcile some of the statements in them [the
     Tracts] respecting the Sacraments, with some of those in the
     Articles and Homilies!" In your remarks which precede the challenge,
     you do mention two opinions which you suppose him to hold, which I
     shall presently notice; but you are still silent as to the Article
     or Homily transgressed. This is not an English mode of proceeding;
     and I dwell on it, as one of the significant tokens in the
     controversy, what is the real state of the case and its probable
     issue? Here are two parties: one clamorous loudly and profusely
     against the other, and does no more; that other is absorbed in its
     subject, appeals to Scripture, to the Fathers, to custom, to reason,
     in its defence, but answers not. Put the case before any
     sharp-sighted witness of human affairs, and he will give a good
     guess which is in the right. If, indeed, there is one thing more
     than another that brings home to me that the Tracts are mainly on
     the side of Truth--more than their reasonings, their matter, and
     their testimonies; more than proof from Scripture, or appeal to
     antiquity, or sanction from our own divines; more than the beauty
     and grandeur, the thrilling and transporting influence, the fulness
     and sufficiency of the doctrines they desire to maintain--it is
     this: the evidence which their writers bear about them, that they
     are the reviled party, not the revilers. I challenge the production
     of any thing in the Tracts of an unkind, satirical, or abusive
     character; any thing personal. One Tract only concerns individuals
     at all, No. 73; and that treats of them in a way which no one, I
     think, will find to be any exception to this remark. The writers no
     where attack your Magazine, or other similar publication, though
     they evidently as little approve of its theology, as your Magazine
     that of the Tracts. They have been content to go onward; to preach
     what is positive; to trust in what they did well, not in what others
     did ill; to leave truth to fight its own battle, in a case where
     they had no office or commission to assist it coercively. They have
     spoken against principles, ages, or historical characters, but not
     against persons living. They have taken no eye for eye, or tooth for
     tooth. They have left their defence to time, or rather committed it
     to God. Once only have they accepted of defence, even from a friend,
     a partner he indeed also, but not in those Tracts which he defended.
     This, then, is the part they have chosen; what your Magazine's
     choice has been, is plain even from the article which leads me to
     write this letter. We are there told of Oxford writers, "relying on
     the authority of the darkest ages of Popery," of their advocating
     "the bathos in theology, an absurdity not worthy to be gravely
     replied to," of their "absurdity," "irrational fanaticism,"
     "intellectual drivelling," of their writing like "the most ignorant
     Popish fanatic," of their "sneering and ridiculing," of their
     reviving the "figments of the darkest ages of Papal superstition,"
     "some of the most vain and baneful absurdities of Popery;" and all
     this with an avowal you do not wish to discuss the matter. Brave
     words surely! Well and good, take your fill of these, Mr. Editor,
     since you choose them for your portion. It does but make our spirits
     rise cheerily and hopefully thus to be encountered. Never were such
     words on one side, but deeds were on the other. We know our place,
     and our fortunes; to give a witness and to be contemned, to be ill
     used and to succeed. Such is the law which God has annexed to the
     promulgation of the truth; its preachers suffer, but its cause
     prevails. Be it so. Joyfully will we all consent to this compact;
     and the more you attack us personally, the more, for the very omen's
     sake, will we exult in it.

     With these feelings, then, I have accepted your challenge, not for
     the sake of Dr. Pusey, much as I love and revere him; not for the
     sake of the writers of the Tracts; but for the sake of the secret
     ones of Christ, lest they be impeded in their progress towards
     catholic truth by personal charges against those who are upholding
     it against the pressure of the age. As for Dr. Pusey himself, and
     the other writers, they are happy each in his own sphere, wherever
     God's providence has called them, in earth or in heaven; and they
     literally do not know, and do not care, what the world says of them.

     Now, as I have already said, I cannot distinctly make out the
     precise charge brought against Dr. Pusey; that is, I cannot
     determine what tenet of his is supposed to be contrary to which of
     the 39 Articles. However, you condemn two, the notion that the
     Sacraments may, for what we know, in certain cases be of benefit to
     persons unconscious during their administration; and next that
     Regeneration is a gift of the new covenant exclusively. I will take
     them in the order you place them.

     1. And first of Regeneration, as a gift peculiar to the Gospel.--You
     remark upon a passage from Dr. Pusey's work on Baptism (in which he
     contrasts regeneration and sanctification, and says, that the former
     is a gift of the Gospel exclusively, the latter of all good men),
     thus: "We have devoted so many scores, nay, hundreds of pages to the
     questions propounded in the extract from the Oxford Tracts
     (especially at the time of the Baptismal controversy, upon occasion
     of Bishop Mant's Tract, when not a few of our readers were wearied
     with the discussion), that we are not anxious to obtrude a new
     litigation; but we have readily inserted the extract furnished by
     our correspondent, because nothing that we could say would so
     clearly show the unscriptural character of the whole system of the
     Oxford Tracts, as to let them speak for themselves."--Now, it might
     seem at first sight as if they were an inconsistency in persisting
     for some years in speaking instead of us, then suddenly saying it is
     best to let the Tracts "speak for themselves," and then, in the very
     next sentences, relapsing in eandem cantilenam, into the same
     declamatory tone of attack as before; but there is really none. In
     each case you avoid discussion, which, as you candidly confess, and
     very likely with good reason, you are tired of. I doubt not you are
     discouraged at finding that you have still to argue what you have
     already done your utmost to settle. Or rather, if you will let me
     speak plainly, and tell you my mind, perhaps there has been that in
     the religious aspect of the hour, which has flattered many who agree
     with you, and perhaps yourself, that the day of mere struggle was
     past, and that of triumph was come; that your principles were
     professed by all the serious, all the active men in the Church, the
     old defenders of opposite views drooping or dying off; and that now,
     by the force of character, or by influence in high places, they
     would be secured a permanent impression upon our religious system.
     And if so, you are not unnaturally surprised to find "uno avulso,
     non deficit alter;" to find a sudden obstacle in your path, and that
     from a quarter whence you looked not for it; and, in consequence,
     you feel stimulated to remove it hastily rather than courteously.
     And hence, partly from weariness, partly from vexation, you prefer
     to act as if you were judge rather than-----, and to pronounce
     sentence by acclamation, not after discussion. If all this be so,
     you are quite consistent, whether you quote our words without
     comment, or substitute your own comment for them. In one point alone
     you are irretrievably inconsistent, to have inserted your challenge
     at the end of the article.

     But what is the very doctrine that has created this confusion? Dr.
     Pusey's asserting (after the primitive teachers) that the old
     Fathers, though sanctified, were not regenerated. Is this, after
     all, the doctrine which is against the Articles, and such that he
     who holds it should quit his Professorship? In which of them is a
     syllable to be found referring to the subject, one way or the
     other--except so far as they tend our way, as implying, from their
     doctrine of regeneration in baptism, that those who are not
     baptized, and therefore the Old Fathers, are not regenerate? If,
     then, the plain truth must be spoken, what your Magazine wishes is
     to add to the Articles. Let this be clearly understood. This
     Magazine, which has ever, as many think, been over-liberal in its
     interpretations of our Services, and in concessions to Dissenters,
     desires to forge for us a yoke of commandments, and, as I should
     hold, of commandments of men. Years ago, indeed, we heard of much
     from it in censure of Bishop Marsh's Eighty-seven Questions; but it
     would seem that your Magazine may do what a Bishop may not. In
     reviewing those Questions, in 1821, it pointedly spoke of the wisdom
     of the framers of the Royal Declaration prefixed to the Articles,
     which prescribes that they shall be taken in no new or peculiar
     sense; contrasting, to use its own words, "the spirit of peace, of
     moderation, of manly candour, and comprehensive liberality, which
     breathes throughout this Declaration, with the subtle, contentious,
     dogmatical, sectarian, and narrow-minded spirit which," it
     proceeded, "we grieve to say, pervades the Bishop of Peterborough's
     Eighty-seven Questions." (----- March 1821). But why is liberality
     to develope on one side only? Why must Baptismal Regeneration be an
     open point, but the Regeneration of the Patriarchs a close one? Why
     must Zuinglius be admitted, and the school of Gregory and Augustine
     excluded? Or do persons by a sort of superstition so cleave to the
     word Protestant, that a Saint who had the misfortune to be born
     before 1517 is less of kin to them than heretics since? But such is
     your Magazine's rule: it is as zealous against Bishop Marsh for
     coercing one way, as against us for refusing to be coerced the
     other.

     Will it be said that Dr. Pusey and others would do the same, if they
     could; that is, would limit the Articles to their own sense? No; the
     Articles are confessedly wide in their wording, though still their
     width is within bounds; they seem to include a number of shades of
     opinion. Your Magazine may rest satisfied that Dr. Pusey's friends
     will never assert that the Articles have any particular meaning at
     all. They aspire, and (by God's blessing) intend, to have a
     successful fight; but not by narrowing the Articles to Lutheranism,
     Calvinism, or Zuinglianism, but as feeling that they are contending
     for the Truth, and that Providence seems wonderfully to be raising
     up witnesses and champions of the Truth, not in one place only, but
     at once in many, as armed men from the ground.

     But to return. It is hard to be put on our defence, as it appears we
     are, for opinions not against the Articles; but be it so. Let us
     hear the form of the accusation. Your Magazine speaks thus: "When
     the Christian reader learns that Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and
     Job, and David, and Isaiah, and Daniel, were not regenerate persons,
     were not sons of God, were not born again; but that Voltaire was all
     this, because he had been baptized by a Popish priest; we may surely
     leave such an hypothesis to be crushed by its own weight." To be
     sure the hypothesis is absurd, if your Magazine's own sense is to be
     put upon the word "regenerate;" but it will be observed, that it all
     depends upon this; and it is not evident that it will be absurd when
     Dr. Pusey's own sense is put upon his own words. If all who are
     sanctified are regenerate, then I say, it is absurd to say that
     Abraham was not regenerate being sanctified. On the other hand, if
     only Christians are regenerate, then it is absurd to say that
     Abraham was regenerate, being not a Christian. What trifling upon
     words is this! what is the use of oscillating to and fro upon their
     different meanings? Your business, Mr. Editor, was to prove his
     sense wrong, not to assume your sense and interpret his words by it;
     else, when you assert, "no one shall enter heaven, unless
     regenerated on earth," he, in turn, might accuse you, quite as
     fairly, of denying the salvation of Abraham, because, in his view,
     Abraham was not regenerated on earth.

     I will now state briefly the view of Dr. Pusey, derived from the
     goodly fellowship of the Fathers, proved from Scripture, and called
     by your Magazine "the very bathos of theology." All of us, I
     suppose, grant that the Spirit in some sense is given under the
     Gospel, in which it was not given under the Law. The Homily (2d on
     Faith) says so expressly: "Although they," the Old Testament saints
     mentioned Heb. xi., "were not named Christian men, yet was it a
     Christian faith that they had: God gave them then grace to be His
     children, as He doth us now. But now, by the coming of our Saviour
     Christ, we have received more abundantly the Spirit of God in our
     hearts, whereby we may conceive a greater faith, and a surer trust,
     than many of them had. But, in effect, they and we be all one: we
     have the same faith," &c. Though man's duties were the same, his
     gifts were greater after Christ came. Whatever spiritual aid was
     vouchsafed before, yet afterwards it was a Divine presence in the
     soul, abiding, abundant, and efficacious. In a word, it was the Holy
     Ghost Himself; who influenced indeed the heart before, but is not
     revealed as residing in it. Now, when we consider the Scripture
     proof of this in the full, I think we shall see that this special
     gift, which Christians have, is really something extraordinary and
     distinguishing. And, whether it should be called Regeneration or no,
     so far is clear, that all persons who hold that there is a great
     gift since Christ came, which was not given before, do, in their
     degree, incur your Magazine's censure, as holding a "very bathos of
     theology." You might say of them, just as of Dr. Pusey, "When the
     Christian reader learns that Abraham was sanctified, yet 'had not
     the Spirit because that Jesus was not yet glorified,' we may leave
     the hypothesis to be crushed by its own weight."

     Now, according to Scripture, I contend, first, that there is a
     spiritual difference between Christians and Jews; and, next, that
     the accession of spiritual power, which Christians have, is called
     Regeneration. Let it be understood, however, that I am not desirous
     here to bring proofs of the doctrine, for which you have no claim on
     me; but to show your readers that, even at first sight, it is not so
     utterly irrational and un-plausible a notion as to account for your
     saying, "What next?" in short, to show that the "absurdity" does not
     lie with Dr. Pusey.

     The Prophets had announced the promise. Ezek. xxxvi. 25--27: "I will
     sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean ... a new heart
     also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you . . .
     and I will put My Spirit within you." Again, xxxvii. 27: "My
     tabernacle also shall be with them." Vid. also Heb. viii. 10. In
     Isai. xliv. 3, the gift is expressly connected with the person of
     the Messiah: "I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods
     upon the dry ground: I will pour My Spirit upon Thy seed, and My
     blessing upon Thine offspring."

     Our Saviour refers to this gift as the promise of his Father, Luke
     xxiv. 49; Acts i. 4. He enlarges much upon it, John xiv--xvi. It
     flows to us from Him: "Of His fulness have all we received." (John
     i. 16.)

     St. John expressly tells us it was not given before Christ was
     glorified (John vii. 39). In like manner St. Paul says, that, though
     the old fathers lived by faith, yet they received not the promise"
     (Heb. xi. 39). And St. Peter, that even the prophets, though they
     had the prophetic Spirit--"the Spirit of Christ which was in
     them"--yet, after all, had not "the glory which should follow;"
     which was "the Gospel with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven;"
     the Spirit, in the special Christian sense. Consider also St. Paul's
     use of the term "spirit," e. g., Rom. viii., as the characteristic
     of the Gospel.

     It is described in the New Testament under the same images as it is
     promised in the Old,--a tabernacle, and a fount of living water (1
     Cor. iii. 17; vi. 19; 2 Cor. vi. 16--18; John iv. 14; vii. 38).

     Nothing, I think, but the inveterate addiction to systematising so
     prevalent, can explain away texts which so expressly say that we
     have a Divine presence which the Jews had not.

     Now, secondly, is this gift to be called Regeneration? I grant that
     in one sense all the terms applicable to Christian privileges are
     also applicable to Jewish. The Jews were "sons of God," were
     "begotten" of God, had "the Spirit," saw "the glory of God," and the
     like; but, in like manner, the Saints in heaven, as their peculiar
     gift, will see "the glory of God," and Angels are "sons of God;" yet
     we know that Angels and Saints are in a state different from the
     Jews. The question, then, still remains open, whether, in spite of
     the absence of discriminating terms, Christians also have not a gift
     which the Jews had not, and whether the word regeneration, in its
     proper sense, does not denote it.

     Our proof, then, is simple. The word regeneration occurs twice only
     in Scripture: in neither can it be interpreted to include Judaism;
     in one, most probably in both, it is limited to the Gospel; in Titus
     iii. 4, 5, certainly; and in Matt. xix. 28, according as it is
     stopped, it will mean the coming of Gospel grace, or the
     resurrection.

     Such is some small portion of the Scripture notices on the general
     subject, which I bring to show that Scripture does not so speak as
     to make the view maintained by Dr. Pusey, with all Saints, guilty of
     absolute "absurdity" on the face of the matter, and a "bathos in
     theology." And the following consideration will increase this
     impression. In truth the view in question is simply beyond, not
     against, the opinion of your Magazine. It is a view which the
     present age cannot be said to deny, because it does not see it. The
     Catholic Church has ever given to Noah, Abraham, and Moses, all that
     the present age gives to Christians. You cannot mention the grace,
     in kind or degree, which you ascribe to the Christian, which Dr.
     Pusey will not ascribe to Abraham; except, perhaps, the intimate
     knowledge of the details of Christian doctrine. But he considers
     that Christians have a something beyond this, even a portion of that
     heaven brought down to earth, which will be for ever in heaven the
     portion of Abraham and all saints in its fulness. It is not, then,
     that Dr. Pusey defrauds Abraham, but your Magazine defrauds
     Christians. That special gift of grace, called "the glory of God,"
     is as unknown to the so-called religious world as to the "natural
     man." The Catholic Religion teaches, that, when grace takes up its
     abode in us, we have so superabounding and awful a grace tabernacled
     in us, that no other words describe it more nearly than to call it
     an Angel's nature. Now mark the meaning of this. Angels are holy;
     yet Angels before now have become devils. Keeping this analogy in
     view, you will perceive that it is as little an absurdity to say
     that Abraham was not regenerate, as to say that he was not an Angel;
     as little unmeaning to say that Voltaire was regenerate, as to say
     he became a devil, as Judas is expressly called. Let me suit one or
     two of your sentences to this view of the subject, and then I will
     release you from the trouble of hearing more upon it. You will then
     speak thus: "When the Christian reader learns that Noah, Abraham,
     and Moses, were not Angels, yet that Voltaire was a devil, we may
     surely leave such an hypothesis to be crushed by its own weight. It
     is the very bathos of theology--an absurdity not worthy to be
     gravely replied to--that men are sanctified, the friends of God, had
     the grace of God in their hearts, and yet were not Angels.
     Sanctified, non-angelic friends of God! grace dwelling in any but
     Michael, Gabriel, the Cherubims and the Seraphims? What next?"

     Alas! sir, that you should so speak of your own privileges! Perhaps
     it is my turn now to ask you, "What next?" and this I mean to do.
     Before proceeding to the other opinion attributed to Dr. Pusey I
     wish to see what you will say to what is now offered you. Only I
     would remark, that the subjects which I have not yet touched upon
     are to come, when due attention shall be shown to your remarks about
     Justification, the Homilies, and kindred points.

     PART II.
     March 3, 1837.

     2. I now proceed to the second of the charges which you made against
     Dr. Pusey. After saying what is necessary, I shall, as I promised,
     notice the subject of Justification, the Homilies, and the Articles;
     and shall intersperse the discussion with some remarks, as brief as
     is practicable, on the various matter "ramblingly and cursorily set
     before your readers," as you happily express it, in your
     animadversions on the portion of my letter already published.

     That portion occupies not so much as seven pages of your larger
     type, and that in the course of two numbers. It has elicited from
     you in answer about sixty pages of your closest. I think then I have
     a claim in courtesy, nay in justice, that you should put in the
     whole of this reply without a word of your own. I will not embrace
     the entire subject in it, but leave one portion for an after Number
     of your Magazine, that you may not say I burden you with too much at
     once. But what I send, I hope to see inserted without mutilation. Do
     grant me this act of fairness--you will have months upon months,
     nay, the whole prospective duration of your Magazine, for your
     reply; I, on the other hand, limit myself to one letter. All I ask
     is the right of an Englishman, a fair and uninterrupted hearing.

     The second charge you bring against Dr. Pusey is this:--that he
     holds that the sacraments may, for what we know, in certain cases,
     be of benefit to persons unconscious during their administration.
     You quarrel, however, with this mode of stating his supposed
     opinion; you say, "Mr. ------ misstates what we said. We were
     denying the utility of administering the Lord's Supper to infants or
     insensible persons, as the Papists employ extreme unction; which Mr.
     ------ skilfully turns into a charge of our denying that there is
     any benefit in Infant Baptism" (p. 124). Now, I must think you leave
     the matter as you found it. You have said, the notion of the Holy
     Eucharist benefitting infants was "an absurdity," "intellectual
     drivelling," "irrational fanaticism," &c. I ask, then, why is not
     the doctrine that Holy Baptism benefits them, all these bad things
     also? Surely you are speaking of the very notion of infants being
     benefited by means of external rites, when you say it implies "a
     system utterly opposed to common sense." You must mean there is an
     antecedent absurdity; antecedent to a consideration of the
     particular case. You speak, just as I have worded it, against the
     very notion that "the sacraments," one as well as the other, "may,
     for what we know, in certain cases, be of benefit to persons
     unconscious during their administration." What is an absurdity when
     supposed in one case, is an absurdity surely in the other. I cannot
     alter my wording of your objection.

     Next let us consider the very passage which has led you to use these
     free epithets. It stands thus: "We have almost embraced the doctrine
     that God conveys grace only through the instrumentality of the
     mental energies, that is, through faith, prayer, active spiritual
     contemplation, or (what is called) communion with God, in
     contradiction to the primitive view, according to which the church
     and her sacraments are the ordained and direct invisible means of
     conveying to the soul what is in itself supernatural and unseen. For
     example: would not most men maintain, on the first view of the
     subject, that to administer the Lord's Supper to infants, or to the
     dying and insensible, however consistently pious and Believing in
     their past lives, wag a superstition? and yet both practices have
     the sanction of primitive usage. And does not this account for the
     prevailing indisposition to admit that baptism conveys regeneration?
     Indeed, this may even be set down as the essence of sectarian
     doctrine (however its mischief may be restrained or compensated in
     the case of individuals), to consider faith, and not the sacraments,
     as the instrument of justification and other Gospel gifts."--These
     words you attribute to Dr. Pusey. You say," Professor Pusey teaches
     that the sacraments are the appointed instruments of justification;
     the learned Professor ought to lecture at Maynooth, or the Vatican,
     and not in the chair of Oxford, when he puts forth this Popish
     doctrine." Again, in pp. 118, 119, you speak of Dr. Pusey's saying
     that the grace of the sacrament is unconnected "with the mental
     energies, that is, through faith, prayer, active spiritual
     contemplations, or what is called communion with God;" (here you
     interpose of your own "for shame, Dr. Pusey, to speak thus lightly
     of 'communion with God!'"); that "to administer the Lord's Supper to
     infants, or to the dying and insensible," is not "superstition," but
     "a practice having the sanction of primitive usage;" and "primitive
     usage," you add, "the Oxford Tracts" [Tracts for the Times] "teach
     is of Apostolical authority." It is quite clear you attribute the
     above sentences to Dr. Pusey.

     Now, Mr. Editor, let me ask you a question. Should any one accuse
     you of having written them, should you not be startled? Supposing I
     boldly attributed them to you, and retorted your interjection of
     indignation upon yourself, would you not consider it somewhat
     outrageous? Should I have any reason to complain if you accused me
     of exceeding assurance, of being under a delusion, or at least of
     unpardonable carelessness? Be judge, then, in your own case. Those
     sentences no more belong to Dr. Pusey than to you. They are not in
     his Tract. They are not his writing. No one man is chargeable with
     the work of another man. Not even were Dr. Pusey to profess he
     approved the general sentiment of the passage, would you have any
     right to charge him with the very wording of it. Every man has his
     own way of expressing himself; I have mine, and you have yours. Dr.
     Pusey might approve the sentiment, yet criticise the wording. All
     these strong sayings then against Dr. Pusey, are misdirected. Learn,
     Mr. Editor, to be sure of your man, before you attack him.

     To proceed. The words occur in the Advertisement to the second
     volume of the Tracts. Let us examine them, whosoever they are. Now,
     in what they say about administering the Holy Eucharist to children
     or the insensible, they do not enforce it, as you suppose, on
     "Apostolical authority." A usage may be primitive, yet not
     universal; may belong to the first ages, but only to some parts of
     the Church. Such a usage is either not apostolical, else it would be
     every where observed; or at least not binding, as not being
     delivered by the apostles as binding. For instance, the Church of
     Ephesus, on St. John's authority, celebrated the Easter-feast after
     the Jewish manner, on the fourteenth day of Nisan; yet such a custom
     is not binding on us. Now supposing I said, "the great reverence in
     which the Jewish dispensation was held in the best and purest ages,
     is shown in this, that the quartodeciman usage has primitive, nay,
     Apostolic sanction;" must I necessarily mean that all Christendom,
     and all the Apostles, observed Easter on the fourteenth day? must I
     mean that we are bound to keep it on that day? must I mean to extol
     such a usage, and to advocate it? Apply this instance to the
     sentence of this writer who is not Dr. Pusey, this Pseudo-Pusey, as
     I may call him; and see whether it will not help your conception of
     his meaning. He does not say, he does not imply, that to administer
     the Second Sacrament to infants is Apostolic; he does not consider
     it a duty binding to us. He does but say, that, since it has a
     sanction in early times, it is not that "absurdity," "irrational
     fanaticism," and so forth, which your Magazine says it is: and his
     meaning may be thus worded: "Here is a usage existing up and down
     the early church, which, right or wrong, argues quite a different
     temper and feeling from those of the present day. This day, on the
     first view of the subject, calls it an absurdity; that day did not."
     Surely it is fair to estimate inward states of mind by such
     spontaneous indications. To warn men against the religious
     complexion of certain persons at present, I should point to the
     Pastoral Aid-Society, though some who agree with them in general
     sentiments may not approve it. To describe that of our Bishops 130
     years since, I should refer to the then attempt, nearly successful,
     of formally recognising the baptism of Dissenters. Again, the
     character of Laud's religion may be gathered even from the
     exaggerated account of his consecrating St. Catherine Cree's church,
     without sanctioning that account.

     When such indications occur in primitive times, though they are not
     of authority more than in modern times, yet they are tokens of what
     is of authority,--a certain religious temper, which is found every
     where, always, and in all, though the particular exhibitions of it
     be not. In like manner the spiritual interpretations of Scripture,
     which abound in the Fathers, may be considered as proving the
     Apostolicity of the principle of spiritualizing Scripture; though I
     may not, if it so happen, acquiesce in this or that particular
     application of it, in this or that Father. And so the administration
     of the Lord's Supper to infants in the church of Cyprian, Saint and
     Martyr, is a sanction of a principle, which your Magazine, on the
     other hand, calls "an absurdity," "intellectual drivelling," and
     "irrational fanaticism." For my part, I am not ashamed to confess
     that I should consider Cyprian a better interpreter of the Scripture
     doctrine of the Sacraments, of "the minding of the Spirit" about
     them, than even the best divines of this day, did they take, which I
     am far from accusing them of doing, an opposite view. You, however,
     almost class him among, and at least make him the associate and
     abettor of, "ignorant fanatics," p. 119.

     Now, if this interpretation of the passage in question be correct,
     as I conscientiously and from my heart believe it to be, it will
     follow that you have not yet made good even the shadow of a shade of
     a charge of opposition to the Articles--not only against Dr. Pusey,
     but against the Tracts generally; for no one can say that any one of
     the Articles formally forbids us to consider that grace is conveyed
     through the outward symbols; while, on the other hand, one of them
     expressly speaks of "the body of Christ" as "given," as well as
     "taken, in the Supper;" words, moreover, which are known to have
     meant, in the language of the day, "given by the administrator," and
     therefore through the consecrated bread. At the same time, let it be
     observed I do not consider the writer of the Advertisement to say
     for certain that the outward elements benefit true Christians when
     insensible; only as much as this, that we cannot be sure they do
     not.

     Before closing this head of my subject I shall remark on the words
     upon which you exclaim, "For shame, Dr. Pusey!" though he has no
     reason to be ashamed of what he did not write. They are these: "or
     what is called, communion with God." You often mistake, Mr. Editor,
     by not laying the emphasis on the right word in the sentence on
     which you happen to be commenting. This is a case in point. The
     stress is to be placed upon the word "called"--"what is called
     communion with God." The author meant, had he supplied his full
     meaning, "what is improperly called." There is nothing to show that
     he denies "the communion of saints" with God and with each other,
     and, in subordination to the mystical union, the conscious union of
     mind and affections. He only condemns that indulgence of mere
     excited feeling which has now-a-days engrossed that sacred title.

     To show that this is no evasion or disingenuousness on my part (for
     you sometimes indulge in hints about me to this effect), I will give
     your readers one or two more instances of the same failing in your
     mode of arguing, and one a very painful instance.

     For example: I said, in the former part of my letter, that Dr.
     Pusey's friends insist on no particular or peculiar sense of the
     Articles,--a fault which I had just charged upon you. I had said you
     were virtually imposing additions: then I supposed the objection
     made, that we should do so, had we the power,--as is often alleged.
     To this I answer, "Your Magazine may rest satisfied that Dr. Pusey's
     friends will never assert that the Articles have any particular
     meaning at all." You have missed the point of this sentence:
     accordingly, you detach it from the context, and prefix it to the
     opening of the discussion, before it appears in its proper place in
     print; and when it does appear, you print it in italics. This is
     taking a liberty with my text. However, to this subject I shall have
     occasion to recur.

     Another instance occurs in your treatment of the Homilies and Mr.
     Keble. The Homily speaks of "the stinking puddles of men's
     traditions." You apply this as an answer to Mr. Keble's sermon, who
     speaks of God's traditions, even those which St. Paul bids us
     "hold;" and who considers, moreover, that no true traditions of
     doctrine exist but such as may be proved from Scripture; whereas the
     Homily clearly means by men's traditions, such as cannot be proved
     from Scripture. You would have escaped this mistake, Mr. Editor, had
     you borne in mind that traditions "devised by men's imagination" are
     not Divine traditions, and that it as little follows that Catholic
     Traditions are to be rejected because Jewish and Roman are, as that
     the Christian Sabbath is abolished because the Jewish is abolished.
     But you saw that Mr. Keble said something or other about tradition,
     and you were carried away with the word.

     The last mistake of this kind is a distressing one. I hardly like to
     mention it; so serious is it. I must call it an "idle word." It is a
     charge brought against Dr. Pusey. He has said; "To those who have
     fallen, God holds out only a light in a dark place, sufficient for
     them to see their path, but not bright or cheering, as they would
     have it; and so, in different ways, man would forestall the sentence
     of his Judge; the Romanist by the sacrament of penance, a modern
     class of divines by the appropriation of the merits and
     righteousness of our blessed Redeemer." You add three notes of
     admiration, and say, "We tremble as we transcribe these awful
     words," p. 123. I dare not trust myself to speak about such heedless
     language as it deserves. I will but say, in explanation of your
     misconception, that Dr. Pusey compares to Roman restlessness, not
     the desiring and praying to be clothed, or the doctrine that every
     one who is saved must be clothed, in "the merits and righteousness
     of our blessed Redeemer," but the appropriation of them without
     warrant on the part of individuals. He denies that individuals who
     have fallen into sin have any right to claim them as their own
     already; he denies that they may "forestall the sentence of the
     Judge" at the last day; he maintains they can but flee to Christ,
     and adjure Him by His general promises, by His past mercies to
     themselves, by His present distinct mercies to them in the Church;
     but that they had no personal assurance, no right to appropriate
     again what was given them plenarily in baptism. This is his meaning;
     whereas you imply that he denies the duty of looking in faith to be
     saved by Christ's merits and righteousness; that he denies
     backsliders the hope of it. If you do not imply this, if you really
     and simply mean that the act of claiming Christ's merits by this or
     that individual (for of this Dr. P. speaks) is, as you express it,
     "a most Scriptural and consoling truth," and that it is
     "blasphemous," but for "the absence of wicked intention in the
     writer," to compare to the Roman penance the confidence which
     sinners are taught to feel that their past offences are already
     forgiven them,--if this be your meaning, I am wrong, but I am
     charitable, in saying you have mistaken Dr. Pusey.

     Now I come to the consideration of (q) the Homilies, (2) the
     Articles, and (3) Justification. And first concerning the Homilies.

     1. You ask, "How do these clergymen ...... reconcile their
     consciences to such declarations as those which abound in the
     Homilies, affirming that the Church of Rome is 'Antichrist,'" &c.?
     And you say that you are considered "persecutors" or a persecutor,
     because you ask how I and others "reconcile such things in the
     Homilies with the Oxford Tracts." Who considers you a persecutor?
     not I; nor should I ever so consider you for asking a simple
     question in argument. What I have censured you for, has been the use
     of vague epithets, calling names, and the like, which I really
     believe you in your sober reason disapprove as heartily as I do. For
     instance: I am sure you would think it wrong to proclaim to the
     world that such a one is an ultra-Protestant. It is classing him
     with a party. There are ultra-Protestants in the world, we know; but
     we can know so little of individuals that we have seldom right to
     call them so, unless they take the name. A person may hold certain
     ultra-Protestant notions, and we may say so; this is deciding about
     him just as far as we know, and no farther. The case is the same in
     the more solemn matters of heaven and hell. We say, for instance,
     that they who hold anti-Trinitarian doctrines will perish
     everlastingly; but we dare not apply this anathema to this or that
     person; the utmost we say is, that he holds damnable errors, leaving
     his person to God. To say nothing of the religiousness of such a
     proceeding, you see how much of real kindness and consideration it
     throws over controversy. Of course I do not wish to destroy what are
     facts; men are of different opinions, and they do act in sets. There
     is no harm in denoting this; many confess they so act. In
     conversation we never should get on, if we were ever using
     circumlocutions. But in controversy it does seem both Christian and
     gentlemanlike to subject oneself to rules; and as one of these, to
     make a distinction between opinions and persons; to condemn
     opinions, to condemn them in persons, but not to give bad names to
     the persons, till public authority sanctions it. If I think you have
     ought of the spirit of persecution in you--(and to be frank with
     you, and in observance of my own distinction, though you are not "a
     persecutor," you speak in somewhat of a persecuting tone,) it is not
     for perplexing me with questions, or overwhelming me with
     refutations, but because your style is "rough, rambling, and
     cursory." I think it like a persecutor to prefer general charges, to
     use unmeasured terms, to be oratorical and theatrical, and when
     challenged to speak definitely, to accuse the party challenging, of
     complaining, being angry, and the like.

     Now to return to the Homilies. You ask how I reconcile my conscience
     to the Homilies calling Rome Antichrist, I holding the doctrines of
     the Tracts. To this I answer by asking, if I may do so without
     offence, how you reconcile to your conscience the Homilies saying
     that "the Holy Ghost doth teach" in the book of Tobit? how you
     reconcile to your "subscription" that they five times call books of
     the Apocrypha "Scripture;" that Baruch is quoted as a "prophet" and
     as "holy Baruch," Tobit as "holy Father Tobit," the author of Wisdom
     and the Son of Sirach as "the Wise Man," and the latter is said
     "certainly to assure us" of a heavenly truth; in a word, that the
     Apocrypha is referred to as many as fifty-three times? Here you see
     I have the advantage of you, Mr. Editor. Though I believe the Old
     and New Testaments alone to be plenarily inspired, yet I do believe,
     according to the Homily, what you do not believe, that the Holy
     Ghost spoke by the mouth of Tobit. Here you see is the advantage of
     what you call my "scholastic distinctions." p. 193. When I said that
     the great gift of the Holy Ghost, called regeneration, was reserved
     for Christians, and yet that the Jews might be under His blessed
     guidance, you said I was drawing a scholastic distinction. This is
     one instance on your part of calling names. What do you mean by
     scholastic? Beware, lest, when you come to define it, you include
     unwittingly the most sacred truths under it. There are persons who
     think the Catholic doctrines of the Trinity and Atonement
     "scholastic;" and so they are, but they are something more, they are
     Apostolic also. The church went down into Egypt before it came out
     of it; nor is it any proof that the distinction in question is not
     Scriptural, that it is, if it is, scholastic. However, any how, it
     serves me in good stead in this instance from the Homilies; it
     enables me to understand and to assent to their doctrine concerning
     the Apocrypha. I consider the gifts and operations of the Blessed
     Spirit are manifold. What He is towards Angels, towards glorified
     Saints as Moses and Elias, towards the faithful departed, towards
     Adam in Paradise, towards the Jews, towards the Heathen, towards
     Christians militant; what He is in the Church, in the individual, in
     the Evangelist, in the Apostle, in the Prophet, in the Apocryphal
     writer, in the Doctor and Teacher, is one and the same so far as
     this, that it is holy; but it may differ in kind in each case. Life
     is the same in all living things; yet there is one flesh of men,
     another of fishes, another of birds: and so the spiritual gift in
     like manner may be the same, yet diverse; it may be applied to the
     heart or to the head, as an inward habit or an external impression,
     plenarily or partially; for one purpose, not for another; for a
     time, or for ever. This view of God's gracious influences you call
     scholastic. I, on the other hand, call the common division, into
     miraculous and moral or spiritual, jejune and unauthorized. However,
     whether I be right or you, I am at least able to do with mine, what
     you cannot,--agree with the Homily. If you will not take my
     explanation, which I sincerely believe to be the right one, you must
     "reconcile your conscience" to a better; till you find one, you must
     reconcile it to a disagreement with the Homily.

     Now I will put another difficulty to you, which will be found in the
     event to put you into a greater strait as regards the Homilies, than
     you suppose me to be in. The last Homily in the volume is "Against
     Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion." It is one of the most elaborate
     of them, consisting of no less than six parts. It advocates
     unreservedly the doctrine of passive obedience to the authorities
     under which we find ourselves by birth. I hold this doctrine, you do
     not. [The charge against the Magazine was not of disloyalty, but of
     holding the doctrine that subjects may, under circumstances, rebel
     against their civil governors, e. g. as in the instance of the
     Revolution of 1688 in England, in Greece in 1821, in Spain in 1823,
     in France in 1830.] Let me put before you some of the statements of
     this Homily,--the direct, explicit, developements of its title. "If
     servants," it says, "ought to obey their masters, not only being
     gentle, but such as be froward, as well, and much more, ought
     subjects to be obedient, not only to their good and courteous, but
     also to their sharp and rigorous princes," Part I. "A rebel is worse
     than the worst prince," ibid. "But what if the prince be undiscreet
     and evil indeed, and it is also evident to all men's eyes that he so
     is? I ask again, what if it belong to the wickedness of the
     subjects, that the prince is undiscreet and evil? shall the subjects
     both by their wickedness provoke God, for their deserving
     punishment, to give them an undiscreet and evil prince, and also
     rebel against him, and withal against God, who for the punishment of
     their sins did give them such a prince?" (ibid.) Now, considering
     the high Tory doctrine, as it is called, contained in extracts such
     as these, I call upon you, Mr. Editor, as you would earn the meed of
     consistency and impartiality, to designate the writers and abettors
     of them, and all "subscribers" to them, "Lauds and Sacheverells."

     I think I have now shown that you are not the person to take my
     conscience to task for not receiving every sentence of the Homilies
     as a formal enunciation of doctrine. I might, indeed, were it worth
     while, enlarge upon the venturesomeness of a writer, who seems,
     according to my apprehension, to hold that baptism is not a means of
     grace, but only "a sign, seal, and pledge," p. 167, and yet uses the
     Liturgy, being the man to make appeals to the conscience of others.
     But let this pass. Here, in the very instance you bring, you do not
     come into court with clean hands. You shrink from certain portions
     of the Homilies; and yet you use strong language about my supposed
     difference from other portions. Under these circumstances, were I
     merely writing for you, I should leave you to marvel at my
     conscience, or to turn to your own; but I write to your readers; and
     in what I say in explanation of my own behaviour towards the
     Homilies, I may perchance do something towards excusing yours.

     I say plainly, then, I have not subscribed the Homilies, though you
     say I have, pp. 151, 153; though you add to my subscription to the
     Articles this further subscription also; nor was it ever intended
     that any member of the English Church should be subjected to what,
     if considered as an extended confession, would indeed be a yoke of
     bondage. Romanism surely is innocent, compared with that system
     which should impose upon the "conscience" a thick octavo volume,
     written flowingly and freely by fallible men, to be received exactly
     sentence by sentence. I cannot conceive any grosser instance of a
     Pharisaical tradition than this would be. No: the Reformers would
     have shrunk from the thought of so unchristian a proceeding--a
     proceeding which would render it impossible (I will say) for any one
     member, lay or clerical, of the Church to remain in it, who was
     subjected to such an ordeal. For instance: I do not suppose that any
     reader would be satisfied with the political reasons for fasting,
     though indirectly introduced, yet fully admitted and dwelt upon in
     the Homily on that subject. He would not like to subscribe the
     declaration that eating fish was a duty, not only as being a kind of
     fasting, but as making provisions cheap, and encouraging the
     fisheries. He would not like the association of religion with
     earthly politics.
     How, then, are we bound to the Homilies? By the Thirty-fifth
     Article, which speaks as follows: "The Second Book of Homilies ....
     doth contain a godly and wholesome doctrine, and necessary for these
     times, as doth the former Book of Homilies." Now, observe, this
     Article does not speak of every statement made in them, but of the
     "doctrine." It speaks of the view or cast or body of doctrine
     contained in them. In spite of ten thousand incidental propositions,
     as in any large book, there is, it is obvious, a certain line of
     doctrine, which maybe contemplated continuously in its shape and
     direction. For instance: if you say you disapprove the doctrine
     contained in the Tracts for the Times, no one supposes you to mean
     that every sentence and half sentence is a lie. If this were so,
     then you are most inconsistent, after denouncing them, to imply, p.
     167, that they "contain much that is godly and edifying, much that
     you are grateful for, and much that, if separated from its adjuncts,
     would be highly valuable in these days of liberalism and laxity."
     You even give logical reasons to show that there is no
     inconsistency, and protest against the notion. Now, sir, I am going
     to turn your "medium not distributed" against yourself. I say then,
     that, in like manner, when the Article speaks of the doctrine of the
     Homilies, it does not measure the letter of them by the inch, it
     does not imply they contain no propositions which admit of two
     opinions; but it speaks of a certain determinate line of doctrine,
     and moreover adds, it is "necessary for these times." Does not this,
     too, show the same thing? If a man said, The Tracts for the Times
     are seasonable at this moment, as their title signifies, would he
     not speak of them as taking a certain line and bearing a certain
     way? Would he not be speaking, not of phrases or sentences, but of a
     "doctrine" in them tending one way, viewed as a whole? Would he be
     inconsistent, if after praising them as seasonable, he continued,
     "Yet I do not pledge myself to every view or sentiment; there are
     some things in them hard of digestion, or overstated, or doubtful,
     or subtle?"

     Let us, then, have no more such superfluous appeals to our
     consciences in such a matter. Reserve them for graver cases, if you
     think you see such. If any thing could add to the irrelevancy of the
     charge in question, it is the particular point in which I dissent
     from the Homilies, even if I do, which will not be so easy to
     prove;--a question concerning the fulfilment of prophecy; viz.
     whether Papal Rome is Anti-Christ! An iron yoke indeed you would
     forge for the conscience, when you oblige us to assent, not only to
     all matters of doctrine which the Homilies contain, but even to
     their opinion concerning the fulfilment of prophecy. Why, we do not
     ascribe authority in such matters even to the unanimous consent of
     all the Fathers. But you allow us no private judgment whatever; your
     private judgment is al particular and peculiar.

     I will put what I have been saying in a second point of view. The
     Homilies are subsidiary to the Articles; therefore they are of
     authority so far as they bring out the sense of the Articles, and
     are not of authority where they do not. For instance, they say that
     David, though unbaptized, was regenerated, as you have quoted. This
     statement cannot be of authority, because it not only does not
     agree, but it even disagrees, with the Ninth Article, which
     translates the Latin word "renatis" by the English "baptized." But,
     observe, if this mode of viewing the Homilies be taken, as it fairly
     may, you suffer; for, the Apocrypha being the subject of an Article,
     the comment furnished in the Homily is binding on you, whereas you
     reject it.

     A further remark will bring us to the same point. Another test of
     acquiescence in the doctrine of the Homilies, is this: Take their
     table of contents; examine the headings; these surely, taken
     together, will give the substance of their teaching. Now I maintain
     that I hold fully and heartily the doctrine of the Homilies under
     every one of these headings: nor, (excepting the question of
     Justification, on which I am myself thoroughly convinced I hold it,
     and which I intend to discuss; and of Repentance, in which the
     Homily says not a sentence which I do not hold;) will you yourself
     be inclined to doubt it. The only point to which I should not
     accede, nor think myself called upon to accede, would be certain
     matters, subordinate to the doctrines to which the headings
     refer--matters not of doctrine, but of opinion, as that Rome is the
     Anti-Christ; or of historical fact, as that there was a Pope Joan,
     which, by the bye, I doubt whether you hold any more than I do. But
     now, on the other hand, can you subscribe the doctrine of the
     Homilies under every one of its formal headings? I believe you
     cannot. The Homily against Disobedience and Wilful Rebellion is in
     many of its elementary principles decidedly opposed to your
     sentiments. And yet you are the writer to tax another with not
     holding by the Homilies! Unless I had some experience that to be
     represented as "troublers of Israel" and "pestilent fellows" is the
     portion of those who fight against the Age, I should feel astonished
     at this.

     I verily and in my conscience believe, that whether we take the text
     or the spirit of the Homilies, I do hold both the one and the other
     more exactly than those who question me. Do not, then, in future
     appeal to me, as if I for an instant granted that the Homilies were
     on your side;--but I propose to say more on this subject when I come
     to speak on Justification.

     2. It follows to speak of the Articles. You imply that I put no
     sense at all upon them, but take them to mean any thing; and
     subscription to be no test or engagement of my opinions. Now is not
     this somewhat a strong charge to bring against a Clergyman? and
     particularly a member of a University which has, within the last two
     years, shown extraordinary, and almost unanimous, earnestness in
     maintaining the necessity of subscription, even in the case of
     undergraduates, against the external pressure? Why did not Dr.
     Pusey's friends quietly sit by, and leave others to set them free?
     Surely the facts of the case are strong enough to excuse a little
     charity, had persons any to give. Persons really do astonish me,
     after all--prepared as I am for such exhibitions--by the ease and
     vigour with which they fling about accusations; showing themselves
     perfect masters of their weapon. In one place you say that we hold
     that there is "not one baptized person, not one regenerated person,
     not one communicant, among all the Protestant churches, Lutheran or
     Reformed, except the Church of England and its daughter churches," p
     122. Now, what would you say if we affirmed that you held that men
     could be saved by faith without works? You would think us very
     unscrupulous, and might use some strong words. Well, then, there is
     not a word, which you would apply to such a statement, that I might
     not with perfect sincerity and truth apply to yours. You have
     touched on a large subject, on which we have no where ventured any
     opinion whatever, and in which we do not hold what you have
     expressed--the subject of lay baptism--but on which an opinion is
     forthcoming when needed.-----Another remarkable exhibition of the
     same science is your asserting that one of the Tracts calls the
     Dissenters "a mob of Tiptops, Gapes, and Yawns," pp. 172, 174, 177,
     185, 186. Five times you say or imply it. Now it so happens the
     Tract in question has nothing to do with Dissenters; but with
     persons who wish alterations in the Liturgy on insufficient grounds,
     a circumstance which in itself excludes Dissenters. To those of your
     readers who do not know this Tract (it is one of the parts of
     Richard Nelson), the following explanation will be acceptable. The
     subject of the Tract is the shortening of the Church Service. Tiptop
     is a "travelling man from Hull or Preston," who "quarters at" a
     public-house at Nelson's village, "sometimes for a fortnight at a
     time," and "dabbles in religion as well as in politics;" a man who
     is praised by his admirers as "talking beautifully, and expounding
     on any subject a person might choose to mention, politics, trade,
     agriculture, learning, religion, and what not." He "lectures about
     the Church Prayers" among other things; and I suppose it is this
     word "lecture" which has caught your eye, and led you into error; if
     so, it is a sort of indication what attention you give to the matter
     of the Tracts. But to continue. Yawn is a farmer whose sons go to
     the Church school; and he himself "scarcely ever," as he boasts,
     "misses a Sunday," coming into the service "about the end of the
     First Lesson." Ned Gape too is a church-goer, though a late one. In
     what sense of the words, then, Mr. Editor, do you assert that when
     Richard Nelson, in the end of the story, says that he "cannot stand
     by and see the noble old Prayer-book pulled to pieces, just to
     humour a mob of Tiptops, Gapes, and Yawns," that the writer calls
     Dissenters by those titles?

     I shall give one more instance of this freedom, and then return to
     the consideration of the Articles. I said in the former part of my
     letter, that you called Dr. Pusey's belief that the old Fathers were
     not regenerated on earth, "the very bathos of theology." On this you
     observe, "Mr.------ still finds it necessary to misapply our
     statement.

     The remark respecting 'the bathos of theology' referred to the
     doctrine, quoted from some old writers, of the conveyance of Divine
     grace to an insensible person, by placing in his lips the bread and
     wine by which believers partake mystically of Christ's body--not
     however in a state of insensibility, but 'by faith, with
     thanksgiving.' This obsolete superstition we did and do consider the
     bathos of theology; but Mr.------, not venturing to defend it, turns
     aside our remark, as if we had said that it is the bathos of
     theology that 'by the coming of our Saviour Christ,' quoting the
     Homily, 'we have received more abundantly the Spirit of God.'" p.
     192. Now, without dwelling on the unreasonableness of saying "Mr.
     ------ not venturing to defend it," when the doctrine I did not
     defend was to be the subject of the second head of my letter, and I
     was engaged upon the first head; and when, after all, I was not
     engaged in proving my belief on these points, but demanding proof
     that they were against the Articles; waiving all this, let the
     reader reflect upon your Magazine's original words, which you now
     accuse me of misstating. "It is the very bathos of theology, an
     absurdity not worthy to be gravely replied to, that men were
     'sanctified,' 'greatly sanctified,' 'were the friends of God,' &c.
     &c. yet .... were still 'unregenerate.'" (p. 790.) Thus you do call
     the non-regeneration of the Patriarchs "the bathos of theology;" and
     when I say so in my letter, "No," you retort, "it is a misstatement;
     I said the doctrine of insensible persons benefiting from the
     Sacrament is the bathos." It is kindest to account for this strange
     mistake of yours by attributing it to what you yourself are partly
     conscious of, your "rough and rambling" ways.

     And with a like heedlessness you imply that I hold the Articles as a
     nasus cereus, to use the controversial term. And you wish me to
     caution "indiscreet 'approvers'" of the Tracts against saying that
     "the Articles are the weak point in our Church; we may indeed sign
     them, for 'is there any taste in the white of an egg.'' "All this
     being as pertinent, when addressed to me, as if I were to accuse you
     of teaching salvation by faith without works. However, such
     unfounded charges are, I repeat, our omen of ultimate success; I
     cheerfully bear them; and now proceed to disabuse at least some of
     your readers, and perhaps to silence yourself.

     You seem to me to confuse between two things very distinct; the
     holding a certain sense of a statement to be true, and imposing that
     sense upon others. Sometimes the two go together; at other times
     they do not. For instance, the meaning of the Creed (and again, of
     the Liturgy) is known; there is no opportunity for doubt here; it
     means but one thing, and he who does not hold that one meaning, does
     not hold it at all. But the case is different (to take an
     illustration) , in the drawing up of a Political Declaration, or a
     Petition to Parliament. It is composed by persons, differing in
     matters of detail, agreeing together to a certain point and for a
     certain end. Each narrowly watches that nothing is inserted to
     prejudice his own particular opinion, or stipulates for the
     insertion of what may rescue it. Hence general words are used, or
     particular words inserted, which by superficial inquirers afterwards
     are criticized as vague and indeterminate on the one hand, or
     inconsistent on the other; but, in fact, they all have a meaning and
     a history, could we ascertain it. [Hence faith, justification,
     infection, &c., are used, not defined in the Articles.] And, if the
     parties concerned in such a document are legislating and determining
     for posterity, they are respective representatives of corresponding
     parties in the generations after them. Now the Thirty-nine Articles
     lie between these two, between a Creed and a mere joint Declaration;
     to a certain point they have one meaning, beyond that they have no
     one meaning. They have one meaning, so far as they embody the
     doctrine of the Creed; they have different meanings, so far as they
     are drawn up by men influenced by the discordant opinions of the
     day. This is what I have expressed in the former part of my letter:
     "the Articles," I say, "are confessedly wide in their meaning, but
     still their width is within bounds: they seem to include a number of
     shades of opinion."

     Next, as to those points (whatever they are) in which they cannot be
     said to have one meaning. Each subscriber indeed attaches that
     meaning which he at once holds and thinks the meaning; but this is
     his "particular" meaning, and he has no right to impose it on
     another. In saying, then, I shall put no "particular meaning" on
     portions of the Articles, I spoke, not of my own belief, but of my
     enforcing that belief upon others. I do sincerely and heartily
     consider my sense of the Articles on certain points to be presently
     mentioned, to be the true sense: but I do not feel sure that there
     were not present, at the drawing up of the Articles, persons or
     feelings which led the framers (not as doing so on a principle, but
     spontaneously, from the existing hindrances to perfect unanimity),
     to abstain from perfect precision and uniformity of statement. What
     can be more truly liberal and forbearing than this view? yet for
     thus holding that Calvinists and others, whom I think mistaken, may
     sign the Articles as well as myself, I am said myself to sign them
     with "no meaning whatever." And you actually take my own sentiment
     out of my mouth, clothe it in the words of the Royal Declaration,
     and then gravely make a present of it to me back again, as if it
     were something wise and high of your own. "The Royal Declaration,"
     you say, "prefixed to the Articles, congratulates the Church that
     all the clergy had 'most willingly subscribed' to them, ' all sorts
     taking them to be for them:' which shows that each conscientious
     individual had carefully examined into their meaning, and not that
     he signed them without attaching any 'particular meaning at all.'"
     p. 191. Of course, these are just my sentiments.

     Accordingly I go on to say, that I look forward to success, not by
     compelling others to take one view of the Articles, but by
     convincing them that mine is the right one. And this will explain
     what you call my "pugnacious terms." Were I fighting against
     individuals or a party in the Church, this would be party spirit:
     but then I should wish to coerce them or cast them out; whereas I am
     opposing principles and doctrines--so, I would fain persuade and
     convert, not triumph over those who hold them. I am not pugnacious;
     I am only "militant."

     It will explain, too, what you consider my overweening and provoking
     language. For I consider I am but speaking what the Catholic Fathers
     witness to be Christ's Gospel. I am exercising no private judgment
     on Scripture; and while I will not enforce it coercively, having no
     authority to do so, I will never put it forward hesitatingly, as if
     I did not think all other doctrines plainly wrong.

     So much about myself. On the other hand, my charge against you is,
     and I repeat it, that you do wish to add to the Articles; that is,
     in the same sense in which you accused Bishop Marsh of wishing to do
     so. You wish to impose upon me your particular or peculiar notion
     that the Patriarchs were regenerated; which is an invasion of
     private judgment, as permitted in our Church, as gross as if I
     strove to enforce on you my particular notion, in accordance with
     the Homily, that the Holy Ghost spoke "by the mouth of Tobit." Till
     you name the particular points of opinion for which you call on Dr.
     Pusey to resign his Professorship, and state the Article or
     determination of the Church which he transgresses, I will never
     cease to say that you do unwittingly--not of course with bad
     intention--that you do wish and aim to add to the Articles of
     subscription.

     To sum up what I have said, and be at the same time more specific. I
     consider that the first five Articles have one definite, positive,
     dogmatic view, even that which has been, from the beginning, the
     Catholic and Apostolic Truth on which the Church is built.

     From the Sixth to the Eighteenth, I conceive to have one certain
     view also, brought out in that particular form at the Reformation;
     but, as in the Seventeenth, not clearly demonstrable to be such to
     the satisfaction of the world.

     In the remaining Articles, taken as a body, I think there is less
     strictness, perspicuity, and completeness of meaning. Some, though
     clear and definite in their meaning, are but negative, or
     protestant, as being directed against the Romanists; others, which
     are positive, are derived from various schools; in others the view
     is left open, or inchoate.

     The first division I humbly receive as Divine, proveable from
     Scripture, but descending to us by Catholic tradition also. The next
     I admit and hold as deducible from Scripture by private judgment,
     tradition only witnessing here and there. The last division I
     receive only in the plain letter, according to the injunction of the
     Declaration, because I do believe in my conscience that they were
     not written upon any one view, and cannot be taken except in the
     letter; because I think they never had any one simple meaning;
     because I think I see in them the terms of various schools mixed
     together--terms known by their historical associations to be
     theologically discordant, though in the mere letter easy and
     intelligible.

     And now, lastly, I will mention why I take these last Articles in
     that one particular meaning in which I do take them, and not in
     another. This again is from no mere private liking or opinion; it is
     because I verily think the Church wishes me so to take them. We at
     this day receive the Articles, not on the authority of their
     framers, whoever they were, English or foreign, but on the
     authority, i. e. in the sense, of the Convocation imposing them,
     that is, the Convocation of 1571. That Convocation, which imposed
     them, also passed the following Canon about Preachers:--"In the
     first place, let them be careful never to teach any thing in their
     sermons, as if to be religiously held and believed by the people,
     but what is agreeable to the doctrine of the Old and New Testament,
     and collected from that very doctrine by the catholic Fathers and
     ancient Bishops." This is but one out of the hundred appeals to
     Antiquity, which, in one way or other, our Church has put forth; but
     it is rendered unique by its originating in the Convocation from
     which we receive the Articles. It is quite impossible that that
     Convocation wished us to receive and explain the doctrines contained
     in them in any other sense than that which "the catholic Fathers and
     ancient Bishops" drew from Scripture. Far from explaining away, I am
     faithfully maintaining them, when I catholicize them. It were well
     for themselves, had others as good a reason for Calvinizing or
     Zuinglizing them.

     And all this shows how right I am in saying that the Articles must
     not be viewed as in themselves a perfect system of doctrine, p. 189.
     They are, on the face of them, but protests against existing errors,
     Socinianism and Romanism. For instance, how else do you account for
     the absence of any statement concerning the Inspiration of
     Scripture? On the other hand, the Canon of 1571, just cited, is a
     proof that the whole range of catholic doctrines is professed by our
     Church; not, only so much as is contained in the Articles. Its
     reception of the primitive Creeds is another proof; for they reach
     to many points not contained in the Articles without them. To these
     documentary evidences may be added the 30th Canon of 1603. Speaking
     of the use of the Sign of the Cross, it says, "The abuse of a thing
     doth not take away the lawful use of it. Nay, so far was it from the
     purpose of the Church of England to forsake and reject the churches
     of Italy, France, Spain, Germany, or any such like churches, in all
     things which they held and practised, that, as the Apology of the
     Church of England confesseth, it doth with reverence retain those
     ceremonies which do neither endamage the church of God nor offend
     the minds of sober men; and only departed from them in those
     particular points wherein they were fallen, both from themselves in
     their ancient integrity, and from the Apostolical churches, which
     were their first founders."

     It is clear, then, that the English Church holds all that the
     primitive church held, even in ceremonies, except there be some
     particular reason assignable for not doing so in this or that
     instance; and only does not hold the modern corruptions maintained
     by Romanism. In these corruptions it departs from Rome; therefore
     these are the points in which it thinks it especially necessary to
     declare its opinion. To these were added the most sacred points of
     faith, in order to protest against those miserable heresies to which
     Protestantism had already given birth. Thus the Church stands in a
     via media; the first five Articles being directed against extreme
     Protestantism, the remaining ones against Rome. And hence, when the
     Royal Declaration says that they "contain the true doctrine of the
     Church of England, agreeable to God's word," which you quote, p.
     169, as if it made against me, it speaks of the doctrine of the
     English church so far as distinguished from other churches: it does
     not say the doctrine of the Gospel, the doctrine of the church
     catholic, or the whole faith; but it speaks of it in contrast with
     existing systems. This is evident from its wording; for the clause
     "agreeable to God's word" evidently glances at Rome; and the history
     of its promulgation throws abundant light on the fact that it Was
     aimed against Calvinism and Arminianism. There is nothing, then, in
     these words to show that the Articles are a system of doctrine, or
     more than the English doctrine in those points in which it differs
     from Romanism and Socinianism, and embraces Arminianism and
     Calvinism.

     No: our Apostolical communion inherits, as the promises, so the
     faith, enjoyed by the Saints in every age; the faith which Ignatius,
     Cyprian, and Gregory received from the Apostles. We did not begin on
     a new foundation in King Edward's time; we only reformed, or
     repaired, the superstructure. You must not defraud us, Mr. Editor,
     of our birthright, by turning what is a salutary protest into a
     system of divinity.

     Before proceeding to the subject of Justification, I will conclude
     what I have otherwise to say on your sixty pages, by adducing some
     further instances of what I consider misconceptions in them.

     (1.) You say (p. 120) that Mr.------in his Parochial Sermons "most
     unscripturally" expresses himself to this effect:--even "the most
     hardened sinner" may "recollect those times of his youth when he was
     free [pure] from sin." You say this doctrine involves a "confidence
     of boasting," and is "fearful." Now he uses the word "sin" in the
     same sense in which our Church prays that Christ may "vouchsafe to
     keep us this day without sin;" and "that this day we fall into no
     sin." It seems, then, all we of the English Church pray every
     morning of our lives that we may be preserved through the day in a
     state which involves "a confidence of boasting." Your misconception
     has arisen from not observing there are different kinds of sin. You
     may call me indeed, and the Church in consequence, "scholastic" in
     this distinction; I call you "technical," and my epithet is as
     availing as yours.

     (2.) You speak, p. 146, of Mr. Hook's University Sermons as
     embodying some of the leading principles of the Oxford Tracts. But
     you do not, I suppose, mean thereby to imply that he has taken his
     opinions from the Tracts. No, Mr. Hook is an independent witness,
     who has boldly put forth the Catholic doctrines in less promising
     times than these, and before some of the writers of the Tracts had
     any formed views upon the subjects he treats of. His sermons were
     listened to with extraordinary interest, and have made a deep
     impression on the minds of his hearers. In his instance, indeed, two
     distinct lines of usefulness are united, which have been granted
     together to no other clergyman of the day; viz. the successful
     preaching of Catholic truth both to a manufacturing population, and
     to the young. I say this, lest you should seem to be paying the
     Tracts an honour which they cannot claim, that of having influenced
     Mr. Hook's opinions.

     (3.) You say of the Fathers, p. 147, "they were discrepant in their
     opinions, so that, beyond their general testimony to a few striking
     particulars, above all the Divinity of our Lord, they cannot be
     referred to with any certainty or confidence, for the opinion of one
     might not be that of another, much less of the Catholic Church."
     Now, Mr. Editor, observe what I am going to say, and never again
     accuse me of wishing to enslave the Protestant mind to the Fathers.
     I, as well as you, hold the Fathers not to demand our assent, except
     on those points in which they agree together, in the same sense in
     which they agree in witnessing "the Divinity of our Lord." You will
     find nothing in the Tracts for the Times stronger than this
     doctrine, which it appears is your own also. You and I, then, agree
     in principle in the matter; we differ in the matter of fact, what
     doctrines are unanimously attested, and what not.

     This mistake is the more remarkable, because the exposition of our
     view on the subject occurs in the very Tract which you analyze and
     discuss at length, No. 71. It is there said, "It is quite impossible
     that all countries should have agreed in that which was not
     Apostolic. They are a number of concordant witnesses to certain
     definite truths; and while their testimony is one and the same from
     the very first moment they publicly utter it, so, on the other hand,
     if there be bodies which speak otherwise, we can show historically
     that they rose later than the Apostles. This majestic evidence,
     however, does not extend to any but to the articles of the Creed,
     especially those relating to the Trinity and Incarnation," p. 28. [A
     misconception in unexpected quarters makes it just necessary to
     observe, that in the language of the Primitive Church, here used,
     "the Incarnation," was taken to include under it the doctrine of the
     Atonement.] For the future, then, do not accuse us of what we do not
     hold, that one Father is of authority in a point in which others are
     against him. This instance will be sufficient to show your readers,
     that at least you cannot guide them into our views concerning
     tradition. They had better have recourse to Mr. Hook and Mr. Keble,
     if not to be converted, at least to ascertain how things stand.

     (4.) Here let me observe, you attribute most gratuitously, and (I
     must even say) officiously, this same Tract, No. 71, to Dr. Pusey;
     and, as assuming it to be his, you accuse him of saying that it is
     "safest not," p. 149, to pray to the saints; and that "what the
     Fathers held" would be an "irrefragable argument" against
     transubstantiation. Again you say, "Professor Pusey considers the
     Eleventh Article as having been the cause of infinite mischief, by
     leading to 'the wildest Antinomian doctrine;' yet that, upon the
     whole--bountiful concession for an Oxford Professor to the glorious
     Eleventh Article of the Anglican Church--it was 'innocently
     intended!!'" p. 155; see also p. 189. I do really think this is a
     very great liberty to take with Dr. Pusey's name. It is the second
     instance of the kind into which you have been betrayed. This is very
     heedless. This Tract is not Dr. Pusey's writing. Dr. Pusey has
     written nothing to which he has not put either his name or his
     initials. One should have thought even the internal evidence of
     style would have saved you from such an awkwardness. The writer of
     it is as unwilling to surrender his claim to it, as to let others
     bear the imputation; nor is he in danger, of losing, or Dr. Pusey of
     being laden with, a property which all careful readers will see to
     want the exuberance of thought and language which is Dr. Pusey's
     characteristic.

     As to the principal charge brought against this Tract, that it
     attacks the Eleventh Article, it will be best answered by quoting
     the passage referred to. It is as follows. "For specimens of the
     perverse reception by the nation, as above alluded to, of what was
     innocently intended, I would refer to the popular sense put upon the
     Eleventh Article, which, though clearly and soundly explained in the
     Homily on Justification or Salvation, has been taken to countenance
     the wildest Antinomian doctrine; and is now so associated in the
     minds of many, with this wrong interpretation, as to render almost
     hopeless the recovery of the true meaning."

     (5.) You quote Dr. Comber against us as an "argumentum ad hominem."
     But a single divine is no authority with us; it is as one of a
     catena, it is as coinciding with the consensus Patrum, in matters of
     doctrine, that he is valuable. There are things in Jeremy Taylor,
     Hooker, Ussher, Laud, and Field, which one may well scruple to
     admit.

     (6.) You say, "As Dr. Pusey considers this anointing "in baptism" as
     Apostolical (and if so, it is a Divinely appointed, and therefore an
     essential portion of baptism), we do not see how he can use the
     Church of England office, which omits it; thus violating a sacred
     precept of transmissive religion," &c. &c.--By "ordinance of our
     Lord" Dr. Pusey meant baptism. But, again, he holds with the
     Thirty-fourth Article: that "traditions and ceremonies may be
     changed according to the diversity of countries, times, and men's
     manners, so that nothing be ordained against God's word. He only
     questions the adviseableness of the alteration in the particular
     instance, not the legality of the act.

     (7.) You say that "Mr. Palmer must surely have learned" certain
     "language" in his learned work on the Prayer-book, "at Trent," p.
     163. Mr. Palmer does not need defence from me. I notice him merely
     as an additional instance how certain a writer of our Church is to
     be called Popish by you, if he has any learning. Depend upon it, Mr.
     Editor, your only chance of maintaining your ultraism, is by keeping
     men in ignorance of theology. If even your stanchest advocate were
     to study theology, he would become either a professed Rationalist,
     or what you would call a Papist.

     (8.) You say, speaking of Sacraments, "the Church of England, you
     believe, has gone as far as Scripture, and not beyond it, in the
     threefold expression of a sign, a seal, and a pledge." p. 167 vid.
     also pp. 169, 180. Now it has gone further; it considers them "means
     of grace." Since, then, our Church would, according to you, have
     gone as far as Scripture in making them "signs, seals, and pledges,"
     it follows that, in making them means, it has gone beyond Scripture.
     This again is heedless.

     (9.) You find fault with Ussher's argument against Purgatory (viz.
     that it is distinct from the objects contemplated in the primitive
     prayers for the dead in Christ), as "injudicious." It is as I said,
     Mr. Editor, you cannot endure a learned man. Ussher even, in spite
     of his alleged Calvinism, is not enough of a Protestant for you.

     However, I shall now close for the present. One subject, and a most
     important one, remains; that of Justification. Before I commence it,
     I invite you to do, what you cannot decline. You have accused me
     frequently of "evasions," though not intentional ones, of course. I
     on the other hand accuse you, instead of coming to the point, of
     vague and illogical declamation, though not intentional either. Now,
     then, state definitely what Dr. Pusey's opinions are, for which he
     ought to give up his Professorship; and state also why, that is,
     what statements of our Church his own oppose. Till you do this, I
     shall persist in saying you wish to add to the Articles of
     subscription. I challenge you to do this, and call your readers to
     attend to your answer; and then, in my next, I will do my best to
     meet it.

   The letter was not continued further, partly on account of the mode in
   which the above was printed in the pages of the Magazine, and partly
   because the challenge, repeated in its closing words, had not been met.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Project Canterbury
