                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

            ON THE APOSTOLICAL SUCCESSION IN THE ENGLISH CHURCH.

                                 [Number 15]
     __________________________________________________________________

     WHEN Churchmen in England maintain the Apostolical Commission of
     their Ministers, they are sometimes met with the objection, that
     they cannot prove it without tracing their orders back to the Church
     of Rome; a position, indeed, which in a certain sense is true. And
     hence it is argued, that they are reduced to the dilemma, either of
     acknowledging they had no right to separate from the Pope, or, on
     the other hand, of giving up the Ministerial Succession altogether,
     and resting the claims of their pastors on some other ground; in
     other words, that they are inconsistent in reprobating Popery, while
     they draw a line between their Ministers and those of Dissenting
     Communions.

     It is intended in the pages that follow, to reply to this supposed
     difficulty; but first, a few words shall be said, by way of preface,
     on the doctrine itself, which we Churchmen advocate.

     The Christian Church is a body consisting of Clergy and Laity; this
     is generally agreed upon, and may here be assumed. Now, what we say
     is, that these two classes are distinguished from each other, and
     united to each other, by the commandment of GOD Himself; that the
     Clergy have a commission from GOD ALMIGHTY through regular
     succession from the Apostles, to preach the gospel, administer the
     Sacraments, and guide the Church; and, again, that in consequence
     the people are bound to hear them with attention, receive the
     Sacraments from their hands, and pay them all dutiful obedience. I
     shall not prove this at length, for it has been done by others, and
     indeed the common sense and understanding of men, if left to
     themselves, would be quite sufficient in this case. I do but lay
     before the reader the following considerations.

     1. We hold, with the Church in all ages, that, when our LORD, after
     His resurrection, breathed on His Apostles, and said, "Receive ye
     the HOLY GHOST,---as My FATHER hath sent Me, so send I you;" He
     gave them the power of sending others with a divine commission, who
     in like manner should have the power of sending others, and so on
     even unto the end; and that our LORD promised His continual
     assistance to these successors of the Apostles in this and all other
     respects, when He said, "Lo I am with you," (that is, with you, and
     those who shall represent and succeed you,) "alway, even unto the
     end of the world."

     And, if it is plain that the Apostles left successors after them, it
     is equally plain that the Bishops are these Successors. For it is
     only the Bishops who have ever been called by the title of
     Successors; and there has been actually a perpetual succession of
     these Bishops in the Church, who alone were always esteemed to have
     the power of sending other Ministers to preach and administer the
     Sacraments. So that the proof of the doctrine seems to lie in a very
     small space.

     2. But, perhaps, it may be as well to look at it in another point of
     view. I suppose no man of common sense thinks himself entitled to
     set about teaching religion, administering Baptism, and the
     LORD'S Supper, and taking care of the souls of other people,
     unless he has in some way been called to undertake the office. Now,
     as religion is a business between every man's own conscience
     and GOD ALMIGHTY, no one can have any right to interfere in the
     religious concerns of another with the authority of a teacher,
     unless he is able to show, that it is GOD that has in some way
     called and sent him to do so. It is true, that men may as friends
     encourage and instruct each other with consent of both parties; but
     this is something very different from the office of a Minister of
     religion, who is entitled and called to "exhort, rebuke, and"
     "rule," "with all authority," as well as love and humility.

     You may observe that our LORD Himself did not teach the Gospel,
     without proving most plainly that His FATHER had sent Him. He and
     His Apostles proved their divine commission by miracles. As
     miracles, however, have long ago come to an end, there must be some
     other way for a man to prove his right to be a Minister of religion.
     And what other way can there possibly be, except a regular call and
     ordination by those who have succeeded to the Apostles?

     3. Further, you will observe, that all sects think it necessary that
     their Ministers should be ordained by other Ministers. Now, if this
     be the case, then the validity of ordination, even with them, rests
     on a succession; and is it not plain that they ought to trace that
     succession to the Apostles? Else, why are they ordained at all? And,
     any how, if their Ministers have a commission, who derive it from
     private men, much more do the Ministers of our Church, who actually
     do derive it from the Apostles. Surely those who dissent from the
     Church have invented an ordinance, as they themselves must allow;
     whereas Churchmen, whether rightly or wrongly, still maintain their
     succession not to be all invention, but to be GOD'S ordinance.
     If Dissenters say, that order requires there should be some such
     succession, this is true, indeed, but still it is only a testimony
     to the mercy of CHRIST, in having, as Churchmen maintain, given us
     such a succession. And this is all it shows; it does nothing for
     them; for, their succession, not professing to come from GOD, has no
     power to restrain any fanatic from setting up to preach of his own
     will, and a people with itching ears choosing for themselves a
     teacher. It does but witness to a need, without supplying it.

     4. I have now given some slight suggestions by way of evidence for
     the doctrine of the Apostolical Succession, from Scripture, the
     nature of the case, and the conduct of Dissenters. Let me add a word
     on the usage of the Primitive Church. We know that the succession of
     Bishops, and ordination from them, was the invariable doctrine and
     rule of the early Christians. Is it not utterly inconceivable, that
     this rule should have prevailed from the first age, everywhere, and
     without exception, had it not been given them by the Apostles?

     But here we are met by the objection, on which I propose to make a
     few remarks, that, though it is true there was a continual
     Succession of pastors and teachers in the early Church who had a
     divine commission, yet that no Protestants can have it; that we gave
     it up, when our communion ceased with Rome, in which Church it still
     remains; or, at least, that no Protestant can plead it without
     condemning the Reformation itself, for that our own predecessors
     then revolted and separated from those spiritual pastors, who,
     according to our principles, then had the commission of JESUS
     CHRIST.

     Our reply to this is a flat denial of the alleged facts on which it
     rests. The English Church did not revolt from those who in that day
     had authority by succession from the Apostles. On the contrary, it
     is certain that the Bishops and Clergy in England and Ireland
     remained the same as before the separation, and that it was these,
     with the aid of the civil power, who delivered the Church of those
     kingdoms from the yoke of Papal tyranny and usurpation, while at the
     same time they gradually removed from the minds of the people
     various superstitious opinions and practices which had grown up
     during the middle ages, and which, though never formally received by
     the judgment of the whole Church, were yet very prevalent. I do not
     say the case might never arise; when it might become the duty of
     private individuals to take upon themselves the office of protesting
     against and abjuring the heresies of a corrupt Church. But such an
     extreme case it is unpleasant and unhealthy to contemplate. All I
     say here is, that this was not the state of things at the time of
     the Reformation. The Church then by its proper rulers and officers
     reformed itself. There was no new Church founded among us, but the
     rights and the true doctrines of the Ancient existing Church were
     asserted and established.

     In proof of this we need only look to the history of the times. In
     the year 1534, the Bishops and Clergy of England assembled in their
     respective convocations of Canterbury and York, and signed a
     declaration that the Pope or Bishop of Rome had no more jurisdiction
     in this country by the word of GOD, than any other foreign Bishops;
     and they also agreed to those acts of the civil government, which
     put an end to it among us.

     The people of England, then, in casting off the Pope, but obeyed and
     concurred in the acts of their own spiritual Superiors, and
     committed no schism. Queen Mary, it is true, drove out after many
     years the orthodox Bishops, and reduced our Church again under the
     Bishop of Rome, but this submission was only exacted by force, and
     in itself null and void; and, moreover, in matter of fact it lasted
     but a little while, for on the succession of Queen Elizabeth, the
     true Successors of the Apostles in the English Church were
     reinstated in their ancient rights. So, I repeat, there was no
     revolt, in any part of these transactions, against those who had a
     commission from God; for it was the Bishops and Clergy themselves,
     who maintained the just rights of their Church.

     But, it seems, the Pope has ever said, that our Bishops were bound
     by the laws of GOD and the Church to obey him; that they were
     subject to him; and that they had no right to separate from him, and
     were guilty in doing so, and that accordingly they have involved the
     people of England in their guilt; and, at all events, that they
     cannot complain of their flock disobeying and deserting them, when
     they have revolted from the Pope. Let us consider this point.

     Now that there is not a word in Scripture about our duty to obey the
     Pope, is quite clear. The Papists indeed say, that he is the
     Successor of St. Peter; and that therefore he is Head of all
     Bishops, because St. Peter bore rule over the other Apostles. But
     though the Bishops of Rome were often called the Successors of St.
     Peter in the early Church, yet every other Bishop had the same
     title. And though it be true, that St. Peter was the foremost of the
     apostles, that does not prove he had any dominion over them. The
     eldest brother in a family has certain privileges and a precedence,
     but he has no powers over the younger branches of it. And so Rome
     has ever had what is called the primacy of the Christian Churches;
     but it has not therefore any right to interfere in their internal
     administration; not more of a right, than an elder brother has to
     meddle with his younger brother's household.

     And this is plainly the state of matters between us and Rome, in the
     judgment of the ancient Church also, to which the Papists are fond
     of appealing, and by which we are quite ready to stand or fall. In
     early times, as is well known, all Christians thought substantially
     alike, and formed one great body all over the world, called the
     Church Catholic, or Universal. This great body, consisting of a vast
     number of separate Churches, with each of them its own Bishop at its
     head, was divided into a number of portions called Patriarchates;
     these again into others called Provinces, and these were made up of
     the separate Dioceses or Bishopricks. We have among ourselves an
     instance of this last division in the Provinces of Canterbury and
     York, which constitute the English Church, each of them consisting
     of a number of distinct Bishopricks or Churches. The head of a
     Province was called Archbishop, as in the case of Canterbury and
     York; the Bishops of those two sees being, we know, not only Bishops
     with Dioceses of their own, but having, over and above this, the
     place of precedence among the Bishops in the same Province. In like
     manner, the bishop at the head of a Patriarchate was called the
     Patriarch, and had the place of honour and certain privileges over
     all other Bishops within his own Patriarchate. Now, in the early
     Christian Church, there were four or five Patriarchates; e. g. one
     in the East, the Head of which was the Bishop of Antioch; one in
     Egypt, the Head of which was the Bishop of Alexandria; and, again,
     one in the West, the Head of which was the Bishop of Rome. These
     Patriarchs, I say, were the primates or Head Bishops of their
     respective Patriarchates; and they had an order of precedence among
     themselves, Rome being the first of them all. Thus the Bishop of
     Rome, being the first of the Patriarchs in dignity, might be called
     the honorary Primate of all Christendom.

     However, as time went on, the Bishop of Rome, not satisfied with the
     honours which were readily conceded to him, attempted to gain power
     over the whole Church. He seems to have been allowed the privilege
     of arbitrating in case of appeal from other Patriarchates. If, e. g.
     Alexandria and Antioch had a dispute, he was a proper referee; or if
     the Bishops of those Churches were at any time unjustly deprived of
     their sees, he was a fit person to interfere and defend them. But, I
     say, he became ambitious, and attempted to lord it over GOD'S
     heritage. He interfered in the internal management of other
     Patriarchates; he appointed Bishops to sees, and Clergy to parishes
     which were contained within them, and imposed on them various
     religious and ecclesiastical usages illegally. And in doing so,
     surely he became a remarkable contrast to the Holy Apostle, who,
     though inspired, and an universal Bishop, yet suffered not himself
     to control the proceedings even of the Churches he founded; saying
     to the Corinthians, "not for that we have dominion over your faith,
     but are helpers of your joy; for by faith ye stand." 2 Cor. i. 24.
     This impressive declaration, which seems to be intended almost as a
     prophetic warning against the times of which we speak, was neglected
     by the Pope, who, among other tyrannical proceedings, took upon him
     the control of the Churches in Britain, and forbade us to reform our
     doctrine and usages, which he had no right at all to do. He had no
     pretence for so doing, because we were altogether independent of
     him; the English and Irish Churches, though in the West, being
     exterior to his Patriarchate. Here again, however, some explanation
     is necessary.

     You must know, then, that from the first there were portions of the
     Christian world, which were not included in any Patriarchate, but
     were governed by themselves. Such were the Churches of Cyprus, and
     such were the British Churches. This need not here be proved; even
     Papists have before now confessed it. Now, it so happened, in the
     beginning of the 5th century, the Patriarch of Antioch, who was in
     the neighbourhood of Cyprus, attempted against the Cyprian Churches
     what the Pope has since attempted against us; viz. took measures to
     reduce them under his dominion. And, as a sign of his authority over
     them, he claimed to consecrate their Bishops. Upon which the Great
     Council of the whole Christian world assembled at Ephesus, A.D. 431,
     made the following decree, which you will find is a defence of
     England and Ireland against the Papacy, as well as of Cyprus against
     Antioch.

     "An innovation upon the Rule of the Church and the Canons of the
     Holy Fathers, such as to affect the general liberties of
     Christendom, has been reported to us by our venerable brother
     Rheginus, and his fellow Bishops of Cyprus, Zeno, and Evagrius.
     Wherefore, since public disorders call for extraordinary remedies,
     as being more perilous, and whereas it is against ancient usage,
     that the Bishop of Antioch should ordain in Cyprus, as has been
     proved to us in this Council both in words and writing, by most
     orthodox men, We therefore decree, that the Prelates of the Cyprian
     Churches shall be suffered without let or hindrance to consecrate
     Bishops by themselves; and moreover, that the same rule shall be
     observed also in other dioceses and provinces everywhere, so that no
     Bishop shall interfere in another province, which has not from the
     very first been under himself and his predecessors; and further,
     that, if any one has so encroached and tyrannized, he must
     relinquish his claim, that the Canons of the Fathers be not
     infringed, nor the Priesthood be made an occasion and pretence for
     the pride of worldly power, nor the least portion of that freedom
     unawares be lost to us, which our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who bought the
     world's freedom, vouchsafed to us, when He shed His own blood.
     Wherefore it has seemed good to this Holy Ecumenical Council, that
     the rights of every province should be preserved pure and inviolate,
     which have always belonged to it, according to the usage which has
     ever obtained, each Metropolitan having full liberty to take a copy
     of the acts for his own security. And, should any rule be adduced
     repugnant to this decree, it is hereby repealed."

     Here we have a remarkable parallel to the dispute between Rome and
     us; and we see what was the decision of the General Church upon it.
     It will be observed, the decree is past for all provinces in all
     future times, as well as for the immediate exigency. Now this is a
     plain refutation of the Romanists on their own principles. They
     profess to hold the Canons of the Primitive Church: the very line
     they take, is to declare the Church to be one and the same in all
     ages. Here then they witness against themselves. The Pope has
     encroached on the rights of other Churches, and violated the Canon
     above cited. Herein is the difference between his relation to us,
     and that of any civil Ruler, whose power was in its origin illegally
     acquired. Doubtless we are bound to obey the Monarch under whom we
     are born, even though his ancestor were an usurper. Time legitimises
     a conquest. But this is not the case in spiritual matters. The
     Church goes by fixed laws; and this usurpation has all along been
     counter to one of her acknowledged standing ordinances, founded on
     reasons of universal application.

     After the Canon above cited, it is almost superfluous to refer to
     the celebrated rule of the First Nicene Council, A. D. 325, which,
     in defending the rights of the Patriarchates, expresses the same
     principle in all its simple force and majesty.

     "Let the ancient usages prevail, which are received in Egypt, Libya,
     and Pentapolis, relative to the authority of the Bishop of
     Alexandria; as they are observed in the case of the Bishop of Rome.
     And so in Antioch too, and other provinces, let the prerogatives of
     the Churches be preserved."

     On this head of the subject, I will but notice, that, as the Council
     of Ephesus controlled the ambition of Antioch, so in like manner did
     St. Austin rebuke Rome itself for an encroachment of another kind on
     the liberties of the African Church.

     Bingham says,

     "When Pope Zosimus and Celestine took upon them to receive
     Appellants from the African Churches, and absolve those whom they
     had condemned, St. Austin and all the African Churches sharply
     remonstrated against this, as an irregular practice, violating the
     laws of unity, and the settled rules of ecclesiastical commerce;
     which required, that no delinquent excommunicated in one Church
     should be absolved in another, without giving satisfaction to his
     own church that censured him. And therefore, to put a stop to this
     practice and check the exorbitant power which Roman Bishops assumed
     to themselves, they first made a Law in the Council of Milevis, That
     no African Clerk should appeal to any Church beyond sea, under pain
     of being excluded from communion in all the African Churches. And
     then, afterwards, meeting in a general Synod, they dispatched
     letters to the Bishop of Rome, to remind him how contrary this
     practice was to the Canons of Nice, which ordered, That all
     controversies should be ended in the places where they arose, before
     a Council and the Metropolitan"

     Thus I have shown, that our Bishops, at the time of the Reformation,
     did but vindicate their ancient rights; were but acting as grateful,
     and therefore jealous champions of the honour of the old Fathers,
     and the sanctity of their institutions. Our duty surely in such
     matters lies in neither encroaching nor conceding to encroachment;
     in taking our rights as we find them, and using them; or rather in
     regarding them altogether as trusts, the responsibility of which we
     cannot avoid. As the same Apostle says, "Let every man abide in the
     same calling, wherein he is called." And, if England and Ireland had
     a plea for asserting their freedom under any circumstances, much
     more so, when the corruptions imposed on them by Rome even made it a
     duty to do so.

     I shall answer briefly one or two objections, and so bring these
     remarks to an end.

     1. First, it may be said, that Rome has withdrawn our orders, and
     excommunicated us; therefore we cannot plead any longer our
     Apostolical descent. Now I will not altogether deny, that a
     Ministerial Body might become so plainly apostate, as to lose its
     privilege of ordination. But, however this may be, it is a little
     too hard to assume, as such an objection does, the very point in
     dispute. When we are proved to be heretical in doctrine, then will
     be the time to begin to consider, whether our heresy is of so
     grievous a character as to invalidate our orders; but, till then, we
     may fairly and fearlessly maintain, that our Bishops are still
     invested with the power of ordination.

     2. But it may be said on the other hand, that if we do not admit
     ourselves to be heretic, we necessarily must accuse the Romanists of
     being such; and that therefore, on our own ground, we have really no
     valid orders, as having received them from an heretical Church.
     True, Rome may be so considered now; but she was not heretical in
     the primitive ages. If she has apostatized, it was at the time of
     the Council of Trent. Then, if at any time, surely not before, did
     the Roman Communion bind itself in covenant to the cause of
     Antichrist. [1] But before that time, grievous as might be the
     corruptions in the Church, no individual Bishop, Priest, or Deacon,
     was bound by oath to the maintenance of them. [2] Extensively as
     they were spread, no Clergyman was shackled with obligations which
     prevented his resisting them; he could but suffer persecution for so
     doing. He did not commit himself in one breath to two vows, to serve
     faithfully in the Ministry, and yet to receive the superstitions and
     profanities which man had, in course of ages, introduced into the
     most gracious and holiest of God's gifts. On the contrary, we
     may say with the learned Dr. Field, " that none of those points of
     false doctrine and error which Romanists now maintain, and we
     condemn, were the doctrines of the Church before the Reformation
     constantly delivered or generally received by all them that were of
     it, but doubtfully broached, and devised without all certain
     resolution, or factiously defended by some certain only, who as a
     dangerous faction adulterated the sincerity of the Christian verity,
     and brought the Church into miserable bondage." [3] Accordingly,
     acknowledging and deploring all the errors of the middle ages, yet
     we need not fear to maintain, that after all they were but the
     errors of individuals, though of large numbers of Christians; and we
     may safely maintain, that they no more interfere with the validity
     of the ordination received by our Bishops from those who lived
     before the Reformation, than errors of faith and conduct in a priest
     interfere with the grace of the Sacraments received at his hands.

     3. It may be said, that we throw blame on Luther, and others of the
     foreign Reformers, who did act without the authority of their
     Bishops. But we reply, that it has been always agreeable to the
     principles of the Church, that, if a bishop taught and up held what
     was contrary to the orthodox faith, the Clergy and people were not
     bound to submit, but were obliged to maintain the true religion; and
     if excommunicated by such Bishops, they were never accounted to be
     cut off from the Church. Luther and his associates upheld in the
     main the true doctrine; and though it is not necessary to defend
     every act of fallible men like them, yet we are fully justified in
     maintaining, that the conduct of those who defended the truth
     against the Romish party, even in opposition to their spiritual
     rulers, was worthy of great praise. At the same time it is
     impossible not to lament, that they did not take the first
     opportunity to place themselves under orthodox Bishops of the
     Apostolical Succession. Nothing, as far as we can judge, was more
     likely to have preserved them from that great decline of religion,
     which has taken place on the Continent.
       _______________________________________________________________

                                  FOOTNOTES

     [1] The following is from the Life of Bernard Gilpin, vid.
     Wordsworth's Ecclesiastical Biography, vol. iv. p. 94. "Mr.
     Gilpin would often say that the Churches of the Protestants were not
     able to give any firme and solid reason of their separation besides
     this, to wit, that the Pope is Antichrist.... The Church of Rome
     kept the rule of faith intire, until that rule was changed and
     altered by the Council of Trent, and from that time it seemed to him
     a matter of necessitie to come out of the Church of Rome, that so
     that Church which is true and called out from thence might follow
     the word of God.. But he did not these things violently, but by
     degrees."

     [2] The Creed of Pope Pius IV., in which every Roman Priest
     professes and promises to maintain all the errors of Popery, was
     only imposed after the Council of Trent.

     [3] See Field on the Church, Appendix to book iii. where he proves
     all this. See also Birkbeck's Protestant's Evidence.
