         ADHERENCE TO THE APOSTOLICAL SUCCESSION THE SAFEST COURSE.

                                 [Number 4]

     WE who believe the Nicene Creed, must acknowledge it a high
     privilege, that we belong to the Apostolic Church. How is it that so
     many of us are, almost avowedly, so cold and indifferent in our
     thoughts of this privilege?

     Is it because the very idea is in itself overstrained and fanciful,
     apt perhaps to lay strong hold on a few ardent minds, but little in
     accordance with the general feelings of mankind ? Surely not. The
     notion of a propagated commission is as simple and intelligible in
     itself, as can well be, is acted on daily in civil matters (the
     administration of trust property, for example), and has found a most
     ready, sometimes an enthusiastic, acceptance, in those many nations
     of the world, which have submitted, and are submitting themselves to
     sacerdotal castes, elective or hereditary. " Priests self-elected,
     or appointed by the State," is rather the idea which startles
     ordinary thinkers, not "Priests commissioned, successively, from
     heaven."

     Or is our languor rather to be accounted for by the want of express
     scriptural encouragement to the notion of a divine ministerial
     commission? Nay, Scripture, at first sight, is express, whether we
     take the analogy of the Old Testament, the words of our LORD, or the
     practice of His Apostles. The primitive Christians read it
     accordingly, and cherished, with all affectionate reverence, the
     privilege which they thought they found there. Why are we so unlike
     them?

     I fear it must be owned, that much of the evil is owing to the
     comparatively low ground which we ourselves, the Ministers of GOD,
     have chosen to OCCUPY in defence of our commission. For many years,
     we have been much in the habit of resting our claim on the general
     duties of submission to authority, of decency and order, of
     respecting precedents long established, instead of appealing to that
     warrant which marks us, exclusively, for GOD'S AMBASSADORS. We have
     spoken much in the same tone, as we might, had we been mere Laymen,
     acting for ecclesiastical purposes by a commission under the Great
     Seal. Waving the question, "Was this wise? Was it right, in higher
     respects?" I ask, was it not obviously certain, in some degree, to
     damp and deaden the interest, with which men of devout minds would
     naturally regard the Christian Ministry? Would not more than half
     the reverential feeling, with which we look on a Church or
     Cathedral, be gone, if we ceased to contemplate it as the house of
     GOD, and learned to esteem it merely as a place set apart by the
     State for moral and religious instruction?

     It would be going too deep into history, were one now to enter on
     any statement of the causes which have led, silently and insensibly,
     almost to the abandonment of the high ground, which our Fathers of
     the Primitive Church, i. e., the Bishops and Presbyters of the first
     five centuries, invariably took, in preferring their claim to
     canonical obedience. For the present, it is rather wished to urge,
     on plain positive considerations, the wisdom and duty of keeping in
     view the simple principle on which they relied.

     Their principle, in short, was this: That the Holy Feast on our
     SAVIOUR'S sacrifice, which all confess to be "generally necessary to
     salvation," was intended by Him to be constantly conveyed through
     the hands of commissioned persons. Except therefore we can show such
     a warrant, we cannot be sure that our hands convey the sacrifice; we
     cannot be sure that souls worthily prepared, receiving the bread
     which we break, and the cup of blessing which we bless, are
     partakers of the Body and Blood of CHRIST. Piety, then, and
     Christian Reverence, and sincere devout Love of our Redeemer, nay,
     and Charity to the souls of our brethren, not good order and
     expediency only, willed prompt us, at all earthly risks, to preserve
     and transmit the seal and warrant of CHRIST.

     If the rules of Christian conduct were founded merely on visible
     expediency, the zeal with which those holy men were used to maintain
     the Apostolical Succession, might appear a strange unaccountable
     thing. Not so, if our duties to our SAVIOUR be like our duties to a
     parent or a brother, the unalterable result of certain known
     relations, previous to all consideration of consequences.[1] Reflect
     on this, and you will presently feel what a difference it makes in a
     pious mind, whether ministerial prerogatives be traced to our LORD'S
     own institution, or to mere voluntary ecclesiastical arrangement.
     Let two plans of Government, as far as we can see, be equally good
     and expedient in themselves, yet if there be but a fair probability
     of the one rather than the other proceeding from our Blessed LORD
     Himself, those who love Him in sincerity will know at once which to
     prefer. They will not demand that every point be made out by
     inevitable demonstration or promulgated in form, like a State
     decree. According to the beautiful expression of the Psalmist, they
     will consent to be "guided by our LORD'S eye" the indications of His
     pleasure will be enough for them. They will state the matter thus to
     themselves: "JESUS CHRIST'S own commission is the best external
     security I can have, that in receiving this bread and wine, I verily
     receive His Body and Blood. Either the Bishops have that commission,
     or there is no such thing in the world. For at least Bishops have it
     with as much evidence, as Presbyters without them. In proportion,
     then, to my Christian anxiety for keeping as near my SAVIOUR as I
     can, I shall, of course, be very unwilling to separate myself from
     Episcopal communion. And in proportion to my charitable care for
     others, will be my industry to preserve and extend the like
     consolation and security to them."

     Consider the analogy of an absent parent, or dear friend in another
     hemisphere. Would not such an one naturally reckon it one sign of
     sincere attachment, if, when he returned home, he found that in all
     family questions respect had been shown especially to those in whom
     he was known to have had most confidence? Would he not be pleased,
     when it appeared that people had not been nice for inquiring what
     express words of command he had given, where they had good reason to
     think that such and such a course would be approved by him? If his
     children and dependents had searched diligently, where, and with
     whom, he had left commissions, and having fair cause to think they
     had found such, had scrupulously conformed themselves, as far as
     they could, to the proceedings of those so trusted by him, would he
     not think this a better sign, than if they had been dexterous in
     devising exceptions, in explaining away the words of trust, and
     limiting the prerogatives he had conferred?

     Now certainly the Gospel has many indications, that our best Friend
     in His absence is likely to be well pleased by those who do their
     best in sincerity to keep as near to His apostles as they can. It is
     studiously recorded, for example, by the Evangelists, in the account
     of our LORD'S two miraculous Feasts, that all passed through His
     Disciples' hands: (His twelve Disciples; as is in one instance
     plainly implied in the twelve baskets full of fragments.) I know
     that minute circumstances like this, in a Parable or symbolical act,
     must be reasoned on with great caution. Still, when one considers
     that our Blessed LORD took occasion from this event to deliver more
     expressly than at any other time the doctrine of communion with Him,
     it seems no unnatural conjecture, that the details of the miracle
     were so ordered, as to throw light on that doctrine.

     But, not to dwell on what many will question, (although on docile
     and affectionate minds I cannot but think it must have its weight,)
     what shall we say to the remarkable promise addressed to the Twelve
     at the Paschal Supper? "Ye are they which have continued with Me in
     My temptation: and I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as My FATHER hath
     appointed unto Me; that ye may eat and drink at My table in My
     Kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."
     Thus much nobody will hesitate to allow, concerning this Apostolical
     Charter: that it bound all Christians whatever to be loyal and
     obedient to CHRIST'S Apostles, at least as long as they were living.
     And do not the same words equally bind us, and all believers to the
     world's end, so far as the mind of the Apostle can yet be
     ascertained ? Is not the spirit of the enactment such, as renders it
     incumbent on every one to prefer among claimants to Church authority
     those who can make out the best title to a warrant and commission
     from the Apostles?

     I pass over those portions of the Gospel, which are oftenest quoted
     in this controversy; they will occur of themselves to all men; and
     it is the object of these lines rather to exemplify the occasional
     indications of our LORD'S Will, than to cite distinct and palpable
     enactments. On one place, however, the passage in the Acts, which
     records, in honour of the first converts, that "they continued
     stedfastly in the Apostles' doctrine and fellowship," one question
     must be asked. Is it really credible, that the privilege so
     emphatically mentioned, of being in communion with the Apostles,
     ceased when the last Apostle died ? If not, who among living
     Christians have so fair a chance of enjoying that privilege, as
     those, who, besides Purity of Doctrine, are careful to maintain that
     Apostolical Succession, preserved to them hitherto by a gracious and
     special Providence? I should not much fear to risk the whole
     controversy on the answer which a simple unprejudiced mind would
     naturally make to these two questions.

     Observe, too, how often these principles, which are usually called,
     in scorn, High-Churchmanship, drop as it were incidentally from the
     pens of the sacred writers, professedly employed on other subjects.
     " How shall they preach, except they be sent ? Let a man so account
     of us, as of the Ministers of CHRIST, and Stewards of the mysteries
     of GOD." "No man taketh this honour to himself, but he that is
     called of GOD, as was Aaron." I do not think it possible for any one
     to read such places as these with a fair and clear mind, and not to
     perceive that it is better and more scriptural to have, than to
     want, CHRIST'S special commission for conveying His word to the
     people, and consecrating and distributing the pledges of His holy
     Sacrifice, if such commission be any how attainable, better and more
     scriptural, if we cannot remove all doubt, at least to prefer that
     communion which can make out the best probable title, provided
     always, that nothing heretical, or otherwise immoral, be inserted in
     the terms of communion.

     Why then should any man here in Britain, fear or hesitate boldly to
     assert the authority of the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, on
     grounds strictly evangelical and spiritual; as bringing men nearest
     to CHRIST our SAVIOUR, and confirming them most exactly to His mind,
     indicated both by His own conduct and by the words of His SPIRIT in
     the Apostolic writings? Why should we talk so much of an
     establishment, and so little of an APOSTOLICAL SUCCESSION ? Why
     should we not seriously endeavour to impress our people with this
     plain truth;-that by separating themselves from our communion, they
     separate themselves not only from a decent, orderly, useful society,
     but from THE ONLY CHURCH IN THIS REALM WHICH HAS A RIGHT TO BE QUITE
     SURE THAT SHE HAS THE LORD'S BODY TO GIVE TO HIS PEOPLE?

     Nor need any man be perplexed by the question, sure to be presently
     and confidently asked, "Do you then unchurch all the Presbyterians,
     all Christians who have no Bishops? Are they shut out of the
     Covenant, for all the fruits of Christian piety which seem to have
     sprung up not scantily among them?" Nay, we are not judging others,
     but deciding on our own conduct. We in England cannot communicate
     with Presbyterians, as neither can we with Roman Catholics, but we
     do not therefore exclude either from salvation. "Necessary to
     Salvation," and "necessary to Church Communion" are not to be used
     as convertible terms. Neither do we desire to pass sentence on other
     persons of other countries; but we are not to shrink from our
     deliberate views of truth and duty, because difficulties may be
     raised about the case of such persons, anymore than we should fear
     to maintain the paramount necessity of Christian belief, because
     similar difficulties may be raised about virtuous Heathens, Jews, or
     Mahometans. To us such questions are abstract, not practical; and
     whether we can answer them or no, it is our business to keep fast
     hold of the Church Apostolical, whereof we are actual members, not
     merely on civil or ecclesiastical grounds, but from real personal
     love and reverence, affectionate reverence to our LORD and only
     SAVIOUR. And let men seriously bear in mind, that it is one thing to
     slight and disparage this holy Succession where it may be had, and
     another thing to acquiesce in the want of it, where it is (if it be
     any where), really unattainable.

     I readily allow, that this view of our calling has something in it
     too high and mysterious to be fully understood by unlearned
     Christians. But the learned, surely, are just as unequal to it. It
     is part of that ineffable mystery, called in our Creed, The
     Communion of Saints, and with all other Christian mysteries, is
     above the understanding of all alike, yet practically alike within
     reach of all, who are willing to embrace it by true Faith.
     Experience shows, at any rate, that it is far from being ill adapted
     to the minds and feeling of ordinary people. On this point evidence
     might be brought from times, at first glance the most unpromising,
     from the early part of the 17th century. The hold which the
     propagandists of the " Holy Discipline" obtained on the fancies and
     affections of the people, of whatever rank, age, and sex, depended
     very much on their incessant appeals to their fancied Apostolical
     succession. They found persons willing and eager to suffer or rebel,
     as the case might be, in their system; because they had possessed
     them with the notion, that it was the system handed down from the
     Apostles, " a divine Episcopate," so Beza called it. Why should we
     despair of obtaining, in time, an influence, far more legitimate and
     less dangerously exciting, but equally searching and extensive, by
     the diligent inculcation of our true and scriptural claim ?

     For it is obvious that, among other results of the primitive
     doctrine of the Apostolical Succession, thoroughly considered and
     followed up, it would make the relation of Pastor and Parishioner
     far more engaging, as well as more awful, than it is usually
     considered at present. Look on your pastor as acting by man's
     commission, and you may respect the authority by which he acts, you
     may venerate and love his personal character, but it can hardly be
     called a religious veneration; there is nothing, properly, sacred
     about him. But once learn to regard him as " the Deputy of CHRIST,
     for reducing man to the obedience of GOD," and everything about him
     becomes changed, everything stands in a new light. In public and in
     private, in church and at home, in consolation and in censure, and
     above all, in the administration of the Holy Sacraments, a faithful
     man naturally considers, " By this His messenger CHRIST is speaking
     to me; by his very being and place in the world, he is a perpetual
     witness to the truths of the sacred history, a perpetual earnest of
     Communion with our LORD to those who come duly prepared to His
     Table." In short it must make just all the difference in every part
     of a Clergyman's duty, whether he do it, and be known to do it, in
     that Faith of his commission from CHRIST, or no.

     How far the analogy of the Aaronical priesthood will carry us, and
     to what extent we must acknowledge the reserve imputed to the
     formularies of our Church on this whole subject of the Hierarchy,
     and how such reserve, if real, may be accounted for;-these are
     questions worthy of distinct consideration!

     For the present let the whole matter be brought to this short issue.
     May it not be said both to Clergy and Laity, "Put yourselves in your
     children's place, in the place of the next generation of believers.
     Consider in what way they will desire you to have acted, supposing
     them to value aright (as you must wish them), the means of communion
     with CHRIST, and as they will then wish you to have acted now, so
     act in all matters affecting that inestimable privilege."

                      ON ALTERATIONS IN THE PRAYER-BOOK.

     THE 36th Canon provides that "no person shall hereafter be received
     into the Ministry except he shall first subscribe" certain " three
     articles." The second of these is as follows.

     "That the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordering of Bishops,
     Priests, and Deacons, containeth in it nothing contrary to the Word
     of God, and that it may lawfully so be used; and that he himself
     will use the form in the said Book prescribed, in public prayer, and
     administration of the sacraments, and none other."

     NOW here is certainly a grave question to all who have subscribed
     this Article. We need not of course say, it precludes them from
     acquiescing in any changes, that are lawfully made in the Common
     Prayer, but surely it makes it most incumbent on them to inquire
     carefully whether the Parties altering it have a right to do so. E.
     g. should any foreign Power or Legislature, or any private Nobleman
     or Statesman at home, pretend to reform the Prayer Book, of course
     we should all call it an usurpation, and refuse to obey it; or
     rather, we should consider the above subscription to be a religious
     obstacle to our obeying it. So far is clear. The question follows:
     Where is the competent authority for making alterations ? Is it not
     also clear, that it does not lie in the British Legislature, which
     we know to be composed not only of believers, but also of infidels,
     heretics, and schismatics; and which for what we know may soon cease
     to be a Christian body even in formal profession? Can even a
     Committee of it, ever so carefully selected, absolve us from our
     subscriptions? Whence do the Laity derive their power over the
     Clergy? Can even the Crown absolve us? or a commission from the
     Crown? If then some measure of tyranny be ever practised against us
     as regards the Prayer Book, HOW ARE WE TO ACT?

     OXFORD, Sept. 21, 1833.
