


                            Tracts for the Times
               On Reserve in Communicating Religious Knowledge
                                 [Number 87]

                              by Isaac Williams
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  PART IV.
                    THE TESTIMONY OF THE ANCIENT CHURCH.

     1. No argument adduced against the principle: history of the subject
     in the writer's mind.
     2. Testimony of the early Church full and extensive.
     3. The existence of what has been termed the Disciplina Arcani.
     4. Indications of the principle independent of any known definite
     system.
     5. The Disciplina a rule of moral nature.
     6. The whole subject connected with a great religious principle and
     rule of conduct.
     7. Catholic mode of interpreting Scripture founded on the same.
     8. High authority for this mode of Scriptural interpretation.
     9. Reverence and caution observable in the Fathers.
     10. Reserve in revelation not confined to GOD'S word.
     11. Origen's mode of considering the subject as moral not
     intellectual.
     12. The same discussed at length by St. Clement of Alexandria.
     13. The testimony of the Ancient Church to the doctrine of Christ
     Crucified.
     14. The practice and principle of the Ancient Church perfectly
     analogous to our LORD'S example.

                                   PART V.
         THE PRINCIPLE OPPOSED TO CERTAIN MODERN RELIGIOUS OPINIONS.

     1. The nature of the objections which have been made.
     2. On preaching the word most effectually.
     3. On teaching the doctrine of the Atonement.
     4. Danger in forming a plan of our own different from that of
     Scripture.
     5. Statement of the case from plain moral principles.
     6. All Scripture in perfect harmony as opposed to this modern
     system.
     7. On eloquent preaching and delivery.
     8. This peculiar system a worldly system.

                                  PART VI.
                  THE SYSTEM OF THE CHURCH, ONE OF RESERVE.

     1. The principle considered with reference to ourselves.
     2. The holiness of GOD'S House of Prayer.
     3. Sacraments, Church Ordinances, and practices.
     4. The Church realizes its kingdom is secret.
     5. This Reserve the best preservative of sound Church principles.
     6. Caution necessary with respect to the latent senses of Scripture.
     7. Secret religious duties, conversation, and controversy.
     8. Untenable objections on the ground of our present position.
     9. This sacred principle more than ever needed.
     10. Want of reverence now prevailing.
     11. Summary of the whole subject.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  PART IV.

                    THE TESTIMONY OF THE ANCIENT CHURCH.

   1. No Argument adduced against the principle: history of the subject in
                             the writer's mind.

     THE writer made every inquiry of friends before the late Tract on
     this subject was published, to ascertain to what objections it was
     liable; and since the publication, he has looked out with great
     interest for everything that has issued against it, with the
     expectation of finding either arguments adduced, which would
     militate against the principle itself, or such as would be
     calculated to show that, allowing the principle to be true, it was
     not capable of bearing out the conclusions to which it has been
     applied: for, by means of such objections, the writer had hoped
     either, by answering and explaining them, to draw out and establish
     more clearly his main principle; or else to be assisted in seeing
     that the case should not be proved; under which circumstance he
     trusts he should be ready to acknowledge it. But to his great
     disappointment he has found nothing of this kind; he is not aware of
     one single argument adduced that touches the question; but much
     vague declamation, and strong alarms expressed, because the view
     interferes with certain peculiar religious opinions, or on account
     of some motives attributed to the writer's friends, or on other
     similar grounds, which in fact (even were they true) in no way
     affect him or this principle. That those who will not afford the
     subject a patient consideration should not agree with him, does in
     truth only confirm the argument which the writer wishes to maintain;
     which is mainly this, that religious truth cannot be known without
     serious attention. If there is something sacred and divine in this
     rule of reverential forebearance it cannot be thus controverted; nor
     has it in any way been put forth with any party feeling, nor will
     any one say it has been treated by us in a spirit of controversy:
     the sole object being to know, by what means we may best arrive at
     truth, and promote religion in the world.

     But independently of these objections, the writer has himself felt
     that there was much in the subject that needed explanation, and
     which was liable to misconstruction. He felt it at the time of
     publishing the former treatise, and has done so ever since. And some
     friendly notices, which have mentioned this, have not expressed it
     more strongly than he has been himself impressed with it: partly
     from not fully seeing how far the inferences might lead him, which
     were deducible from a principle that he considered as true; and
     partly from some of his original observations on the subject having
     been mislaid and lost at the time of the publication, comprising the
     whole of the proof from antiquity which is here given; and as the
     inquiry has from its very nature occasioned some unavoidable
     misapprehensions, perhaps he could not better explain his sentiments
     than by recording the history of them in his own mind.

     The opinion was not at first formed from a knowledge of any system
     of the kind in sacred antiquity, nor from observing that the
     principle was so fully maintained throughout the whole of the Holy
     Scriptures as he has since found it to be, much less from any
     speculative theory adopted in the study; but from his own dealings
     with mankind in the care of a parish, and his observation of the
     conduct of others who, he thought, had most experience and good
     sense and singleness of heart in winning men to the truth. Much pain
     was occasioned him, and much injury he thought was done to the cause
     of the Gospel, in those who, from habit or want of consideration,
     acted otherwise. It appeared to him that, though his mode of
     proceeding was contrary to that which such persons require, yet it
     was according to the maxims of Scripture: and often oppressed, as we
     cannot but feel, while thus acting, at being considered by some
     almost without the pale of the Christian covenant, yet his own
     natural sense of right, delicacy, and even Christian expediency, and
     much more his notion of the Gospel itself, could never allow him to
     act differently; considering that in the care of himself he had more
     to guard against insincere profession, and unreal systems of thought
     and feeling in religion than any thing else; and that in others also
     he had nothing so much to seek for as true honesty and seriousness
     of mind, respecting a state so awful as that which Christianity
     represents ours to be. It appeared to him that there was no subject
     upon which we were so much and so earnestly cautioned throughout the
     Gospels as this (especially through all the Sermon on the Mount, and
     in our LORD'S last discourses in St. John,) and that in the world at
     present the standard of things was so external, that there was more
     than ever danger of false pretension,-of an unreality, a want of
     thorough simplicity and seriousness, a secret looking to the world,
     such as would eat out the very heart of religion. Thoughts of this
     kind were constantly in his mind: not that he had any notion
     whatever of a system, or indeed of any great and extensive
     principle, nor even did his feelings assume any definite shape so as
     to support themselves by arguments and decisive reasons why his
     sentiments and practice were unlike those of certain others; but he
     only felt that in acting otherwise in occasional instances of
     various kinds, he was doing violence to something sacred and to
     natural modesty; and that the obloquy he was subject to he shared
     with those of whose fidelity he could not doubt, such as Bishop
     Butler and Bishop Wilson. And indeed when continually engaged in
     these and the like thoughts, he had felt inexpressibly relieved and
     comforted at finding those whom he could most value not only quite
     free from all this, but watchful against it in themselves and
     others. Perfectly one and of a piece with this appeared to him the
     uniform tendency of Holy Scripture, when viewed with a reference to
     this subject, as has been shown in the previous part of this
     treatise. And in reading the ancient writers with this view he found
     throughout, if they did not fully explain the whole of our LORD'S
     conduct on this principle, yet they incidentally allowed it, and
     bore the fullest evidence to the opinions he has stated. So much so
     indeed that the doctrine, which appears new and strange to many of
     us in the present day, would have been one with which they were
     quite familiar. The inferences implied, and the practices
     recommended, would have been considered by the Ancient Church as a
     matter of course, and this it is our present object to show.

            2. Testimony of the early Church full and extensive.

     But before entering on this part of the subject, which was before
     accidentally omitted, let us be understood in our appeal to
     antiquity. The principle has not been founded, as some have stated,
     on the primitive practice, but on Scripture alone. And our appeal to
     Catholic antiquity would be sufficient were it only to prove that it
     is not opposed to our opinion; but so far is this from being the
     case, that, on the contrary, we shall find that it fully supports it
     in a variety of ways. We shall find scattered intimations of this
     kind pervade all primitive writings: but that more particularly
     there were two customs which embody and strongly put forth the
     principle. The first an external system of discipline, designated by
     the Latins the Discipline of the Secret, according to which they
     kept back in reserve the higher doctrines of our Faith until persons
     were rendered fit to receive them by a long previous preparation.
     The other an universal rule in the explanations of GOD'S Word, which
     is founded on the supposition that it contains mystical meanings
     disclosed only to the faithful.

     To these two points therefore we would especially draw attention in
     our appeal to Catholic Antiquity; first of all that not only what we
     have supposed respecting our LORD'S concealing His Divine presence
     is confirmed both by the express allusions of the Fathers, but also
     by their adopting into the Church a mode of acting, which appears to
     us extraordinary, and which either took its rise from this
     circumstance (i. e. of Scriptural example), or was founded upon a
     great religious principle. Secondly, that they universally seem to
     suppose that there is in Holy Scripture something which is
     throughout analogous to what we have traced out in the history of
     our LORD'S life, so that there is an unity of action and manner of a
     very remarkable kind in the two cases. They suppose that our blessed
     LORD is as it were, throughout the inspired writings, hiding and
     concealing Himself, and going about (if I may so speak reverently)
     seeking to whom He may disclose Himself: that there are many things
     in Scripture which might appear common and ordinary accounts,
     relating to passing events, or words which appear to speak only of
     temporal wisdom; that our LORD is walking therein and concealing His
     divinity: in the same manner that we have supposed that in our
     LORD'S ordinary walk and mode of life among men He very studiously
     and remarkably concealed His ineffable majesty under the appearance
     of common humanity, accompanied with great goodness. Though these
     two points are different yet they involve one common principle.

     But when we come to produce the proof from the ancient Church that
     we are putting forth no new doctrine, we find it a task really very
     difficult, from the very abundance of the matter; the principle is
     thoroughly and entirely infused into their whole system; their
     words, their notions, their practices, thoroughly breathe of it, so
     as to indicate a state of thought and feeling perfectly at variance
     with those modern systems, whether that (improperly) called
     Evangelical, or the cold and barren (equally miscalled) orthodoxy of
     the last age; so as to show an entire and essential difference in
     tone and spirit. The proof is difficult, for one hardly knows how to
     produce it; if we were to bring forward, generally, sentiments from
     the Fathers which imply it, it would occupy volumes; and besides
     this, the testimony is so varied in its nature that it makes an
     attempt appear desultory. It is like attempting to describe some
     strong impression of the mind, which is shown in the body in every
     part; every limb, and every gesture may be indicative of it, and yet
     it may be rather expressed by the whole than by any part, and to
     select one, would not adequately serve the purpose. So does the
     principle pervade the body of the Church, appearing now in one part,
     and then in another; now in action, now in demeanour, now in
     expression, and often in all together, and yet in so subtle a manner
     as to defy description. The Fathers speak of it as our LORD'S mode
     of conduct; they speak of it still more, as St. Paul's in all his
     teaching; they speak of it as a rule of Scripture, as a principle in
     morals; their practice with regard to others, and their studies,
     both alike imply it. There is, perhaps, not one among the Fathers
     with whom one would not find, on this subject, that sympathy and
     understanding which it is in vain to seek for among moderns, at
     least, among those who are imbued with a spirit alien to the Church.

     The spirit and practice of the Ancient Church is like the genuine
     and retiring modesty of first love in contrast with the feeble
     loudness and noisy display of a counterfeit, which would fain renew
     feelings it has lost: "with their mouth they show much love."

     The instances we have to adduce, must therefore necessarily be
     various in their character, and may appear to allude to things in
     themselves distinct; one to a secret sense in Scripture, another to
     a moral rule of action, another to a rule of Church discipline, and
     another to an historical fact respecting our LORD or His Apostles.
     But it must be observed, that it is this very diversity which most
     establishes the point in question; namely, that it is a great moral
     and religious principle, or which these are incidental
     manifestations: for either of these points proved singly, might be
     supposed to be only the effect of imagination, or a train of
     circumstances that might be otherwise accounted for: but a
     concurrence of the whole in points, each of which is contrary to our
     at present received notions, can only be referred to a general
     principle. Besides which, this very variety opens to us a subject of
     exceeding interest, namely, our blessed LORD acting towards mankind
     through the whole of His Church, in a manner strikingly in harmony
     with His personal conduct in the days of His Incarnation.

       3. The existence of what has been termed the Disciplina Arcani.

     Now first of all with regard to the Disciplina Arcani: what has been
     said would naturally lead one to conclude that it owed its origin to
     a most sacred source. It seems so perfectly in accordance with all
     that has been noticed of our LORD'S conduct, (in Tract No. 80. Part
     I.) that His example and mode of teaching will constantly account
     for its origin in a manner that nothing else will. And moreover,
     that alone will suggest a reason why the principle should have
     become so universal, without any apparent reference to that definite
     system of Church discipline.

     But even were we to suppose, as some have imagined, that the
     practice of the Disciplina had its origin in religious or
     philosophic mysteries among the heathen: even this by no means
     destroys our argument respecting the principle itself as a rule in
     religion or morals; for the very existence of those mysteries
     themselves remains to be accounted for. If the principle we maintain
     is a truth of GOD, and strongly stamped on His revelation, such a
     principle must be founded on our moral and spiritual nature, and
     therefore of course may be expected to be found among mankind; this
     would account for its existence in Egypt and early Greece. But there
     is great reason to believe that the pagan mysteries took their rise
     from something more holy than themselves. One cannot seriously
     reflect on Herodotus' account of Egypt, and the mysterious awe with
     which he forbears to speak of certain things in religion, without
     apprehending that there is much more in it than any system of man's
     invention; that amidst the extensive corruption of primitive
     religion which took place in that country, there still remained an
     indefinable fear, which would only find its correspondence in the
     sense handed down of the awfulness of the true GOD. So that at all
     events, were we to allow for a momentary supposition that this
     Disciplina had an heathen origin, the very existence of these pagan
     mysteries would serve greatly to establish the principle as a law in
     our moral nature.

     But it has been well said, that to suppose the doctrines of the Holy
     Catholic Church owed their origin to the practices of heathen
     philosophy, is as if a person were to imagine that the sun owed its
     light to a reflection of the moon in the waters; and this we should
     be doing, if we allowed the secret discipline of the early Church to
     have owed its origin to any heathen custom. But the principle of
     reserve on which it is founded, is thoroughly consistent throughout
     with all the methods of revelation, and quite consistent in itself
     in all its extensive developments in the Church. If we grant it to
     be true that there are no proofs for the existence of the Disciplina
     itself before the middle or the end of the second century, this
     would only prove that it might not have appeared as a definite
     system; it may have been wrong, as is the case of other
     institutions, that it should have assumed a precise form and name at
     all; or the circumstances of the Church preceding it may not have
     required it should do so, from the Christians being necessarily of a
     strong and marked character to be Christians at all, while the
     Church was herself struggling into existence.

     Yet had we a close and accurate account of the manner in which the
     Apostles dealt with individuals as we have of our LORD Himself, we
     might have found in them a continuation of His own mode of teaching,
     as there remarked by the close attention which the narrative admits
     of. Some indications of it are at once obvious in the Acts of the
     Apostles; for instance, the great danger we have supposed to
     accompany the revelation and acknowledgment of the Presence of GOD,
     is at once exemplified in the fate of Ananias and Sapphira, and the
     awful rebuke addressed to Simon Magus.

     But the very obscurity which hangs about the practices of the early
     Church, the silence in which many things are left, seems to indicate
     something of this principle. How little from the Epistles of St.
     Paul, or any other records of the first ages, do we learn of any of
     the forms of discipline which the Church doubtless then observed?
     and afterwards the mention of the Secret Discipline seems to be
     often but incidental. Indeed, it is by no means evident that even
     Justin Martyr does not allude to it, it is well known that he
     applies the word fwtismoV or illumination, to Baptism, a word
     afterwards used with reference to the instruction in Christian
     doctrine imparted at that Sacrament, and the light then bestowed.
     Add to which we know our LORD was for forty days conversing with His
     disciples of the things concerning the kingdom, of which nothing is
     publicly written or declared: in these things it was, as St. Peter
     says of the Resurrection, they were disclosed, "not unto all the
     people, but to certain witnesses chosen of GOD." We find, moreover,
     that the heretics of the first age maintained that their doctrines
     were of that more sacred kind which our LORD and His Apostles had
     divulged to certain favoured disciples. Although there was no truth
     in these allegations, and no proof of a divine authority for the
     Disciplina, yet is it not likely that the false assumption of the
     former, as well as the latter system, may have taken their rise in
     some great truth, viz. our LORD'S mode of communicating knowledge to
     His disciples, and a certain reserve in disclosing Himself?

     Add to this the extraordinary ignorance of the heathen writers
     respecting Christianity, and the strong indications which all must
     have noticed throughout St. Paul's Epistles, that he discloses and
     withholds Christian knowledge and mysteries, according to the
     meetness of those to whom he was writing to receive them.

     If intimations of these things are but faint in the first age of
     Christianity, yet in the next they derive the most ample
     confirmation throughout the works of St. Clement of Alexandria,
     Origen, Tertullian, and most of the succeeding Fathers; their mode
     of speaking of religion, of interpreting Scripture, always seems to
     imply this principle of reserve. The Disciplina Arcani is spoken of,
     not as some ecclesiastical system founded on motives of expediency,
     as is now often supposed, or arising from the circumstances of the
     times, or as merely directed towards the heathens; it is implied
     that this reserve is an universal principle in morals; that its
     assuming a strong and definite shape in the Disciplina Arcani is
     only an accidental development of it; that it is founded deep in our
     nature; that the system is to be traced throughout the heathen world
     in some shape or other, proving it to be of divine origin or arising
     out of some common principle; that it has the authority of our LORD
     Himself and His disciples; that it was practised by our LORD, not
     from the immediate and necessary exigencies of the occasion, but as
     a great law and rule of religious wisdom; that an awful and
     reverential sense of His thus disclosing Himself only according to
     the state of man's heart is the only key to the knowledge of His
     ways, either in His moral providences or His more direct
     revelations.

      4. Indications of the principle independent of any known definite
                                   system.

     The very silence of the first ages is on this subject in our favour;
     and a few passages that do allude to it, are themselves so
     interesting, and so much tend to confirm the view we have taken,
     that we cannot withhold a fuller reference to them, though they have
     already been alluded to. The Author of the Epistle to Diognetus,
     which has been ascribed to Justin Martyr, says incidentally in the
     passages before spoken of, "having been myself a disciple of the
     Apostles, I am become a teacher of the Gentiles. The things which
     were delivered to me, I am the means to convey to those who are
     worthy, who have become disciples of the truth. For who is there
     that has a love for the Word, who does not seek clearly to know
     those things which were by the Word shown openly to the disciples,
     to whom He declared them, being Himself manifested to them, speaking
     with all freedom, not understood by the unbeliever, but conversing
     and explaining to the disciples. And they who were by Him esteemed
     faithful have become acquainted with these mysteries of the Father."

     This simple and undersigned but distinct allusion to the teaching of
     our LORD Himself is much to be observed, and seems by the mention of
     the disciples to carry on, and connect with the system of the Church
     that reserve which has been noticed in the Gospels, and serves to
     explain in some degree that silence, so remarkable in the New
     Testament, of the things concerning the Church delivered to faithful
     men.

     The passage quoted by Mr. Keble on the subject of tradition from the
     bishop Hippolytus bears an undesigned testimony to this principle
     also at an early period. "Take care," says that holy Father, "that
     these things be not delivered to unbelieving and blasphemous
     tongues. For the danger is not inconsiderable. But impart them to
     serious and faithful men who wish to live holily and justly with
     fear. For it is not without a purpose that the blessed Paul in his
     exhortation to Timothy says . . . . 'Keep the deposit committed to
     thee;' and again 'what thou hast heard from me by many exhortations,
     commit these to faithful men, &c.' If therefore that blessed Saint
     delivered "these truths which were easily accessible to all, with
     religious caution, seeing by the Spirit that all have not faith; how
     much more shall we be in danger, if, at random and without
     distinction, we impart the oracles of GOD to profane and unworthy
     men."

     This testimony not only sanctions the evidence of the pre-ceding
     extract, but inculcates the same as a moral duty incum-bent on
     teachers of the truth. We have, again, the very high authority of
     St. Athanasius for knowing, that the disciples them-selves did
     observe precisely a similar caution from the beginning to that which
     our LORD had observed towards them, and this testimony connects this
     reserve of the Ancient Church by an unbroken chain with our LORD
     Himself.

     St. Basil bears testimony also to this having been the practice of
     the early disciples, and that it was founded on our LORD'S example.
     He mentions that there were "many things which they had re-ceived
     not from Scripture but from Apostolical tradition, com-municated,"
     he says, "in mystery and secrecy, and which their fathers had
     preserved in unobtrusive and modest silence, know-ing rightly that
     this sacred reverence to mysteries was their best protection." He
     then alludes to the same having been the inten-tion, when Moses
     allowed not the holy things in the temple to be seen by all, but
     kept the profane without, and admitted the more pure into the outer
     courts. After stating some circum-stances of this kind in the law of
     Moses, such as the Levites set apart for sacred things, and the
     entering into the Holy of Holies with such circumstances of
     solemnity and awe; "in the same manner," he says, "the Apostles and
     Fathers, who pre-scribed the first rites of the Church, preserved
     the dignity of their mysteries in secrecy and silence. And even that
     obscurity which the Scripture makes use of is," he adds, "a species
     of the same reserve, rendering the understanding of its doctrines
     difficult of apprehension, and that for the benefit of ordinary
     readers."

                 5. The Disciplina a rule of a moral nature.

     The evidence of these passages has been partly historical, and
     suggests the probability that the early system of reserve may have
     had some connection with our LORD'S example and authority; and
     partly as adducing the testimony of the Fathers respecting the
     practical wisdom of the rule. To the latter we may add the authority
     of Tertullian, in a passage before alluded to, and it is important
     as proving that, where he had occasion incidentally to allude to the
     Disciplina, he speaks of it as a rule of a moral nature. He strongly
     condemns the heretics for having no discipline whatever, or
     distinction observed in their assemblies and worship, even, he says,
     if heathen were present, they would "'cast that which is holy to
     dogs, and pearls before swine.' And this utter subversion of all
     discipline they called simplicity, and accused the care of the
     orthodox Christians as a mode of enticement." In the same passage he
     adds, that "discipline is an index of doctrine: they say that GOD
     ought not to be feared; therefore, every thing with them is free and
     open. But where is GOD not feared, but where He is not? and where
     GOD is not, truth is not; where there is no truth, of course there
     is no dis-cipline. But where GOD is, there is the fear of GOD, which
     is the beginning of wisdom."

     The next person whose agreement with us we may mention is St.
     Chrysostom. His authority is of the more weight, as he himself was
     so eloquent and bold a preacher, and not a mere student; so as to
     prove that the practice which this reserve implies is in no way
     opposed to the most earnest teaching of the truth. He speaks of it
     frequently as a rule important to be observed in communicating
     religious knowledge. He mentions it as his own practice (in his
     preface to St. Matthew). "Those that I perceive awake, and desirous
     to learn, I will endeavour to teach. Those that sleep and attend
     not, I will neither tell the difficulties nor their answers, in
     obedience to the Divine law: for it is written 'Give not that which
     is holy, to the dogs.'" He speaks of this law in another place, as
     similar to that of human friendship, which imparts secrets only to
     the most intimate friends. "Let them attend to this," he adds, "who
     make a sort of triumphal show of the secrets of the Gospel, and unto
     all indiscri-minately display the pearls and the doctrine, and who
     cast the holy things unto dogs and swine by useless reasonings." He
     often speaks of it as St. Paul's practice; in his Commentary on the
     words of not casting pearls before swine, he says, "Paul intimates
     the same thing in saying, the natural man receiveth not the things
     of the SPIRIT; for they are foolishness unto him, and in many other
     places he speaks of a corrupt life being the cause of their not
     receiving the more perfect doctrines, therefore he commands us not
     to open our doors to them." He has much more to the same effect on
     the teaching of St. Paul. And not to dwell on various passages in
     which St. Chrysostom incidentally alludes to the principle, one may
     be mentioned in which he speaks clearly of the Discipline in the
     very connection we have supposed, as a mode of acting which had a
     reference to our LORD'S own example, "We close the doors," he says,
     "before we perform the mysteries, and keep out the uninitiated; not
     from any weakness we apprehend in them, but because the generality
     are not yet sufficiently advanced to be rightly disposed towards
     them. It was upon this very account that He Himself said many things
     unto the Jews in parables, because seeing they did not perceive. For
     this reason also Paul hath commanded us to know how we ought to
     answer each individual."

     In the Catechetical Lectures of St. Cyril of Jerusalem, we may, of
     course, expect to find much on this subject; all that is requisite
     is to show that he considered this system, not as one intended
     merely for the self-defence of Christians, but as one intended for
     and contributing to the good of all parties, as a practical rule;
     and this he does most fully. In a passage more than once quoted of
     late years with reference to the Disciplina, he forbids the
     catechumens to communicate the knowledge which he says to those who
     are unprepared for it is highly injurious. He forbids those whom he
     is instructing to communicate to cate-chumens the things which were
     revealed to them. "If any should ask and say, What harm will there
     be in my being ac-quainted?" he adds, "They who are sick ask for
     wine; but if it be unseasonably afforded them, it occasions frenzy;
     and from this two bad consequences ensue, the sick man dies, and the
     physician is blamed."

     In another place he speaks of the secret discipline as closely
     connected with our LORD'S own teaching, as the example and authority
     on which it was formed. After speaking of the Gospel being hid from
     those that are lost, and saying that the GOD of the New as well as
     of the Old Testament concealed things in parables, he adds, "The sun
     renders blind the weak-sighted; not that it is the nature of the sun
     to make persons blind, but that the state of their eyes cannot bear
     its light. Thus it is that they whose hearts are diseased from
     unbelief, are not able to look upon the bright rays of Godhead. The
     LORD spake to those who were able to hear in parables, and those
     parables He explained privately to His disciples. The brightness of
     His glory was for those who were enlightened, the blinding for the
     unbelieving. These mysteries the Church now declares to one who
     ceases to be of the catechumens. It is not her custom to declare
     them to heathens. We often speak of many things covertly, that the
     faithful who know may understand, and others be not injured."

     Origen, in like manner, speaks of the discipline then observed among
     Christians as a moral system, which was considered as best
     calculated to do good. And so far from its having any con-nexion
     with heathen practices, he speaks of it as opposed to them. Against
     Celsus, speaking of some heathen philosopher, he proceeds: "Let us
     see if the Christians have not a much wiser way of leading people to
     what is good and virtuous. For these ancient philosophers speak
     publicly, and make no discrimination of their hearers, but whosoever
     pleases may stand by and hear. But the Christians, as far as they
     are able, make a trial of the souls of those who wish to hear them;
     and first having privately brought their minds in tune, when they
     appear to have been sufficiently advanced by some evidence they have
     given of their desire to lead a good life, they then introduce them;
     and make a private distinction between those lately introduced, who
     have not yet received the sign of their purification, and those who,
     as far as in them lies, have indicated their determination to have
     no other principles of life but those of a Christian. And they have
     persons among them appointed to inquire into the lives and conduct
     of those who come to them, that they may prevent those who do things
     that are forbidden from coming into the common assembly; but those
     who are not such, they receive with their whole heart, and take
     pains daily to make them better."

     And a little after, he proceeds, "For we endeavour, as far as we
     can, that our assemblies should be formed of serious persons; and
     things which are especially of a divine character we then venture to
     bring forward in our public discourses, when we have no want of
     understanding hearers; but we conceal and pass over in silence
     things which are more deep, from an audience who are figuratively
     said to require milk. For thus Paul writes to the Corinthians, who
     were not yet sufficiently recovered in their morals from their
     former heathen state: "I have fed you with milk, and not with meat;
     for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye
     able," &c. And the same Apostle, well aware of the more perfect food
     of the soul, and that that of new converts might be compared to
     milk, says, "Ye are become such as have need of milk, and not of
     strong meat; for every one that useth meat is unskilful in the word
     of righteousness, for he is a babe. But strong meat belongeth to
     them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have
     their senses exercised to discern both good and vile."

     In the same book we find Celsus reflecting against the Christians,
     and accusing them of inconsistency, for now, says he, "they cry out
     to those of clean hands and a pure heart, washed from all
     wickedness, to come and be initiated in their sacred purification,
     now, on the contrary, they call on the sinner, the foolish, the
     childish, the miserable-he shall receive the kingdom of GOD." To
     which Origen answers, that "it is one thing to invite the sick to be
     healed, and another those that are healthy to the knowledge of
     divine things."

     Much more to this effect does Origen mention respecting the system
     then observed in the Church; and what is very observable, he not
     only does occasionally fully bear testimony to our supposition that
     our LORD did in the days of His flesh reveal Himself only so far as
     men were able to bear it, but he speaks of our LORD Himself in
     expressions that might very well by analogy and metaphor be applied
     to the secret discipline he describes. In the treatise last quoted,
     he says, that our SAVIOUR condescended to come down to the level of
     him who was unable to look upon the excessive luster and brightness
     of His divinity. He became flesh and spoke in a bodily manner until
     such a one, having received Him as such, by little and little was
     lifted up by the WORD, and was able to behold His former person. For
     there are different forms of the WORD, according as the WORD appears
     to each of them who are being trained to knowledge, in accordance
     with their respective moral habit and spiritual advancement, and
     different progress in virtue. So that it is not in the manner that
     Celsus has supposed that our GOD became changed in form. And when He
     went up into an high mountain, He showed Himself to them in another
     form, and far transcending that which they beheld, who remained
     below and were not able to follow to Him to the height. For they who
     were below had not eyes capable of beholding the glorious and divine
     transfiguration of the WORD, but indeed were scarce able to
     comprehend such as He was among them, so that of them who could not
     perceive His Divine beauty it is said, "He hath no form nor
     comeliness; and when we shall see Him, there is no beauty that we
     should desire Him."

     6. The whole subject connected with a great religious principle and
                              rule of conduct.

     From all that has been said it may, I think, be clearly seen with
     regard to the Disciplina Arcani that it could not have been a system
     suggested by heathen mysteries, but that it is so closely connected
     with Scripture, that allusions to it naturally rise out of, and
     again fall into Scriptural allusions, or some account of our LORD
     and His Apostles; so much so, as that all relating to it is
     perfectly consistent, and all of a piece with what they evidently
     considered to be the teaching of Holy Scripture. If either of them
     is attacked Origen seems in defending the one to pass imperceptibly
     into a defence of the other, as if the method of the Church and the
     method of Holy Scripture were one and the same, mutually implying
     each other, as if the former gradually had its rise out of the
     latter, by means of an identity or similarity of conduct in the
     inspired Apostles or teachers in the early Churches; although the
     principle might have now assumed a more definite and marked
     character, from being formed into a system. And these remarks would
     be more fully seen were we to quote the numerous passages in which
     the expressions of St. Paul are cited in allusion to it,
     particularly by Clement of Alexandria and Origen. Besides this very
     high and Divine character with which Origen invests the practice, he
     at times refers it to a principle of natural modesty, such as nature
     has clearly given us in many instances for our protection. Nor is
     this incidental mode of connecting this system of the Church with
     our LORD'S example at all confined to Origen, but frequent among
     other early writers; thus St. Augustine speaking of where it is said
     that many "believed in CHRIST, but He trusted not Himself to them,"
     says that "it is the same with the catechumens; they believe but are
     not admitted to the Eucharist." The practice is immediately applied
     as illustrating our SAVIOUR'S conduct. In another passage, St.
     Augustine speaks of himself as doubting how to act up this as a
     known and acknowledged duty. In his Enarration on Psalm 39, he
     applies to himself the words, "I said, I will take heed to my ways
     that I offend not in my tongue. I will keep my mouth as it were with
     a bridle while the ungodly is in my sight. I held my tongue and
     spake nothing: I kept silence, yea, even from good words, but it was
     pain and grief to me." He applies this passage to his own great
     difficulties and perplexities on this subject of reserve; that on
     the one hand he might not offend by an undue display of holy things
     so contrary both to Divine and Apostolic precept. For our LORD and
     St. Paul, he says, held back even from those who were exceedingly
     eager to learn those spiritual truths which were beyond them; and
     his advice to his hearer is, "Be not hastening to hear what you
     cannot receive, but improve in holiness that you may receive it." On
     the other hand, he was anxious and struggling with the difficulty
     arising from the opposite duty, as one "set over the LORD'S
     household to give them their meat in due season." "Positus," he
     says, "in hâc fluctuatione dicendi et tacendi; perclitans ne
     projiciat margaritas ante porcos; periclitans ne non eroget cibaria
     conservis."

     If St. Augustine here speaks of this rule of reserve as a duty in
     individuals, Origen also speaks of it as a necessary circumstance in
     good men, inasmuch as the world cannot understand them. In the
     following passage He thus beautifully expresses it: "As the solar
     ray affects the countenance of him who looks to the sun, and it is
     not possible for any one to stand in the sun, and not himself to
     partake of its light; so must we suppose that he will become a
     partaker of GOD, who shall have meditated on the law of the Divine
     Word, and shall have given up his mind to become acquainted with
     GOD." "I suppose that this secret is declared in Exodus, when the
     countenance of Moses, after he had familiarly conversed with GOD,
     was so glorified, that the children of Israel were not able
     stedfastly to look upon the glory of it, and on this account he who
     attended on GOD took a veil to converse with His people. Thus every
     soul which is given up to GOD, and hath entered into His truth,
     beyond what is known to the many, and hath partaken of His Divinity,
     surpasses the comprehension of the multitude, so that it assumes a
     veil in order to direct inferiors, by discoursing on matters level
     to their comprehensions.

    7. Catholic mode of interpreting Scripture founded on this principle.

     Now the characteristic of truth is consistency and coherence, and
     mutual adaptation and relation in its various parts and
     developments; so that principles, which appear to have no immediate
     connexion in their origin and formation, are found when pursued to
     their consequences mutually to correspond with and imply each other:
     as cause and effect, as concave and convex in a circle, or as
     dependent parts of one great whole. Besides this practice of the
     secret discipline, there is another principle, almost, if not quite,
     universal in the Ancient Church, which is also equally opposed to
     modern opinion. I allude to that general custom among the Fathers of
     supposing that Scripture contains latent mysterious meaning beyond
     the letter, the apprehension of which is disclosed to a faithful
     life. And this practice, though in itself distinct, does in fact run
     up into that of the Disciplina Arcani, analogously to the way, in
     which miracles and parables are found to run up into each other as
     indications of one law. Both may be considered as a different
     development of the same principle. In both we have, what has been
     observed in the former part, "Wisdom going about seeking those that
     are worthy of her, to whom she may reveal her secrets." And a
     circumstance which particularly bears upon the present inquiry is
     this, that in speaking on this subject, as well as on the system we
     have before spoken of, ancient writers do incidentally illustrate or
     enforce their observations by the example of our LORD'S dealing with
     mankind.

     Now this mode of interpretation is so general in the Ancient Church
     that something of the kind may be considered as the characteristic
     difference between the interpretation of Catholic Christians and
     those of heretical teachers; that the latter lower and bring down
     the senses of Scripture as if they were mere human words, while the
     former consider the words of Divine truth to contain greater
     meanings than we can fathom; and therefore amplify and extend their
     significations as if they were advancing onward, (like the
     interpretations and various fulfilments of prophecy,) into deeper
     and higher meanings, till lost in ever increasing, and at length
     infinite light and greatness, beyond what the limited view of man is
     capable of pursuing.

        8. High authority for this mode of Scriptural interpretation.

     Nor does it appear at all unreasonable beforehand-before considering
     it as a matter of fact, that this should be the case: I mean that
     the Divine Word should be in its secret range thus vast and
     comprehensive, as the shadow of the heavens in still and deep
     waters. In things natural, GOD has not only disclosed to us, by
     experience and natural light, the mode of tilling the earth and all
     other things necessary for the support of our animal life and human
     comforts, but he has also afforded us some knowledge of the heavenly
     bodies; He has withdrawn the veil and opened something of the
     mysterious vastness, and ways, and order of things celestial. And in
     disclosing these, there is of course some great design of His
     Providence towards men; whether to humble them by showing something
     of the vastness of His power, or to raise and spiritualize their
     minds by the contemplation of it. Why, therefore, may He not in like
     manner in His word, besides that knowledge and practical wisdom,
     information, and warning, which is more in the letter of Holy
     Scripture as a lantern unto our feet-why may there not be also
     concealed and laid up something of the vastness and infinity of His
     counsels, things Divine and spiritual, which He may also open and
     reveal to men to carry on the purposes of His wisdom, and of their
     probation? In attempting too far to dive into it, to illustrate and
     apprehend its meanings, fallible men may of course greatly err from
     time to time, though the general principle on which they set out may
     be nevertheless from the SPIRIT of truth. Thus fallible men have
     erred and do err in their attempts to explain the heavenly bodies;
     and yet they may be right in the notion of the order and the
     vastness of the material heavens, though wrong in their particular
     explanations; and if they have erred, it has been in the littleness
     and unworthiness of their conceptions; the higher their conceptions
     have been, the more have they approached to the sublimity and
     infinity of GOD'S works.

     But it might be said, that this mode of interpretation has arisen
     from the nature of the Hebrew language, in which each word contains
     many deep and ulterior meanings, which may be considered as types of
     each other. But this observation will, in fact, lead us to the same
     conclusion of its Divine character; it is indeed only going further
     into the subject, sending us back one step more in tracing the chain
     which reaches from GOD'S throne. For if the sacred language which
     the Almighty has chosen in order to reveal Himself to mankind is of
     this typical nature, it proves that such is the language of GOD;
     that in numerous analogies and resemblances, differing in time,
     importance and extent, but with one drift and scope, He is used to
     speak to us, blending figure with word spoken.

     But when we come to the matter of fact as proved by the Scriptures
     themselves, the principle itself must be allowed as right, whatever
     limitations men may prescribe to the application or use of it. It is
     very evident how much our blessed LORD has Himself pointed out to us
     these deep and latent meanings, where we could not otherwise have
     ventured to suppose them to exist; as, for instance, in the sign of
     the prophet Jonah, and the lifting up of the serpent in the
     wilderness. And in almost all His references to the Old Testament,
     our LORD has led us to seek for mines of secret information
     disclosed to the eye of Faith beyond the letter.

     And it is to be observed that Scripture has not generally pointed
     out to us those instances in which an allegorical interpretation is
     most obvious and important, but often those in which it is less so;
     as if thereby, it rather suggested to us a general law, than
     afforded any direction respecting its limit and extent. If from our
     LORD'S own example we pass to the writings of St. Paul, it is
     needless to mention the numerous striking instances in which he has
     unfolded to us the spiritual and high senses of the Old Testament.
     And passing from Apostles to Apostolical writers, we find the same
     system acknowledged, as it were incidentally, but almost
     universally. To say nothing of Barnabas's Epistle, and its peculiar
     character in this respect, which must have great weight as being the
     testimony of primitive antiquity, even though it be not apostolical,
     nor written by the companion of St. Paul, who has been called the
     great mustagwgoV. Even Clement of Rome, though his Epistle does not
     much admit of such allusions, yet has at least one remarkable
     instance of the kind, where he speaks of the scarlet thread held out
     by the harlot Rahab, as conveying a sign of "the blood of our LORD,
     by which there is redemption to all who trust and hope in GOD."

     With regard therefore to this system of interpretation, we have in
     many instances Divine authority for it; and beyond where we have
     this authority, it might be thought that we have no sanction for
     such applications and explanations: in which case, it would be
     similar to the moral principles or doctrines that are deduced from
     Holy Scripture, which may be said to flow more or less clearly from
     the Word itself, and to be supported by analogy, natural
     consequence, or agreement with other passages; and these to be
     decided by the judgment of individuals, and that natural weight of
     authority which we allow to be due to the opinions of great and good
     men. But further than this, as with regard to moral principles of
     doctrine, so also with respect to such particular interpretations,
     it is perhaps the case, (as it has been well observed,) that for
     some of them there may be such a concurrent testimony in early and
     distinct Churches as to amount to a Catholic consent, which consent
     would of course have the same kind of sacred authority as would
     attend a similar agreement with respect to doctrine.

     But all that is here required to be proved is, first that such a
     mode of interpretation is that of the Universal Church, and
     secondly, that it is implied thereby that it is GOD'S mode of
     dealing with mankind. And here again, as in the case of the
     Disciplina, the argument does not depend upon any vindication of the
     manner in which it may have been pursued in some cases. Even were it
     granted that the interpretations of Origen, Ambrose, and others were
     fanciful and untenable, as perhaps they sometimes are, yet it cannot
     be supposed that they were wrong in the general principle of
     interpretation, but in the effort of human understanding to fathom
     the depths of Divine wisdom in the particular instance. There may be
     much beyond the letter, but it may be presumption in uninspired man
     to say what it is,-"Let GOD be true but every man a liar."
     Sufficient for our purpose it is that such a method of considering
     Holy Writ is Catholic, not to say Apostolical and Divine.

             9. Reverence and caution observable in the Fathers.

     The mode in which it is spoken of by so early a writer as St.
     Irenæus, is important; he is condemning fanciful expositions of the
     parables, proving thereby that it was an error that age was liable
     to, and, in so doing, thoroughly acknowledges the principle in the
     light in which we consider it, viz., that this knowledge is not to
     be attained by mere natural acuteness or critical sagacity, that GOD
     is throughout the teacher, that man is to wait on and reverently
     learn of Him. "Those things," he says, "in being most fully assured
     that the Scriptures are perfect, for they are spoken of by the WORD
     of GOD and His SPIRIT, but we as the last and the least in His Word
     and in His SPIRIT, must need His help for the knowledge of those
     mysteries. And it is not to be wondered as it in things spiritual
     and heavenly, and which are the subjects of Revelation, this should
     be the case, since even in those things which are before our feet
     (such as are in the natural creation, which are handled and seen by
     us and dwell about us) many things escape our knowledge, and these
     we commit to GOD." After mentioning some particulars of this kind in
     the natural world, he says, "If therefore in the natural creation
     some things are laid up with GOD, and some come to our knowledge,
     where is the difficulty in supposing this to be the case, in those
     things which we seek to know in Scripture, since all the Scriptures
     are spiritual, and that some things according to the grace of GOD we
     should explain, and that others should be laid up with Him. So that
     GOD should be throughout the teacher, and man throughout should be
     learning of Him." "If therefore in the manner which I have mentioned
     we will lay up some of our questions with GOD, we shall persevere in
     maintaining our faith, and continue without danger, and find all
     Scripture which GOD has given us, to be in harmony. The parables
     will harmonize with things spoken openly, and things spoken openly
     explain the parables, and in variety of statements we shall perceive
     within us but a multiplicity of voices, combining together to form
     one accordant and harmonious melody."

     This passage serves very admirably to set before us the very
     reverent and holy manner in which the Fathers looked on this
     principle of interpretation: and St. Augustine may speak for another
     age, in thoughts very similar, and alike expressive of the general
     tone of feeling in the Ancient Church on this subject. "Expect not,"
     he says, "to hear from us those things which the LORD was then
     unwilling to say to His disciples, for as yet they could not bear
     them: but rather advance in charity, which is diffused in your
     hearts through the HOLY SPIRIT which is given you; that, being
     fervent in spirit and loving spiritual things, ye may be able to
     discern the spiritual light and spiritual voice which men cannot
     bear; not by any sign appearing unto your bodily eyes, nor by any
     sound which is heard by bodily ears, but by the inward sight and
     hearing. For that is not loved which is altogether unknown. But when
     that is loved which is known in howsoever small a part, then by that
     very love itself it is effected, that it should be better and more
     fully known. If therefore ye advance in charity, which the HOLY
     SPIRIT sheds in your heart, He will teach you all truth:" "not
     altogether in this life," he afterwards adds, "but so far in this
     life as shall be a pledge of fulness hereafter." Thus, it is well
     known, St. Augustine and others often speak. All imply a certain
     reverential sobriety to be most needful in approaching GOD'S word,
     lest we obtain harm instead of benefit thereby. In another passage,
     the same writer has occasion to condemn, like St. Irenæus, those who
     otherwise attempted that knowledge. "The Evangelical Sacraments," he
     says, "which are signified in the sayings and actions of our LORD
     JESUS CHRIST, are not open to all, and some by interpreting them
     with too little diligence, and too little soberness, obtain
     oftentimes destruction instead of safety, and error instead of the
     knowledge of truth." In another place St. Augustine speaks to the
     same effect. "By many," he says, "and manifold obscurities and
     ambiguities are they deceived who read carelessly, conceiving one
     thing for another; but in some places they find not enough even to
     suggest false surmises: so obscurely do some things envelop
     themselves in thickest darkness. All of which, I doubt not, is a
     Divine provision, in order to subdue pride by labour, and to recall
     the intellect from its fastidiousness, to which those things
     generally appear mean which are easily investigated." And again,
     "Now no one doubts that both objects become known to us with greater
     delight by means of similitudes, and things that are sought for with
     some difficulty are discovered with more pleasure. Magnificently
     therefore, and healthfully for us hath the HOLY SPIRIT so adapted
     the sacred Scriptures, as to satisfy our hunger by passages more
     manifest, and by those that are more obscure to prevent
     fastidiousness. For generally out of those obscurities nothing is
     elicited but is elsewhere more plainly spoken."

            10. Reserve in revelation not confined to GOD'S Word.

     But the principle upon which ancient writers explain Scripture they
     do not apply to that alone, but to all the ways of GOD, and
     frequently connect this also with our LORD'S conduct. It is not Holy
     Writ only with them, but the visible creation also, and natural
     providence, and sacramental mysteries, which are the veils of
     Divinity, through which and by which the ALMIGHTY speaks darkly to
     His creatures, concealing or disclosing Himself as they are found
     worthy. The words, by which they speak of these, might be applied
     also to what has been stated of our SAVIOUR'S conduct when
     manifested in the flesh.

     Thus Chrysostom, in speaking of the Christian mysteries, applies to
     them words which he might at another time use of Holy Scripture, or
     of our LORD as seen through the veil of the flesh, in which alone He
     can be discerned by a purified sense enlightened from above.

     "I hear," he says, "of the body of CHRIST, the unbeliever
     understands this in one way, and I in another. He knows not what he
     sees, as children when they see a book and cannot read. He who can
     read will find laid up in the letters a great power, whole lives and
     histories. He who cannot will hear a voice, and will converse with
     one at a distance, and again by means of letters, will speak to whom
     he wishes. So it is with the mysteries, the unbelieving in hearing
     hear not; but the believers, by the experience which they derive
     from the HOLY SPIRIT, see the power laid up and contained in them."

     The illustration which Chrysostom here makes use of is not unlike an
     expression of Origen's, who, in reply to Celsus who says that he
     knew the Christian Religion, observes, as well as might a person
     conversant with the common people of Egypt, and who knew the
     hieroglyphical figures, say he understood the wisdom of the
     Egyptians.

     And it may bring the analogy more closely home to us to observe,
     that these Catholic writers, in thus speaking, will often introduce
     the very expression of it being our LORD Himself who is thus
     manifesting Himself therein to the eye of faith; or veiling His
     glories from us, and withdrawing Himself from the multitude, or the
     thoughtless and indifferent inquirer. "Is it not the case," says St.
     Ambrose "that when we think over a passage in Scripture, in vain
     endeavouring to gain some explanation for it, while we are doubting
     and seeking, suddenly the most exalted doctrines seem to rise, as it
     were over the mountains before us, then over the hills He (i.e.
     CHRIST) appears unto us, and enlightens our minds, and pours into
     our understanding the knowledge of that which it had appeared
     difficult to comprehend. Therefore the WORD which was absent now
     becomes present in our minds. And again, when any thing appears to
     us rather obscure, the WORD is as it were withdrawn, and we long and
     look for His return, as of one gone away." In like manner does
     Augustine speak of the same great and all-extensive principle under
     a new analogy, that of the visible creation. Here also is it
     considered that we have "the presence of a GOD who hideth Himself,"
     and indications that He is desirous to disclose Himself through that
     language, as far as we are able to bear it; in the same manner, as
     through the letter of the written Scriptures we behold Him as it
     were through a veil. "For we behold," He says, "the ample fabric of
     the universe containing the earth and heavens and all things that
     are therein. And from the greatness and beauty of this fabric the
     inestimable greatness and beauty of the Framer Himself, whom
     although as yet we know not, yet even now we love. For inasmuch as
     we cannot now behold Him by the purity of our hearts, He hath not
     ceased to set before our eyes His works, that seeing what we can, we
     may love: and may be thought worthy for that love itself at some
     time to behold that which we see not. But in all things that He hath
     spoken unto us (in His written Word) we must seek for the spiritual
     meaning, to ascertain which your desires in the name of CHRIST will
     assist us. By which, as by invisible hands, ye know at the invisible
     gate, that invisibly it may open to us, and ye invisibly may enter
     in, and invisibly be healed."

     St. Cyril of Jerusalem carries on the same principle beyond the
     bounds of the visible creation, saying that in the invisible world
     also the Godhead is withdrawn from sight excepting so far as the SON
     may reveal; in a very beautiful and sublime passage, He intimates
     that not only to different states of men, in exact proportion to a
     certain capability of receiving it, but to all created beings and
     the angels of Heaven, the SON reveals the FATHER, kaq o ekastoV
     cwrei. He says that "although it be written that the angels behold
     the face of my FATHER, which is in heaven, yet even they see Him not
     as He is GOD, but only so far as they are capable of beholding Him.
     For JESUS Himself hath told us, 'No one hath seen the FATHER, but He
     who is of GOD, He hath seen the FATHER.' Angels therefore behold as
     far as they can, and thrones and dominions more than they; yet see
     not all His Majesty; they see as far as they are able to do, and as
     far as for them is needful. Together with the SON, so the HOLY
     SPIRIT also knoweth the FATHER. For no one knoweth the FATHER but
     the SON, and he to whom the SON shall have revealed Him. He seeth as
     is meet, and revealeth together with the SPIRIT and through the
     SPIRIT, according as each can contain GOD."

     So variously and extensively, in sense so vast and sublime, do the
     Fathers acknowledge all the principles that we maintain, of the law
     by which GOD imparts the knowledge of Himself.

         11. Origen's mode of considering the subject, as moral, not
                                intellectual.

     If again we come to Origen, who dwells so much on the latent senses
     of Scripture, we shall find that he speaks of them as means which he
     considers that GOD has of trying and teaching us, by a sort of
     reserve and gradual disclosure. This he takes for granted in all his
     commentaries: his common allusion is of higher meanings being
     revealed unto the perfect: the Bible is, with him, the field in
     which the unsearchable riches which are in CHRIST are the hidden
     treasure: its Divine precepts are the goodly pearls, but there is
     one of great price, and this is the secret knowledge of CHRIST. It
     is like an instrument in which the music is asleep, until it is
     brought out by a skilful hand, such as that of the Psalmist of
     Israel, when all Scripture is found in perfect harmony, at the sound
     of which the evil spirit flies: thus he speaks in his Commentaries.
     But we should do him injustice to suppose that he would consider
     Scripture, on that account, a sealed book to those unlearned in the
     school of CHRIST. In his letter to Gregory, he says, "that the chief
     means to enter into the secret sense of Scripture is to knock at the
     door by prayer." In another place, he exhorts those who find
     difficulties in Scripture, not to despair, or be weary in reading.
     "For," he says, "as incantations have a certain natural power, so
     that he that understands them not yet derives something from them
     according to the character of the sounds, whether it be to his hurt,
     or the healing of his body or soul; so let him understand that more
     powerful than any incantations are the words of Divine Scripture."

     With observations of this kind respecting the secret sense of
     Scripture, he blends in other places some references to our LORD'S
     own teaching. Thus, in another place, speaking of the depth of
     wisdom contained in St. Paul's teaching, he says, "I will say
     nothing at present on all those things which throughout the Gospels
     are worthy of observation. Each of these passages contains much
     wisdom, such as is difficult of comprehension, not only to the
     multitude, but also to some persons of understanding, on account of
     the very profound meaning of the parables, which JESUS spake to
     those who were without: keeping the clear exposition of them for
     those who were more advanced in spiritual discernment, and who came
     to Him privately in the house. He who has perceived it, cannot but
     be full of admiration at the import of those expressions by which
     some are called those without, and others, those in the houses. And
     again, who would not be astonished at the frequent transitions of
     JESUS, if he be able to follow them? how for certain discourses or
     actions, or in order to His own transfiguration, He went up into a
     mountain. And how below He healed the sick, and such as were not
     able to ascend where His disciples were."

     And in another place, where he is speaking to the same effect, viz.
     that JESUS explained all things privately to His disciples, such as
     He deemed more worthy than others of Heavenly wisdom,-he remarks
     that "Paul, in the account of gifts which are bestowed of GOD, puts
     wisdom in the first place, and knowledge the next in order, and
     faith in the third and lower place." This principle, indeed,
     thoroughly imbues all the works of this great writer. Whatever may
     have been his errors, and however rash some of his speculations, yet
     one cannot but be impressed at the deep and broad views which he
     discloses to us in Scripture, although they may be such as it is
     beyond man to follow, and he may have erred in attempting it. Still,
     though we may not on some occasions approve of them in the
     particular, yet he leaves a general sacred impression that in
     Scripture we are treading on holy ground.

     From his very remarkable depth of thought and extensive insight into
     the wonders of nature and Revelation, he seems to have arrived at a
     sense of human ignorance. With the same vast and comprehensive view
     of the ways of Providence with our own great Butler, and a similar
     devotional piety, he seems to have wanted his practical sense and
     sobriety of judgment, and by a keen imagination to have been tempted
     to venture on those depths, which perhaps neither man nor angel is
     permitted to explore: yet, perhaps there is no writer who more
     constantly reminds us of the incompetency of the natural man to
     understand the mysteries of GOD. Thus, to use his own words, he says
     in his work against Celsus, "In the 17th Psalm it is said of God,
     after the Hebrew manner of speaking, that 'He hath made darkness His
     secret place,' to signify how unknown are worthy conceptions of GOD,
     who hath concealed Himself as it were in darkness, from those who
     are unable to bear the brightness of His knowledge, nor able to
     behold Him. Partly on account of the impurity of men's minds who are
     encompassed with infirmity, and partly from a natural incapability
     of understanding GOD. And to signify how few among mankind are found
     capable of the knowledge of GOD, Moses is described to have entered
     into the darkness in which GOD was. And again, Moses also shall
     approach unto GOD, and the rest shall not approach. And the Prophet,
     that he might set forth how deep are the doctrines which are
     concerning GOD, and which cannot be penetrated by them who have not
     that SPIRIT of GOD, which searcheth all things, even the deep things
     of GOD, hath spoken of His being "covered with the deep like as with
     a garment." And moreover, our SAVIOUR and LORD, the WORD of GOD,
     hath signified the greatness of the knowledge of the FATHER, that
     first of all it is worthily apprehended by Himself alone: secondly,
     by those whom the WORD shall illuminate with His guidance: when He
     says, 'No one knoweth the FATHER, but the SON, and he to whom the
     SON shall reveal Him.' He it is that dispelleth the darkness which
     the FATHER hath made His hiding place."

     The same extraordinary writer in another passage opens a very
     sublime and valuable sentiment, by introducing the analogy of GOD'S
     natural Providence to explain this law of the Scriptures, which so
     often wraps up mysterious wisdom in difficulties of thought of
     expression.

     "If," says he, speaking of the earnest and attentive reading of
     Scripture, "if, in particular places, to the unlearned there may
     occur sentiments which do not seem to surpass the wisdom of man,
     this is nothing to be wondered at: for thus in the works of that
     Providence which embraces all the world, some things appear more
     evidently the works of Divine superintendence, but in others this
     forethought is so concealed, as to afford occasion for unbelief in
     that GOD who governs all things by an unspeakable contrivance and
     power. For the hand and design of an all-disposing Governor is not
     so apparent in things on the earth, as it is in the sun, and the
     moon, and the stars. And it is not so manifest in human
     contingencies, as it is in the souls and bodies of living creatures;
     the object and design being strongly discernible to those who trace
     these things, concerning the impulses, instincts, and natures of
     animals, and the structure of their bodies. But, as in the case of
     those who have once rightly perceived this Providence, their faith
     in that Providence is not lessened on account of things which they
     understand not; so neither should the just sense of that Divinity,
     which extends throughout the whole of Scripture, suffer any
     diminution in our regard, on account of our not being able, from our
     own weakness, to perceive the hidden lustre of its doctrines in some
     particular passages, where it is concealed by homely and despised
     phrase."

      12. The subject discussed at length by St. Clement of Alexandria.

     Nothing has been yet said of Clement of Alexandria, and indeed
     little of the Alexandrian school, as the object has been rather to
     show the general consent of the Fathers than to bring forward the
     agreement of any one in particular with ourselves. Nor, indeed, was
     the writer at all aware till he had fully drawn out this subject
     himself, and finished the Scripture proof, that St. Clement of
     Alexandria, had philosophically discussed the same at great length
     in the fifth and sixth chapters of his Stromata. He alludes to it as
     the Scriptural mode of instruction throughout, and maintains, by
     many curious instances, that this reserve in communicating moral and
     religious truth was observed by all the heathen philosophers. He
     speaks of sacred knowledge progressively disclosing itself in this
     manner. "The violent," he says, "take the kingdom by force, offering
     violence not in contentious disputations, but by the persevering
     power of an upright life, and prayers 'without ceasing,' having worn
     out the stains of their former sins. To him," he says, "who walks
     according to the word, the first step towards discipline is the
     perception of his own ignorance. One who hath been ignorant, hath
     sought, and seeking, hath found the teacher; having found, he hath
     believed; and believing, hath hoped; and hoping in Him he loves Him;
     and loving, becomes assimilated into the object of his love;
     labouring to become that which he first hath loved."

     In the same book he says, that, "as the generality of people are not
     taken by the intrinsic lustre of wisdom and justice, nor value them
     according to truth, but to some accidental pleasure they may
     derive;" "therefore by some mode of concealment, truly divine and
     needful for us, the purely sacred Word is laid up in the secret
     shrine of truth. Such the Egyptians indicated by the adyta, and the
     Hebrews signified by the veil, which they alone might enter into who
     were consecrated to GOD, who were to have their hearts circumcised
     from other affections on account of the love of GOD alone."

     He then shows in numerous instances, how at all times the truth had
     been concealed, by enigmas, by signs and symbols, by allegories and
     metaphors, by dubious oracles, and to all this he applies the words
     of Isaiah, "I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden
     riches of the secret places, that they may know that I am the LORD;"
     after showing many instances in which he thinks there was secret
     knowledge in the laws of the Old Testament, he shows it was so in
     the hieroglyphics of Egypt, in many expressions of Plato, in the
     Pythagorean mysteries, in the Platonic and Epicurean secrets, in the
     esoteric and exoteric doctrines of Aristotle, in the fictions of
     ancient poets. He says that the philosophers tried the sincerity of
     their hearers in their lives before they communicated divine
     knowledge to them. And besides, he says that, "through some sort of
     a veil truth itself appears greater and more venerable, like fruits
     which shine through water, and forms which are half concealed.
     Moreover when different modes of apprehension are held forth, the
     ignorant is deceived, the wise only understands."

     Of our own Scripture, he says in another place, it is plainly
     declared in the Psalms, that it is written in parables: "I will open
     my mouth in a parable," &c. And the illustrious Apostle speaks to
     the same effect: "but we speak wisdom among them that are perfect,
     but not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world,
     which come to naught, but we speak in a mystery the hidden wisdom of
     GOD. Which none of the princes of this world knew; for, had they
     known it, they would not have crucified the LORD of Glory."

     He often alludes to St. Paul as observing this rule of reserve,
     keeping, he says, to the prophetical and truly ancient mode of
     concealment (as in 1 Cor. ii. 6, 7; iii. 1, 2, 3): and he shows that
     St. Paul has, in numerous places, spoken of its being usual in
     Scripture thus to veil the truth (as in Eph. iii. 3, 4, 5; Col i. 9,
     10, 11 and 25, 26, 27; 1 Cor. iii. 10; viii. 7; and where he says to
     the Hebrews that, for the time, they ought to have known,
     considering how long they had had the Old Testament.

     It is difficult to do more than barely allude to what St. Clement
     says on a subject which he enters into so fully. In the sixth book,
     he applies the same, in some degree, to our SAVIOUR'S teaching:
     "Neither prophecy," he says, "nor our SAVIOUR Himself, promulgated
     the divine mysteries in a manner that they might be easily
     apprehended by all persons, but discoursed in parables. Certainly,
     the Apostles say concerning the LORD, 'that He spake all things in
     parables, and without a parable spake He not unto them;' and even in
     the Law and Prophets," he adds, "it was He that spake to them in
     parables."

     He thus explains the reason of this reserve in Scripture, and
     continues, "For many causes, therefore, the Scripture conceals its
     full import. First of all, that we may be given to inquiry, and
     watchful in the discovery of saving words. In the next place,
     because it was not good for all to understand the saving truths of
     the HOLY GHOST, lest they should be injured thereby,

     if they received otherwise what was intended for their salvation.
     Therefore it is, that those holy mysteries which are reserved for
     the elect, and for those who are from their faith judged worthy of
     knowledge, are concealed by parables. For such is the style of
     Scripture; wherefore our LORD also, being not of this world, yet
     came among men as if He were of this world; for He sustained the
     whole of (human) virtue, and was about to raise man, who had his
     dwelling here, to things high and spiritual, on from one world to
     another. Therefore, He hath made use of a metaphorical mode of
     Scripture, for such is a parable. A saying which is not itself the
     thing intended, but like it, and leading to it, and to the truth,
     him that understands it. Or, as some say, a mode of speech, which,
     by means of other subjects, brings forward the thing intended with
     power and effect. The whole economy of GOD, as it is exists in the
     Prophecies concerning our LORD, is a parable to those who did not
     know the truth." He then proceeds to say, that not the prophets
     only, but the disciples of our LORD, who preached the word after His
     death, used proverbs. And he afterwards adds to these observations:
     "For, as truth does not belong to all, it is concealed in various
     ways, and makes the light to arise on those only who are initiated
     in the mysteries of knowledge, and, on account of the love of it,
     seek the truth."

      13. The Testimony of the Ancient Church to the doctrine of Christ
                                 crucified.

     Now, all that has been adduced from the Fathers goes to establish
     this point, (independently of others,) that all Divine and saving
     knowledge is derived by pains on the part of man, and requires of
     preparation of the heart; this is implied by both the two subjects
     which have been discussed, the systematic discipline of the reserve,
     and also that of the secret senses of Scripture revealed only to
     good men. It is implied by all their modes of speaking of it. All
     these things suppose some method of discipline necessary to
     ascertain the truth: so that the will and the understanding should
     both be exercised at once. "The very method of all doctrine," says
     St. Augustine, "being partly most open, and partly by similitudes,
     in words, in deed, in sacraments, adapted to all the instruction,
     and all the exercise of the soul, serves as a method of discipline
     for the reason. For both is the unfolding of mysteries directed to
     those things which are spoken most openly; and, if these were only
     such things as are most easily understood, truth would neither be
     sought for with study, nor be discovered with delight. If in the
     Scriptures there were no sacraments, and if in the sacraments there
     were not symbols of truth, action and knowledge would not be
     sufficiently united. But now piety begins in fear, and is perfected
     in love."

     And the whole of this subject, respecting the difficulty of arriving
     at Divine knowledge, will also bear upon another great and essential
     principle, which has been alluded to in the former treatise;
     although it be but one and a partial development of it, viz. that
     CHRIST crucified is the first doctrine taught,-the knowledge of our
     LORD'S Divinity, the last men come to learn; that the study of the
     Cross of CHRIST, implying the humiliation of the natural man, leads
     to the living and practical sense of His Atonement; that through the
     humanity and sufferings of our LORD, men are brought to an union
     with the Godhead; that we cannot come to CHRIST but by bearing the
     Cross after Him, by which, as St. Bernard says, we are made to
     partake of that anointing which goeth forth from Him. The Fathers
     seem always to imply that the secrets of CHRIST'S kingdom are
     obtained only by a consistent course of self-denying obedience; that
     a knowledge of these things is not conveyed by mere words, nor is a
     matter of excited emotion, but is a practical knowledge of the
     heart, obtained more and more by self-renouncing duties of prayer
     and the like; and thus it is, that, by the Cross of CHRIST, we are
     brought to Him, and led on to the knowledge of GOD. So that this
     higher degree of faith "goeth not forth but by prayer and fasting."
     This is often either explicitly stated, or incidentally implied by
     Origen and others. St. Augustine sets it forth in the following
     beautiful and figurative passage. He compares the world to a sea
     that we must cross before we can arrive at the stable shore. He
     says, that "GOD has afforded the plank or wood by which we may reach
     the shore, and that wood is the Cross of CHRIST. For no one can pass
     over this sea, unless carried on the Cross of CHRIST. One who has no
     eyes to see embraces this Cross; and while from afar he knows not
     whither he is to go, if he looses not his hold on this wood, He will
     bear him to it." "This," he says, "I would wish to instil into your
     hearts, that, if you will live piously, and as a Christian cling to
     CHRIST in that which He has been made for us, you may arrive at Him
     in what he is and hath been in Himself." "It were better not to
     perceive in the understanding that which He is, if notwithstanding
     we adhere to the Cross of CHRIST, than to see Him in the
     understanding, and to despise the Cross of CHRIST. It were, indeed,
     best of all that that might be beheld to which we are going, and
     that he goeth might cling to that which should bear him thither."
     "And this hath been the case with those who are enlightened with
     higher degrees of faith. They have seen the shore from afar, and, in
     order to arrive at it, have loosed not their hold of the Cross of
     CHRIST, nor despised His humility. But those little ones who cannot
     understand this, if they depart not from the Cross of CHRIST, His
     Passion, and His Resurrection, they are carried by this ship to that
     which they behold not; and they who behold it arrive also thither in
     the same ship." "And why was He crucified? because the wood of His
     humility was necessary for thee. Thou wert swollen with pride, and
     cast far away from thy country. Thy way was intercepted by the waves
     of this world, and thou hadst no means to pass over to thy country,
     unless carried by the wood. Be carried in the ship, on this wood;
     believe in the Crucified, and thou shalt arrive thither. He was
     crucified for thee, that He might teach thee humility; and because
     if He had come as GOD, He would not have been acknowledged. For He
     neither cometh nor goeth in that He is GOD, inasmuch as He is every
     where present, and contained by no place. What, therefore, was His
     coming, but His appearing as Man."

     Such is the doctrine of the cross as taught by the Ancient Church,
     and confirmed by the according testimony of all Scripture; so far as
     we are able to trace a principle, which must be inconceivably vast,
     and incomprehensible in its nature and extent.

       14. The practice and principle of the Ancient Church perfectly
                      analogous to our LORD'S example.

     The evidence therefore of Catholic Antiquity affords the fullest and
     most complete confirmation, in every point of principle and detail,
     to all that has been said in the former treatise respecting the
     conduct of our LORD when seen in the flesh. And as our LORD has
     vouchsafed His presence to be with His Church, and the condition of
     that His presence is union and agreement; therefore in this
     concurrent acknowledgment to this principle we have again in the
     eyes of Faith our LORD'S presence, His spiritual as before His
     bodily presence. There is a wonderful analogy in all GOD'S dealings
     with mankind; in the conclusion of Part II. (Tract No. 80.) it was
     observed that a perfect parallel might be found throughout our moral
     nature, wherein He who is "the light which lighteth every man that
     cometh into the world" discloses Himself. The same exact parallel
     may now be shown as He is revealed in His Church. (And that
     independently of the occasional testimony which the foregoing
     extracts bear to the conduct of our LORD having been as we describe,
     in the way of historical allusion to the fact.)

     First of all, as our LORD in the flesh concealed His divinity and
     His miracles, so did the Disciplina Arcani of the early Church do
     the same. It was that high doctrine that this system concealed, and
     the nature of those Sacraments, which are as it were a continued
     miracle in His Church.

     Secondly, it appears that, as our LORD spake by parable things hard
     to be understood t o the multitude, and explained them to His chosen
     disciples, so does the Catholic and Primitive mode of interpreting
     Scripture imply that all the Holy Word is like a parable, containing
     within it Divine wisdom, such as is disclosed to the faithful and
     good Christian.-That, if we are inclined to feel surprised at our
     LORD'S not making Himself publicly known to His enemies in His power
     and wisdom, the early Church suffered herself to be under the same
     obloquy and misinterpretation among heathens, who were singularly
     ignorant of the nature of Christianity.-That, as our LORD implied
     that there was great and increasing danger to those who knew His
     will, so, in a manner quite different to our modern notions, do the
     Ancients imply, that great danger is to be apprehended from knowing
     the Gospels, and not acting suitably to that knowledge.-That, as the
     Gospels indicate throughout that the benefit conferred on every
     individual was exactly according to his faith, to the effort he made
     to ask, or to touch the hem of our SAVIOUR'S garment, so do the
     Fathers also teach that exactly according to the advancement of
     holiness of life, or the effort to advance, does CHRIST disclose the
     Eternal FATHER. That, as our LORD continually pointed out to natural
     objects, as conveying spiritual instruction and the Wisdom of
     GOD,-the birds as teaching filial confidence, the lilies of the
     field humility, the seed sown the nature of the eternal kingdom,-so
     do the Fathers speak of nature itself being also but a clothing, by
     which the ALMIGHTY was concealed from us, and revealed to those who
     read His works with faith. Finally, it would appear that, as the
     mortification of the Cross, and keeping the commandments, was our
     LORD'S teaching to all indiscriminately, and to those who were thus
     brought to Him that He made known His Divinity; so the object of the
     Disciplina Arcani was to effect this purpose, to procure a
     preparation of the heart previous to the imparting of the highest
     knowledge. That such is throughout the teaching of the Fathers, that
     the Doctrine of the Cross is among them one of extensive meaning,
     containing both the humiliation of the natural man, and in
     conjunction with it the knowledge of our LORD'S Divinity and
     Atonement.

                                   PART V.
         The Principle opposed to certain modern religious opinions.

            1. The nature of the objections which have been made.

     IT is very evident that the mere mention of such a principle as this
     subject indicates would immediately be met with the very strongest
     objections, before it is at all considered what is really meant by
     it. For let it be only suggested that Holy Scripture observes a rule
     of reserve, it may be answered at once by the strong and distinct
     contradiction, that the very word Revelation, directly declares the
     contrary; for is it not the very purpose of Scripture to communicate
     knowledge, not to conceal it? Does not, it may be said, its very
     graciousness depend on this very circumstance, that it reveals GOD'S
     goodness to His creatures, sitting in darkness and the shadow of
     death; as well might it be said that the very object of light is to
     darken, of communication to conceal. And this argument, when not
     thus stated, might be put at great length, by adducing passages of
     Holy Writ which declare expressly their very object,-that its
     purpose is to reveal. But all these texts, thus adduced, need not be
     separately referred to, or answered, as the whole argument which
     they are brought to prove runs up into, and is contained in, this
     very simple statement, viz., that Scripture is a system of
     revelation; to imply therefore that it is a system of reserve, is at
     once a palpable contradiction.

     And it is curious that the very texts, adduced in this mode of
     treating the subject, often imply or suggest all that we maintain.
     To refer to figurative language, it is said, does not GOD "deck
     Himself with light, like as with a garment?" Whereas this very
     expression conveys it; for does not a garment veil in some measure
     that which it clothes? is not that very light concealment? The
     revelations of GOD must ever be to mankind in one sense mysteries;
     whatever He makes known opens to view far more which we know not.
     Not light only, but the "cloud" also, is the especial emblem of the
     SPIRIT'S presence. "GOD is light," but "clouds and darkness," also
     "are round about Him;" "His pavilion is in dark waters, with thick
     clouds to cover Him." The comings and goings of our LORD are often
     significantly said to be with clouds; of Wisdom, that hath made her
     dwelling in Jacob, it is said, that she "dwells in high places, and
     her throne is in a cloudy pillar. She alone compasses the circuit of
     the heaven, and walks in the bottom of the deep."

     In the same manner of considering the subject, which we have spoken
     of, it might be said, that St. Paul, a person of all others the most
     laborious in preaching, had no other object than that of declaring
     the Gospel to the world; and what did the Gospel contain of good
     tidings, but the Atonement? It might further be stated, (though I am
     not aware it has been,) that a certain parrhsia, or openness in
     confessing the truth, was the very characteristic of St. Paul; it
     was the very object of his prayers; and his request, that it might
     be that of others for him, that this free utterance and boldness of
     speech might be given him. It was his boasting that he had thus
     spoken; he appealed to his converts that he had kept back nothing
     from them that it was expedient for them to know. "With great
     boldness to speak the truth," is one of the first gifts of the
     SPIRIT, as bestowed on the Apostles on the day of Pentecost; and
     "utterance" is numbered among the highest Christian graces. Now all
     this is not only granted, but also that if any thing here maintained
     would imply conduct different from that of the Apostle, would in any
     way derogate from the necessity of that parrhsia, it would of course
     be to be condemned in the strongest manner: of this there could be
     no doubt. It is needless to observe, that to withhold the truth from
     fear or false shame or pride is to be ashamed of CHRIST, to which
     that awful warning is denounced. Let it therefore, if necessary, be
     explicitly stated that if any conduct is supposed to be here taught
     different from that which would have been practised by St. Paul,
     among inspired Apostles, by St. Chrysostom, among Ancient Fathers,
     and by the earnest and single-hearted Bishop Wilson, in our own
     Church, such is far from being the intention of this treatise.

     With regard to that mode of argument alluded to, it is evident that
     in this manner Holy Scripture might be quoted against itself, and a
     principle based on one command utterly repudiated without
     consideration, on account of its supposed discrepancy with another
     apparently opposed to it. But in such cases, it is by reconciling
     and explaining such apparent contradictions that we obtain the most
     life-giving principles contained within them, and the most important
     rules of conduct; thus we derive them best and most safely. These
     difficulties are like the hardness of an external covering, which
     preserves and guards the most precious fruits of nature, and affords
     trouble at arriving at them. That this reserve is not incompatible
     with such a declaration of the truth is evident from this, that the
     two persons whom we should select as most remarkable for fulness and
     freedom of speech, St. Paul and St. Chrysostom, are equally as much
     so for their reserve. For the Fathers speak of its being most
     observable in St. Paul; and it is evident how it marks his writings,
     especially when he touches on the subject of mysteries. Perhaps the
     most obvious passage that could be adduced, which seems at first
     against this supposition, is that in which St. Paul says, he "had
     kept back nothing that was profitable;" and it is remarkable of this
     text, so often quoted against us, first of all, that it was spoken
     to the Ephesians, to whom we know that St. Paul beyond all others
     revealed spiritual knowledge; secondly, that they were not the
     Church at large, but the elders of Ephesus; and, thirdly, to show
     how differently the ancients viewed these things, on referring to
     St. Chrysostom, we find he marks as emphatic the word "that was
     profitable, twn sumferontwn; for there were some things," he says,
     "which it was not expedient for them to learn; to speak every thing
     would have been folly." And as to St. Chrysostom himself, he often
     refers to this reserve, as an acknowledged principle, and it is
     observable that though he sometimes shows he is fully impressed with
     the secret senses of Scripture, yet in his Homilies he seldom
     alludes to them.

                 2. On preaching the word most effectually.

     But with regard to that short and summary manner in which the whole
     subject may be got rid of by saying, that, notwithstanding all such
     speculative and abstract principles, it is nevertheless our duty to
     "preach the WORD" (i.e. CHRIST Crucified) "in season, and out of
     season," and woe be to us, if we do it not. Doubtless it is so; a
     "dispensation is committed" unto us, a talent which it would be
     death to hide. And to this it must be said, that the principle of
     Reserve which we mention is so far from being in any way
     inconsistent with this duty, that it is but the more effectual way
     of fulfilling it. And this may be shown by another case very
     similar. It is our bounden duty to "let our light shine before men,"
     to set a good example, that they "may see our good works:" but
     nevertheless it is true notwithstanding, that the great Christian
     rule of conduct, as the very foundation of all holiness, is that our
     religious actions should be in secret as much as possible. These two
     therefore are perfectly compatible. And unless we do act upon this
     latter principle, that of hiding our good works, our example will be
     quite empty and valueless. So also may it not be the case, that our
     "preaching CHRIST Crucified" may be in vain and hollow, unless it be
     founded on this principle of natural modesty, which we have
     maintained will always accompany the preaching of a good man under
     the teaching of GOD?

     But without considering the subject in the light of a holy and
     religious principle, if we put it on the very lowest ground, why, it
     may be asked, in religion are all truths to be taught at once? in
     all other matters there is a gradual inculcation, something must be
     withheld, something taught first; and is not the knowledge of
     religion as much a matter of degrees as any human science? But we
     have rather treated it here in the higher point of view, in order to
     show that our efforts to do good will be worse than fruitless,
     unless in doing so we act on this principle, to sanctify and
     strengthen our intentions, that the contrary mode of proceeding is
     not an indifferent matter, but very injurious. If any one acts on
     the pure love of GOD, there is no occasion to command this secrecy;
     for GOD will doubtless "reveal even this unto him:" and if we preach
     CHRIST from the highest motives there is no occasion to teach this
     reserve; but if we are liable to be influenced by new religious
     schemes, and indirect motives, we have great need of the warning.

     And the fact is, that all we say is so natural, so obvious to
     natural modesty, if men would but seriously consider it, that those
     who are most opposed to all that we maintain, do in themselves
     practise it unconsciously in other points. But when they hear of
     this Tract, without waiting to know what it intends, they hasten to
     the attack: like the hasty servant in Aristotle, akouei men ti tou
     logou, parakouei de, and akousaV men, ouk epitagma de akousaV, orma
     proV thn timwrian.

     It is asked with some degree of impatience, "Is not knowledge good
     for man?" Doubtless we have maintained it most especially by making
     it the highest of all things, as a talent of exquisite work, the
     very jewel of great price, infinitely divine and sacred. We do not
     lower the doctrine of the Atonement, but heighten and exalt it, and
     all we say is, that it should be looked upon and spoken of with
     reverential holiness. If it is the name of Reserve only which is
     objectionable, then let the substance of this article be expressed
     by any other which may be found equally to serve the purpose,
     whether it be forbearance, or reverence, or seriousness, or
     religious caution, as long as the full intention of it is equally
     preserved.

     A rule of moral and religious teaching of such a nature as this of
     course requires a little attention: there is no subject with which
     the generality of persons are so little acquainted, or which they
     have so little considered, as that of practical moral principles.
     And there often may be something in their mode of life, which
     peculiarly indisposes them to enter into the one now under
     discussion. If a person has never been engaged in religious
     teaching, where his object has been to bring men to a serious
     consideration of the truth; if he is known to look upon theology
     rather in a political than a religious point of view; if he is much
     used to popular speaking, and the applause that accompanies it; if
     he allows himself to discuss the most sacred subjects in the daily
     periodical; if he has never been trained to any reverence for holy
     places; if he considers Christianity as a mere popular system; if he
     disparages sacraments: then of course we cannot consider such an one
     as an adequate and fair judge on a subject the very nature of which
     is opposed to his own practice; for the discernment of every moral
     principle depends on conduct regulated with regard to it.

                3. On teaching the doctrine of the Atonement.

     But there is another reason, more pervading and deeply rooted than
     any of these, although in various ways connected with them, which
     remains to be considered. All the objections are made without
     reference to the case we adduce, and without attention to the
     arguments, on account of a previously conceived strong bias against
     it; which makes it necessary that we inquire more at length into
     that system of the day which has claimed for itself the inmost
     sanctuary of religion, and at once predisposes men so strongly to be
     so thoroughly opposed to all that we can urge. All the arguments
     adduced, and the principle maintained, are at once looked upon with
     respect to that system; all other matters to which it applies, and
     all the circumstances on which it is founded, are immediately set
     aside as unworthy of consideration, because this system of late
     years and of human invention is through all its branches thoroughly
     opposed to it: and many, and more than are aware of it, have taken
     up their position in these opinions, and consider it so impregnable,
     that whatever opposes it must necessarily be false. The system of
     which I speak is characterized by these circumstances, an opinion
     that it is necessary to obtrude and "bring forward prominently and
     explicitly on all occasions the doctrine of the Atonement." This one
     thing it puts in the place of all the principles held by the Church
     Catholic, dropping all proportion of the faith. It disparages
     comparatively, nay, in some cases has even blasphemed, the most
     blessed Sacraments. It is very jealously afraid of Church authority,
     of fasting and mortification being recommended, of works of holiness
     being insisted on, of the doctrine of the universal judgment. It is
     marked by an unreserved discourse on the holiest subjects. To this
     system all that we have said is thoroughly opposed.

     Now it is evident that this system is throughout peculiar, in
     distinction from what is Catholic: by the term Catholic we of course
     mean a combination of what the Universal Church and the Holy
     Scripture teach conjointly, the former as interpreting the latter.
     It is a plan thoroughly un-Scriptural, un-Catholic, unreal: we will
     therefore at once allow that this maxim of Reserve is directly
     opposed to it throughout, in its tone and spirit, in its tendencies
     and effects, in its principles and practices. Where Christians so
     thoroughly differ, what appeal can there be? When inspired Apostles,
     when even Paul and Barnabas, had a dissension and disputation
     between them, they were sent up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and
     Elders about the question, to decide the point in dispute. We appeal
     to Scripture and the Church. Now those who hold these opinions will
     allow that the Church Catholic holds them not. Neither does
     Scripture warrant them; which may be easily shown, even though we
     allow not the Church as its interpreter. Nor, indeed, are they
     grounded on Holy Scripture, but on a supposed expediency. For in
     fact the advocates of these opinions will not allow an unreserved
     appeal to the written WORD, but they maintain, that then only, when
     the HOLY SPIRIT was given, did Holy Scripture set forth the
     Atonement with that fullness which they require. Thus have the
     contrived to take a position which sets aside almost the whole of
     Holy Writ, including the Gospels themselves, from any appeal on this
     subject. In fact, this system is nothing else but a method of human
     device, which is able to quote a part of Scripture for its purpose.
     It is not according to the general tenor or the analogy of
     Scripture, nor is it founded or based on Scripture as its origin.
     They consider, like the Romanists, that they infallibly hold the
     truth, which must therefore be a fuller development of Scripture in
     a later age; thus, in fact, do they make the Word of GOD of none
     effect through their tradition. These opinions indeed, are grounded
     on nothing else but certain effects, which this system is thought to
     produce.

     It is supposed that there is something particularly life-giving and
     heart-searching in these modes of teaching, which thrust forth
     exclusively and indiscriminately the doctrine of the ever blessed
     Atonement, and inculcate loudly the necessity of our dependence on
     the good SPIRIT of GOD: and these are so considered in distinction
     from those, which in connexion with them inculcate also practical
     duties, and the various departments of public and private religious
     worship. In which opinion there is indeed something true, but not so
     in the mode in which it is put forward and understood. There is
     indeed a great truth, of which these peculiar statements catch at
     the shadow, and it is their connexion with this great truth itself,
     which has caused them to be received as the whole of Religion. And
     perhaps many, who have appeared to themselves and others to have
     been embracing these popular opinions, have, in fact, by GOD'S mercy
     thought of, and practically embraced, nothing else but that great
     truth itself. For that a more adequate sense of the Atonement,
     broader, and higher, and deeper views of the mystery which is "hid
     in CHRIST," is indeed the perfection of the Christian character,
     that which grows with its growth, and is strengthened together with
     it more and more, so that advancement in holiness is a continual
     progress in self-abasement and self-renunciation towards that repose
     which is in GOD "manifested in JESUS CHRIST;" this is indeed most
     true. And the same is the case with respect to that other opinion of
     it being needful to name always the ever blessed SPIRIT of GOD; that
     the same gradual perfection of a Christian will consist in a deeper
     and continually increasing sense of his utter inability to support
     himself in spiritual life, and a confidence that he can do all
     things through CHRIST strengthening him: a feeling consciousness of
     thorough dependence on GOD every moment of his existence, not only
     in sustaining his natural, but much more his new and regenerate
     life.-That all the differences in the heart of men, from the worst
     to the most perfect, will consist in the different mode in which
     they have instilled and thoroughly infused into their hearts these
     great principles: this is indeed most true. But how is this state to
     be obtained? These peculiar opinions are formed on the supposition,
     that it is by declaring these truths aloud to all we meet. This is
     the point on which we are at issue. For this we think there is no
     sanction in all the laws of our moral nature and religious
     philosophy; that there is none for it in the Catholic Church, none
     in Holy Scripture; and any manner of bringing forward GOD'S truth as
     differing from these, we suppose highly dangerous. If we are to look
     out for some practical guide to know in what way we are to hold and
     declare Scriptural doctrine, surely it is our duty to bring forward
     "the faith once for all delivered unto the saints," in the fulness
     of that creed into which we are baptized; is not this the divinely
     appointed guardian, by which we may keep what is contained in Holy
     Scripture in its due proportions, which has been afforded us as a
     key to the right understanding of Scripture, and also an
     authoritative annunciation of what in doctrine we are to hold and
     teach. For of course if we put forth one truth to the suppression or
     disparagement of others, the effect of our teaching may be
     equivalent to falsehood, and not truth. That the preparations of the
     heart which can alone receive the faith in its fullness, are by
     other means than those which this system supposes, we cannot but be
     assured; Scripture and reason both would imply that it is by
     insisting first of all, if need be, on natural piety, on the
     necessity of common honesty, on repentance, on judgment to come, and
     without any mode of expression that excepts ourselves from that
     judgment; by urging those assistances to poverty of spirit, which
     Scripture recommends and the Church prescribes, such as fasting and
     alms, and the necessity of reverent and habitual prayer. These may
     be means of bringing persons to the truth as it is in JESUS CHRIST,
     with that awe and fear, which our LORD'S own teaching and that of
     His Apostles would inspire; surely above all things should we be
     careful not to be deceiving ourselves and others by an irreverent
     handling of GOD'S most sacred consolations. For otherwise are we not
     going against what our LORD declared to be His own teaching? Are we
     not putting "new wine into old bottles," the Gospel blessings into
     the corruptions of the old man, of which we know the consequence?
     Are we not putting "new cloth on an old garment;" the new cloth of
     the Christian Church on the old garment of the Jewish legal Church?
     Are we not exposing the sacred thing of God committed to our charge,
     the secret treasures of His house, to our own great injury, and in a
     way to have evil effects on others also? May not such a mode of
     exposing all the riches of our Christian inheritance be likened to
     the conduct of King Hezekiah, when he showed all his treasures to
     the king of Babylon, "all that is in mine house," said he, "have
     they seen; there is nothing among my treasures that I have not
     showed them;" and for this the sentence was declared, that to
     Babylon his children and his treasures should be taken. In like
     manner, the world will take captive those who thus lose their secret
     strength by a vain display; and this is, in effect, the same as our
     LORD has said in those words, "They will trample them under foot,
     and turn again and rend you."

     With regard to the notion that it is necessary to "bring forward the
     doctrine of the Atonement on all occasions, prominently and
     exclusively," it is really difficult to say any thing in answer to
     an opinion, however popular, when one is quite at a loss to know on
     what grounds the opinion is maintained. Is it from its supposed
     effects? Pious frauds might be supported on the same principle: but
     let us observe these effects as they become more fully developed:
     the fruits of the system have shown themselves in the disobedience
     of ministers to their ecclesiastical superiors, of individuals to
     their appointed ministers, of whole bodies of Christians to the
     Church. Is it the popularity of the opinion? this is not a test of
     truth, but an argument of the contrary; Christian truth is in itself
     essentially unpopular; and even were it otherwise, what is
     popularity when it is opposed to Catholic antiquity? Is it from
     Scripture? we have shown that the tone and Spirit of Holy Scripture
     is quite opposed to it.

     Do we then maintain that it is to be intentionally and designedly
     withdrawn from all public mention? nothing of this kind has been
     ever suggested or practised by us; this would of course be as
     unnatural as the other. Why should we not be content to act
     naturally, with the Church and Divine Scripture for our guides? why
     should not a conscience exercised therein, and practised in the
     discernment of good and evil, be content to act as our common sense
     and judgment, or, if we may reverently use such words, as the HOLY
     SPIRIT, ever enlightening the path of obedience, dictates, without
     shaping our conduct into this mould? Why should one who thus acts be
     thought unworthy of the Christian name? Why should it be thought
     necessary to bring proof and induction, and, as it were by a stretch
     of charity, to obtain some indication that such an one denies not
     the doctrine of the Atonement? which has been done in the case of
     the Fathers and Saints of old, and of Bishop Butler and others in
     our own Church.

     It may be said, are we not saved by faith alone in CHRIST, and if
     so, what else have we to preach? It may be answered by another
     question, was it not the very office of the Baptist to be the herald
     of CHRIST, and yet, so little did he publicly make a practice of
     declaring this, that there was a doubt whether he was not himself
     the CHRIST: but instead of proclaiming Him aloud, he taught
     Repentance, and to each individual amendment of life. The Baptist
     declared, "I came that He might be manifested, but how was He to be
     manifested, excepting, as our LORD said, that He would manifest
     Himself unto him that kept His commandments." Therefore the
     Forerunner preached repentance. When he did allude to the Atonement,
     in the expression of "the LAMB of GOD," it was secretly and
     obscurely, and probably only to a few chosen and favoured disciples,
     who themselves could not have understood the clear meaning of the
     allusion, to whom it must have been a dark saying. Doubtless, we are
     saved by faith in CHRIST alone; but to come to know this in all its
     power, if the very perfection of the Christian; not to be instilled
     or obtained by lifting up the voice in the street, but by obedience
     and penitence, so that, as each man advances in holiness of life,
     and comes the more to know what GOD is, the more does he feel
     himself, with the Saints of all ages, to be the chief of sinners.
     But as for that assurance and sensible confidence, with which it is
     thought necessary that the doctrine should be preached and received,
     it would seem as if there was scarcely any thing against the subtle
     effect of which we are so much guarded in Holy Scripture as this:
     all those who are recorded as being most approved, were remarkable
     for the absence of it; as in the case of the Centurion, the
     Canaanitish woman, and others; above all, of those who at the last
     day shall be surprised with the welcome tidings that they are
     accepted: on the contrary, those who are rejected shall come with
     that plea of confidence, because they have prophesied in CHRIST'S
     name, and He has taught in their street, and will be condemned with
     emphatic words, as they that work iniquity; whereby the whole stress
     is thrown on that single point, which those who hold these opinions
     are most studious to make of secondary importance, the necessity of
     working righteousness.

     Surely the doctrine of the Atonement may be taught in all its
     fulness, on all occasions, and all seasons, more effectually, more
     really, and truly, according to the proportion of the faith, or the
     need of circumstances, without being brought out from the context of
     Holy Scripture into prominent and explicit mention. Did not St.
     James preach the Gospel most effectually under the guidance of GOD'S
     good SPIRIT? Did not St. Paul preach the Gospel to the
     Thessalonians, when he spoke of the day of Judgment, as well as to
     the Galatians, when in answer to certain Jewish prejudices, he set
     forth the only remission of sins to be found in the Cross of CHRIST?
     May not we regulate our teaching according to the case of the
     persons we address, as they did? But above all, did not our LORD
     preach the Gospel? Did He not say to the two disciples who came from
     St. John the Baptist, "To the poor the Gospel is preached?" But how
     was it preached? We know what His preaching was; He taught the
     Atonement always, but never openly: He taught it always, but never
     openly: He taught it always; He taught it in the Beatitudes, in the
     parables, in His miracles, in His commands, in His warnings, in His
     promises; He taught it always, but always covertly, never at all in
     the manner now required, but quite the opposite. And as it pervaded
     all our LORD'S teaching; and ought to do, as we have stated, the
     teaching of every good Christian; so surely it may do so in a way to
     be more effectually impressed on others, and to indicate its
     thorough reception into the character of the speaker, by one who
     might have never prominently and explicitly declared it, any more
     than our LORD does in His own teaching. It may be impressed on
     others by the tone of a person's whole thoughts, by the silent
     instruction of his penitent and merciful demeanour, by immediate
     inference and implication from his sayings, by the only
     interpretation which his words will bear; but above all things, by
     the doctrine of the Sacraments ever influencing his life; He may
     thus ever bear about in the body the marks of the LORD JESUS, and
     preach CHRIST Crucified. Whereas, on the contrary, another who
     expressed this doctrine with all the fulness which is now required,
     might in all the tone of his disposition, his teaching, his whole
     bearing and observation, be as far from it as one who had never
     heard of it; and adopt this tone to the great injury of himself and
     others. The important thing needed consists in those preparations of
     the heart, which may lead men to humiliation and contrition; when
     this is done, He who "dwells with the humble and contrite," will
     never fail to lead them to all the consolations of Religion. Let us
     consider the case of a friend who consulted us on a matter that
     afflicted his conscience, how tender and careful should we be in
     such a case for fear of administering consolation too speedily, lest
     by so doing we check the workings of GOD'S good SPIRIT, and heal too
     slightly His wounds to our friend's great detriment: and shall we do
     this to all indiscriminately?

     But besides this, the awful name of the blessed SPIRIT, without whom
     we can neither think nor do any thing that is right, is, as is
     supposed, ever in like manner to be proclaimed as it were in the
     market-place, and those who do not do so, are supposed to deny His
     power, the power of the ever blessed SPIRIT of GOD, in whose Name we
     were baptized, Whom in the doxology we confess daily, in Whom we
     live and move. Let these sacred words be introduced in our teaching,
     as they are in Holy Scripture. But even from this we almost shrink
     at feeling that they have been used in an unreal manner, and "taken
     in vain;" for these holiest of words may be constantly used by us,
     when we are not at all affected and influenced by so concerning a
     doctrine, which may be seen by the whole of our character in daily
     life, and tone of our teaching; by self-confidence, and an absence
     of that fear and trembling, which ever follows the consciousness,
     that it is GOD that worketh in us both to will and to do. And what
     is done in such a case? Is the effect merely nugatory? Surely not:
     great injury is done by this irreverence to that most sacred Name.
     There is far less chance of real repentance in such a case.

     Surely this great and life-giving doctrine might be taught more
     truly by one who practised no obtrusive system of this sort; to say
     nothing of his practical instructions, every word of which might be
     calculated to teach a person dependence on GOD; but even by his
     silence. For instance, might not one like holy Simeon, (whom sacred
     Scripture has so strongly marked as one under the gracious guidance
     of the good SPIRIT, by the expression, thrice repeated, that "the
     HOLY SPIRIT was upon him," that it was "revealed unto him of the
     HOLY SPIRIT," that "he came by the SPIRIT into the temple;" ) might
     not such a one, by daily frequenting "the House of Prayer," with
     that earnestness and assiduity which showed that he felt himself
     unable to stand for a day without assistance from above, learn and
     teach so affecting a truth, as well as by set declarations
     concerning it? Might he not, by these habitual practices, be
     rendered meet to find CHRIST in His Temple, and to prophesy in His
     name?

    4. Danger in forming a plan of our different from that of Scripture.

     Surely we know not what we do, when we venture to make a scheme and
     system of our own respecting the revelations of GOD. His ways are so
     vast and mysterious, that there may be some great presumption in our
     taking one truth, and forming around it a scheme from notions of our
     own. It may not be the way to arrive at even that truth; and also it
     may counteract some others, which it is equally important that we
     should be impressed with. The very idea of forming such a scheme,
     arises from a want of a due sense of the depth and vastness of the
     Divine counsels, as if we could comprehend them. It is with states
     of society as with individuals; those whose thoughts and knowledge
     are most superficial, are most apt to systematize; and it is very
     little considered what awful things in the economy of GOD may be
     thus habitually kept out of sight,-kept out of sight, perhaps, by
     many quite unconsciously; for the secret influence of these opinions
     is more extensive than they are aware of, who are subject to them.
     It is not an uncommon thing to hear sermons which are throughout
     specious and plausible, which seem at first sight Scriptural, and
     are received as such without hesitation, and yet, on a little
     consideration, it will appear that they are but partial views of the
     truth, that they are quite inconsistent with the much forgotten
     doctrine of a future judgment. What effect, therefore, must this
     system have upon an age and whole nation?

     Nor is it only in its not supporting the analogy of faith, that this
     system is opposed to Scripture; but its spirit and mode of teaching
     is quite different. It may be observed in this, that this scheme
     puts knowledge first, and obedience afterwards: let this doctrine,
     they say, be received, and good works will necessarily follow. Holy
     Scripture throughout adopts the opposite course. In many and
     extensive senses, the language it adopts, and the plan it pursues,
     is on the principle that "the law is the schoolmaster, to bring us
     to CHRIST;" "that he who will do the will shall know of the
     doctrine;" whereas this teaching is, "receive only this doctrine and
     you will do the will." The kind of secondary way, and as it were in
     the back ground, in which the necessity of obedience is put in this
     system, is the very opposite to Scriptural teaching. Scripture ever
     introduces the warning clause, "If ye keep the commandments;" they,
     on the contrary, "If ye do not think of them too much."

     And again, is there not an extraordinary confusion and perplexity
     raised, which has the effect of entangling men's minds with words
     and phrases? Are there not frequently logical fallacies, couched in
     verbal inaccuracies, which will appear, on a little consideration,
     to be mere confusions of expression, yet ever leave a false
     impression? Christian repentance is spoken of as something not only
     separate from, but opposed to CHRIST. The effect of Christian good
     works is treated as having a tendency to puff us up with pride and
     selfishness: works, that is of humility and charity, exercised in
     secret, purely with the desire of pleasing GOD, for of course such
     only are good works which could be insisted on (though of course
     what they mean must be bad works, those of hypocrisy). Or again,
     that religious services weaken our dependence on the good SPIRIT;
     or, in other words, that frequent and constant prayers to GOD for
     His assistance, diminish our reliance on GOD. Or again, that the
     deep and awful sense of judgment to come derogates from CHRIST'S
     atonement, as if the most earnest consideration of the former did
     not most impress the unspeakable worth of the latter. Or again, that
     to insist on the value of the Sacraments, is to derogate from
     CHRIST; for when it is considered that there is no value whatever
     supposed in those Sacraments, excepting from CHRIST'S presence in
     them, and His atoning blood communicated through them, this is
     precisely the same as if the same charge were brought against
     attaching too high a value to the Holy Scriptures; for it might be
     said that we put the Scriptures in the place of CHRIST. It is very
     painful to be obliged to speak of these things. To answer them, we
     must come to plain first axioms in morals, such as the following.

            5. Statement of the case from plain moral principles.

     Religious doctrines and articles of faith can only be received
     according to certain dispositions of the heart; these dispositions
     can only be formed by a repetition of certain actions. And therefore
     a certain course of action can alone dispose us to receive certain
     doctrines; and hence it is evident that these doctrines are in vain
     preached, unless these actions are at the same time practised and
     insisted on as most essential.

     For instance, charitable works alone will make a man charitable, and
     the more any one does charitable works, the more charitable he will
     become; that is to say, the more will he love his neighbour and love
     GOD; for a charitable work is a work that proceeds from charity or
     the love of GOD, and which can only be done by the good SPIRIT of
     GOD: and the more he does these works therefore, the more will he
     love his neighbour and love GOD: and he who does not (in heart and
     intention at least) perform these works, will not be a charitable
     man, i.e., will not love GOD or his neighbour: and those are not
     charitable works which have not this effect; for no external act,
     such as the giving away of money, is necessarily a work of charity,
     but only such as consists in the exercise of the principle of
     charity. He therefore will, most of all, love GOD and love CHRIST,
     who does these works most; and he will most bring men to CHRIST, who
     most effectually, with GOD'S blessing, induces them to do these
     works in the way that GOD hath required them to be the same.

     Or again, he will only be humble in heart who does humble actions;
     and no action is (morally speaking) an humble action but such as
     proceeds from the spirit of humility; and he who does humble actions
     most will be most humble; and he who is most humble will be most
     emptied of self-righteousness, and therefore will most of all value
     the Cross of CHRIST, being least of all sensible of his own good
     deeds: and the more he does these works, the more will the HOLY
     SPIRIT dwell with him, according to the promises of Scripture, and
     the more fully will he come to the knowledge of that mystery which
     is hid in CHRIST. That teacher, therefore, who will most induce men
     to do these works, will most of all bring men unto CHRIST, though he
     speaks not most fully and loudly of His ever blessed Atonement.

     Or again, good works consist especially in Prayers. He who does most
     of these good works, i.e., he who prays most, seeks most of all for
     an assistance out of, and beyond himself, and therefore relies least
     of all on himself and most of all upon GOD; and the more he does
     these good works, the more does he rely upon GOD'S good Spirit, for
     which he seeks. He, therefore, who, by preaching the judgment to
     come, or by recommending alms and fasting, or by impressing men with
     a sense of the shortness of life and the value of eternity, or by
     any such practical appeals which the occasion suggests, will lead
     men most to pray, will do most towards leading them to lean on GOD'S
     good SPIRIT, although he may not repeat in express words the
     necessity of aid from that good SPIRIT, without whom we cannot
     please GOD.

     To say, therefore, that such works, which alone are good works, tend
     to foster pride, and are a seeking for expiations beyond the one
     great Atonement, conveys a most dangerous fallacy: when the works
     which are intended, if the words can be applied to anything worthy
     of condemnation, must be bad works, those of ostentation, of
     hypocrisy, or superstition, and the like, which, of course, the
     oftener they are repeated, the more do they make men ostentatious,
     hypocritical, or superstitious; and so do take them from the Cross
     of CHRIST. They are sins against which we cannot warn men too much;
     sins repeatedly condemned by CHRIST, who never condemns or
     disparages good works, but insists upon them always and throughout
     most earnestly. Let hypocrisy, in all its shapes, be condemned as
     Scripture condemns, and we shall fully understand such teaching. Or
     again, consider the case morally with regard to the teaching of
     Repentance. For instance, take the deceivable sin of covetousness,
     of which we are all in danger. A covetous man is he who trusts in
     riches; and so far as any one trusts in riches, in that degree he
     cannot trust in GOD, and therefore can have no saving sense of the
     atonement of CHRIST, or dependence on the good SPIRIT of GOD. And if
     his feelings are excited on the subject of these doctrines, while he
     is under the influence of this vice, it cannot be any thing better
     than a mere delusion of the fancy; and therefore that teacher who
     will most of all lead men to abandon and get rid of covetousness,
     will render their minds most open to receive these two great
     doctrines of the Gospel; as seen in the case of Zaccheus, when
     salvation came to his house as a true child of faith; and in our
     LORD'S advice to all to sell and give alms. The same inference may
     be drawn with regard to the love of praise, in which case it may
     likewise be shown that it follows as a plain moral consequence, what
     our Lord has declared, that they cannot "believe who receive honour
     one of another." So also with respect to impurity of heart; for a
     man of impure heart may be very sensible affected by these touching
     and vital doctrines of the Gospel; and yet it is certain that he
     cannot receive them rightly; for the pure in heart alone can see
     GOD; and therefore can alone see, so as rightly to understand, these
     doctrines in which GOD is manifested. That minister, therefore, who,
     by preaching the terrors of the judgment day, or by any other
     Scriptural means, induces men to repent of these crimes, will
     necessarily, and by a plain moral consequence, open their eyes,
     their ears, their heart, to receive the high saving principles of
     the Gospel; though he speaks not explicitly of them any more than
     the Baptist did, or our LORD, or His Apostles. So palpably absurd,
     even on the plain grounds of moral principles, is it to speak of the
     teaching of repentance being opposed to the preaching of CHRIST.

     This is an explanation of some obvious reasons why Holy Scripture
     should connect our own cross with the Cross of CHRIST, as it so
     often does, and emblematically typified of the Church, in him who
     bore the Cross after CHRIST; for it is said to us all, "whosoever
     doth not take up his cross and come after Me cannot be My disciple."
     Now there can be no repentance, and no progress in religious duties
     without self-denial. These duties, therefore, are a bearing of our
     own cross, which will alone bring us to a right sense of the Cross
     of CHRIST. It is not setting aside the Cross of CHRIST, nor
     disparaging it; it is only showing the mode by which alone we may be
     brought to know its inestimable value.

     He who most of all practises these duties, will be most of all
     brought, by a necessary and moral consequence, to value the Cross of
     CHRIST; and he who is brought to embrace that doctrine with most
     affection, will speak of it with most reserve; he cannot speak of it
     as these persons require. Nor can there be any reasonable
     apprehension, as it is sometimes said, that the teaching of the
     Church, which keeps the doctrine of the Atonement in the reserve of
     Scripture, will lead men to despair. Did any one ever know an
     instance of this, of a Christian, in sound health of mind, brought
     to a state of despair from the fear of GOD and His judgments? There
     is a mistake in this use of the word despair, which rather means a
     careless, hopeless indifference to the anger of the Almighty, which
     is so common, than an excessive fear of His judgments. Such a fear
     brings with it abundant consolation and hope; and therefore the true
     knowledge of this saving doctrine of the Atonement is expressed in
     such words as these, that "the salvation of GOD is nigh unto them
     that fear Him;" that the LORD looks to him who "trembles at His
     word;" that He "revives the spirit of the contrite;" or that "whoso
     is wise will ponder these things; and they shall understand the
     loving-kindness of the LORD."

     We must again return to and repeat this point; good works, being
     nothing else but the exercise of a good principle, will make a good
     man (as far as, humanly speaking, a man can be called good), and
     those are not good works which will not make a man good; and he is
     not a good man, who does not love GOD with all his heart, and depend
     on the aid of the blessed SPIRIT, and trust in CHRIST. He,
     therefore, who most of all induces men to practise these good works,
     under the awful sense of their condition as baptized Christians,
     brings them most of all to the Cross of CHRIST; and he who, by his
     teaching, leads men to think that such works are of minor
     importance, and speaks slightingly of them, i.e., works of charity,
     of humiliation, and prayer, teaches men false and dangerous
     doctrine, flattering to human indolence, but opposed to Scripture,
     opposed to the Church, opposed to the first principles of our moral
     nature; and therefore it is said emphatically, "Whosoever shall
     break one of the least of these commandments, and shall teach men so
     shall be called the least in the kingdom of Heaven:" that is to say,
     he who treats slightingly these good works, shall obtain least of
     all the blessings of CHRIST'S Spiritual kingdom at present, the
     gracious gifts which are in the Atonement of CHRIST, and by
     consequence to be lowest in His kingdom hereafter. By using high
     words of doctrine, without the inculcation of these commands, we
     lead men to trust to a vain shadow, instead of the Rock of their
     salvation. Doing the works or not it is which makes the entire
     difference between the house built on the sand, and that which is
     founded on a rock, though outwardly they appear alike; as our LORD
     has warned, he who "heareth these words and doeth them, I will liken
     to a wise man, who built his house on a rock;" and "every one who
     heareth them and doeth them not," is outwardly the same, perhaps,
     but has no foundation. And what is the rock on which he is built,
     but CHRIST? His very works are built on this Rock, otherwise they
     are not good works. It is not as if CHRIST was the end only (as they
     who disparage Baptism would imply); not as if the Atonement were a
     thing to be arrived at at last; but CHRIST is the way also, the
     beginning and the end, the Author and the Finisher, the Alpha and
     Omega. It is through the blood of CHRIST alone we are able to think
     or do what is good. It is through His blood alone that such thoughts
     and deeds are accepted. It is not simply that by bearing our cross
     we are brought to His; but we are in Him, and He in us; our cross is
     His Cross, and His Cross is our cross. When we humble ourselves, we
     partake of the virtue going forth from His humiliation: it is He
     that is drawing us nearer to Himself. When we pray, it is not our
     prayer, but His HOLY SPIRIT within us that leads us unto Himself.
     When we do works of charity, it is to Him in His brethren: it is His
     compassionate bowels yearning in us towards them: it is the virtue
     of His ineffable charity through us, His members, again flowing
     forth to all mankind. To check, therefore, such works by any
     mis-statements, by half admonitions and half encouragements, is to
     keep men from Him. It is like stopping the mouths of the blind men,
     who have now ay to approach Him but by prayer, that He may open
     their eyes; for unless we practise these works of obedience and
     repentance, we shall assuredly have no eyes to see Him; for it is
     "the commandment of the LORD" which "giveth light unto the eyes." It
     is putting away the little children, the babes in CHRIST, because
     they are not of full stature. It is casting stumbling-blocks in the
     way of weak men. It is very true, that in the Gospels, the
     consolations of CHRIST may be more imparted to persons who were
     opprobriously designated "sinners;" and some of whom may have fallen
     into grievous sin; that "the publicans and harlots enter into the
     kingdom before the Pharisees:" but why? not because they were worse,
     but because they were far better than the Pharisees; as the poor and
     despised are perhaps generally found wiser and better than those in
     higher station.

    6. All Scripture is perfect harmony as opposed to this modern system.

     We must again return to, and repeat the same point. Good works must
     ever make a good an; and a good man will most of all love GOD, as
     manifested in JESUS CHRIST; and therefore it is that Holy Scripture
     has put the case in every variety of ways, in order that, comparing
     the manifold expressions by which its describes the inscrutable
     mysteries of CHRIST'S kingdom, we may arrive at some sense of the
     truth. And in whatever way we consider it, we shall find that the
     whole harmony of Scriptural teaching is opposed to the present
     system, or what is sometimes designated the Gospel scheme; the
     former being, in contrast to it, one of Reserve. We have shown, from
     obvious moral inference, that to ameliorate the heart and practice
     is the only way to arrive at those riches which are hid in CHRIST.
     Surely a little reflection will show how thoroughly Holy Scripture
     supports this opinion throughout. Let us only look to the manner in
     which the commandments are spoken of, and that not merely in the New
     Testament, but in the Old also. Could words be applied to them such
     as we find throughout the Psalms, unless they had some mysterious
     connexion with the Cross of CHRIST? How else could they be "sweeter
     than honey and the honeycomb?" How else could they be "dearer than
     thousands of gold and silver?" How else could they be "wonderful,"
     and "quickening," "giving light unto the eyes," and "everlasting
     righteousness?" Let us again consider the expressions by which the
     Gospel privileges are spoken of in Scripture, and we shall find that
     they are all connected with certain dispositions and graces, and
     confined to them. Those dispositions and graces can alone be
     attained by a certain mode of life and course of actions; which
     actions, therefore, Scripture commands and inculcates in every way,
     by bringing before us every example, and precept, and doctrine, that
     may be calculated to affect us with the terrors of GOD'S judgments,
     or the hopes of His mercy.

     Let us consider who they are whom Scripture pronounced as blessed.
     It might be supposed from the modern system, that the expression had
     been, "Blessed are all ye that hear the Gospel," and this Gospel is
     confined to a full declaration of the gracious doctrine of the
     Atonement; but it is not thus it speaks. It is, indeed, said to
     some, "Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see, and
     blessed are the ears which hear the things that ye hear," -but then
     it must ever be remembered, and again repeated, that this was not
     said unto all the people to whom our LORD had been preaching: but to
     the disciples "privately," in express distinction from those who had
     heard our LORD teaching, but who, as He said, had no "eyes to see,
     nor ears to hear." Whereas in His more public teaching, His blessing
     was entirely confined and limited to certain dispositions, which are
     recorded in the Sermon on the Mount.

     Blessing again is pronounced privately on St. Peter, because he had
     been brought to that high knowledge of CHRIST by GOD Himself: as in
     the case of all the disciples, our LORD thanked GOD for having
     "revealed these things unto babes." And after these declarations to
     St. Peter, pronouncing his blessedness, and the greatness of that
     belief on which the Church would be built; we naturally expect our
     LORD to invite others to it, either by openly declaring that
     doctrine, or by showing them the way to arrive at it; we watch His
     words with expectation, especially when He calls all the multitude
     unto Him: but, so far from declaring unto them these gracious and
     high things, He speaks of the necessity of every man taking up his
     cross. This was, in fact, telling the people in what way they might
     arrive at that belief for which St. Peter was so blessed. For let it
     be observed, that this was the mode by which St. Peter had arrived
     at it. He had taken up the Cross at the first, and followed CHRIST
     when He called him to forsake all; and the result was, that he had
     now come to the full knowledge of that Truth. To suppose, therefore,
     that a doctrine so unspeakable and mysterious as that of the
     Atonement, is to be held out to the impenitent sinner, to be
     embraced in some manner to move the affections, is so unlike our
     LORD'S conduct, that it makes one fear for the ultimate consequences
     of such a system.

     Or again, consider the case of Judas Iscariot; what was the cause of
     his not believing? it was simply this, that he had one unrepented
     sin in his heart. He must have witnessed many miracles, and heard
     our LORD'S Divine teaching; and might have seen His unexampled and
     transcendent goodness and holiness. But this one sin blinded his
     eyes and stopped his ears, so that seeing he saw not, and hearing
     heard not. Had he taken the Baptist's advice to repent; or our
     LORD'S warnings on the subject of riches, or those so often
     graciously given to himself,-as when He said, "Ye are clean, but not
     all," and "one of you shall betray me," and "It were good for that
     man, if he had never been born," then he might have believed; and
     might have been possibly "the beloved disciple." In his case,
     humanly speaking, so far as we can perceive, repentance would have
     been one with believing in CHRIST. And surely our LORD'S conduct to
     Judas might show us how men might do all that can be done to reclaim
     a very bad person, without any display of the most ineffable mercies
     of GOD, beyond what the occasion called for.

     But, moreover, if we take the mere general outline and first view of
     the Gospel narrative, it is so like all GOD'S manifestations of
     Himself to the world, and the history of what the Church was to be,
     that it ever occurs to one as showing the principles of it. "The
     Desire of all nations had come," "the Messenger of the covenant whom
     men delight in;" but he was to be "as a refiner's fire." The power
     of the cross was to be shown especially in this its secret
     character, whereby the strength of GOD being concealed in human
     weakness, it might act as a test to the dispositions of men: it was
     to be "a sign that should be spoken against, in order that the
     thoughts of many hearts might be revealed." On the contrary, what do
     they really mean who adopt the human scheme of teaching and
     receiving in its fulness the doctrine of the Atonement? How is this
     to be done? Do they understand the meaning of their own words? We
     hardly know what we speak of when we speak of the Atonement, it is a
     vast sea which no man can fathom: who can think of it worthily? Who
     can comprehend the Sacraments in which it is hidden? The sea,
     indeed, itself, is the type or figure of Baptism, wherein the ways
     of GOD are, and His paths in the great waters, and His footsteps are
     not known. Surely men know not what they do, when they define and
     systematize the ways of GOD in man's redemption, under expressions
     such as imputed righteousness, justification, and sanctification,
     and the like; which words stand in their minds, for some exceeding
     shallow poor human ideas, for which they vehemently contend, as for
     the whole of religion. It is, in fact, to explain the ineffable, to
     measure the infinite, to enter into the secret counsels of GOD; to
     circumscribe truths as vast and incomprehensible as the circuit of
     the heavens in the compass of the human system. Whereas we know
     nothing whatever but this, that a childlike obedience which accepts
     the commands and doctrines of Scripture, will be brought to the full
     knowledge of GOD.

     Surely, I repeat, we know not what we do, when we speak of the
     doctrine of the Atonement, and of preaching and receiving the same:
     we know not how much it is the very foundation of every part of
     Scripture, and how mysteriously it may be contained therein, "the
     LAMB slain from the foundation of the world." Doubtless, we may
     suppose that our LORD went about in the fulness of the power of the
     Atonement, (if we may so speak,) out of that vast sea of mercy,
     dispensing to men as they were able to receive it; what were the
     bodily cures that He wrought, connected as they were with the
     forgiveness of sins; and what the various blessing that He
     pronounced? But the distributing of those gifts according as the
     dispositions of men made them capable of receiving them. To one it
     was the kingdom of heaven, to another it was consolation, to another
     it was the inheritance of the earth, to another it was
     righteousness, to another it was mercy, to another it was the power
     to see GOD; thus was the unspeakable power of the Atonement, in all
     the beatitudes, distributed according to each man's obedience. Not
     as gifts falling from heaven into the cup of each; but in every case
     as a pearl of great price, as hid treasure. To another it is spoken
     of as "refreshment," to another "as rest for the soul," to another
     as being to JESUS CHRIST as "brother and sister and mother;" to
     another that GOD the FATHER, and JESUS CHRIST, and the COMFORTER
     will come to "make their abode with him." But observe on each of
     these occasions, how perfectly mysterious and secret the gift is;
     how closely limited and restricted to certain tempers or conditions;
     how on every occasion the conditions are put first, the disposition
     required, or the keeping of the commandments, and the gifts as
     following: in short, these promises and privileges, vouchsafed to
     the Christian are distributed in a manner perfectly analogous to the
     miracles, which were dispensed, as it would appear, by an invariable
     law according to the faith of each. And both of them upon a
     principle quite opposed to these modern opinions, which speak of
     "the display of GOD'S mercy in the Atonement." Observe how, on all
     occasions, the very opposite conduct is pursued to that of the human
     system. The LORD of heaven and earth, in the full power of His
     Divinity and atoning mercy, but ever as it were hiding Himself, as a
     poor man going about with a few fishermen, calling every one that
     came to Him to undisguised privation and hardship, putting these as
     it were always first, and keeping back the blessing; checking men,
     and setting aside their offers of attendance, when they expected any
     thing but hardship; as when to the Scribe He said, "The foxes have
     holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath
     not where to lay His head;" or demanding an instant surrender
     without delay, as of him to whom He said, "Let the dead bury the
     dead, but follow thou me." And let us notice the rich man whom "He
     loved;" and who seemed what would be called deficient in spiritual
     views, and in a right understanding of the nature of the Gospel;-how
     differently did our LORD treat him, to that conduct which these
     modern religionists would require us to adopt, when he called upon
     him to the practice of the most self-denying duties and the exercise
     of charity.

     And observe how necessarily all these gifts, in which the kingdom of
     heaven consists, are attached, and invariably imparted to these
     conditions, and inseparable from them: so that to have the
     dispositions, or to fulfil the commands required, is in that degree
     to partake of the spiritual blessings; and not to fulfil them is to
     fail of those gifts. Thus when we are commanded to learn of CHRIST
     "to be meek and lowly, and we shall find rest;" so far as we become
     meek and lowly we shall find rest to our souls: and this rest is not
     imparted to any but so far as they are so. And when CHRIST says,
     that if we keep His commandments, He will come and make His abode
     with us; so far as we keep the commandments, we shall assuredly have
     CHRIST abiding with us; and so far as He abides with us, we shall of
     course be made partakers of all the privileges of the Gospel, both
     now and hereafter. Whosoever therefore will himself keep the
     commandments, and induce us to do so, will so far be himself a
     partaker of the Gospel, and make us to be so, as a necessary and
     infallible consequence. The same argument may be applied, if
     considered with respect to every blessing in the Gospels, taken
     separately with a view to the temper connected with it; for
     instance, the poor in spirit does naturally, and of necessity come
     to the enjoyment of the Christian inheritance; whatever teaching,
     therefore, disengages men from the love of wealth, will bring them
     so far into their Christian inheritance; every act which produces
     this spirit, leads men so far one step into the possession of this
     their Christian birthright. We have repeated these points more at
     large from the former treatise, in order to show, in connexion with
     the moral proof, how fully the Scriptural statements confirm all
     that has been said concerning actions and habits; that actions alone
     can produce dispositions, and dispositions alone can receive
     doctrines, when the case is viewed with regard to our moral
     constitution. Or to state it in a higher point of view, all
     knowledge of saving doctrine is revealed from above to those who
     will do the will; for every act of obedience is rewarded of GOD with
     additional light, and the fulness of this light, illuminating the
     path of obedience, is the knowledge of GOD. So that in whatever way
     we consider it, there is no Scriptural sanction for the necessity of
     our always thrusting forward the doctrine of the Atonement without
     reserve.

     And here we cannot forbear asking in seriousness, whether it be not
     such a failure in inculcating Christian practice, which may have
     cherished such dispositions, as are plainly betrayed in the words
     and actions of those who avow and maintain this system; dispositions
     and tempers which, whether they result from this system or no, could
     not possibly have resulted from a proper discipline of the heart
     under Scriptural teaching.

     But to return, the same harmony of Scripture may be shown in the
     variety and apparent discrepancy, by which not only the different
     tempers and graces which Scripture inculcates are designated, as we
     have seen, but the one thing that is needful in order to obtain
     eternal life. In one place it is said, "Believe in CHRIST, and thou
     shalt be saved." Whereas in another place our LORD says, "If thou
     wouldst enter into life, keep the commandments." So that these two
     requisites will necessarily imply each other, and somehow to keep
     the commandments will lead us to CHRIST, and will be believing in
     Him. But the commandments contain the love of GOD and the love of
     our neighbour; and to know this principle, the spiritual
     interpretation of the commandments, our LORD told the Lawyer, was to
     be "not far from the kingdom of heaven:" and this was the test which
     our LORD put to the rich young man whom He loved, telling him to
     give to the poor and follow Him. These two points, therefore, in
     this case, would put it to the proof, whether he had kept the
     commandments or understood the spirit of them. Agreeable to this,
     St. Paul tells us in another place, that faith will profit us
     nothing, and works will profit us nothing, without charity, which
     alone availeth. On the other hand, St. John tells us that to know
     GOD is eternal life; therefore faith, and obedience, and charity,
     and knowledge, must in some sense be one and the same, or
     necessarily imply each other. For if we keep the commandments, we
     shall enter into life, and if we have charity, we shall enter into
     life; and so also if we believe in CHRIST, or know CHRIST, it is
     eternal life. And yet not one of these without the other. If,
     therefore, GOD'S promises partake of so great diversity, may not our
     teaching partake of this variety of GOD'S Word, without our being
     bound to one human system? And why may not those who inculcate love
     and obedience lead men to the Truth?

     Surely it is sufficient to say, that we are following the method of
     Scripture: nor can any thing else be truly said to partake of the
     parrhsia of GOD'S WORD, and to be "not shunning to declare the whole
     counsel of GOD." The whole case might be put very simply to any
     unprejudiced mind: let it be granted, that the degree of happiness
     the good will attain hereafter depends on their sense of, and trust
     in, the Atonement of CHRIST; yet nevertheless this is also true,
     that he who humbles himself most on earth, will be the highest in
     heaven: or again, it is also true, that the degree of the rewards
     hereafter will depend on, and be proportionate to, the use of the
     talents which have been given; and therefore, if objection is made
     to our inculcating these things, it is a sufficient answer, that we
     are but following the method and commands of Scripture. This would
     be quite sufficient for a childlike obedience. But when we come to
     consider the nature of religious principles, and to "compare things
     spiritual with spiritual," then we obtain a glimpse of that vast and
     mysterious truth laid up in the counsels of GOD, that it is he who
     humbles himself most, and obeys most dutifully, who attains most of
     all unto a right and saving sense of the Atonement of CHRIST. And
     thus we come again to the same point with regard to our teaching, as
     for instance, that he who most of all impresses himself and others
     with a sense of the day of judgment, will most of all lead himself
     and others to keep the commandments; and he who does this will be
     the most humble, and will most of all embrace the doctrine of the
     Atonement; whereas he who puts forward this doctrine most
     prominently, in a manner different from this general analogy of
     GOD'S Word, may be taking persons furthest from it.

     Again, we have said the necessary effect of keeping the
     commandments, is to empty a man of self-righteousness, and therefore
     to bring him to CHRIST Crucified. Now this might be shown in all the
     examples of holy men in Scripture: for whatever other graces they
     might have, they are all marked with humility. And that humility in
     proportion to their obedience, and their faith in proportion to
     their humility. Thus St. Paul, because he had always laboured to
     have "a conscience void of offence both towards GOD and man," and in
     a Gospel had "laboured more abundantly" than all the Apostles,
     therefore felt himself the chief of sinners: words which our own
     devout and laborious Hammond eagerly and emphatically at his last
     Communion exclaimed of himself: and the good Bishop Andrewes, in all
     his devotions speaks of himself as ton panu amartwlon, ton amartwlon
     uper telwnou. These holy men loved much, because they felt they had
     much forgiven; and they felt they had much forgiven, because they
     loved much. For it has been well said, "The best men know they are
     very far from what they ought to be, and the very worst think that,
     if they were but a little better, they should be as good as they
     need be." So far therefore as we keep the commandments we shall
     embrace the Atonement, and so far only, whether we speak of it or
     not. But how very inconsistent with this is the mode which this
     system has introduced, of judging of the saints of GOD according to
     this rule, viz. how far and how much they speak of the Atonement!
     Holy Scripture itself is hardly sufficient to shield the man of GOD.
     Before the publication of the Gospel indeed, such a full declaration
     is not expected and among the very few that since appear before us
     in Holy Writ, St. James has been by one great name given up, because
     he cannot stand by this peculiar criterion of saving Faith. And
     surely this principle upon which sentence is pronounced on the
     Saints of the primitive Church, is quite irreconcilable with the
     general tenor of Scripture; for their devotional and practical
     graces are allowed, but they are supposed to have misunderstood and
     misinterpreted the true nature of the Gospel; that is to say, they
     gave up houses and lands, and parents and wives and children for the
     sake of CHRIST and the Gospel, but did not receive the promises
     annexed to doing so in the present, or in future time; that they
     were meek, but did not inherit the kingdom; that they mourned, but
     were not comforted; that they kept CHRIST'S commandments, but He did
     not, according to His promise, manifest Himself unto them. And is
     all this to be inferred from their not speaking of the Atonement?
     Why was this of such vital importance? And consider what great
     injury is done to a generation who are taught to disparage these
     holy men, who spent their days and nights in frequent prayers, in
     fastings, and mortification, and retirement from the world. Men have
     been induced to believe that this was not only unnecessary, that
     they took not merely a circuitous and difficult way to obtain the
     favour of GOD, whereas the true way was comparatively very short and
     easy; but that these saints of GOD have failed of the right and
     saving way altogether.

                   7. On eloquent preaching and delivery.

     There is another important point in which the modern system is
     opposed to Scripture in breaking the spirit of reserve, viz., in
     attaching so great a value to preaching as to disparage Prayer and
     Sacraments in comparison. According to this the Church of GOD would
     be the House of Preaching; but Scripture calls it the House of
     Prayer. But with regard to the subject of preaching altogether, it
     is, in the present day, taken for granted, that eloquence in speech
     is the most powerful means of promoting religion in the world. But
     if this be the vase, it occurs to one as remarkable, that there is
     no intimation of this in Scripture: perhaps no single expression can
     be found in any part of it that implies it: there is no
     recommendation of rhetoric in precept, or example, or prophecy.
     There is no instance of it; no part of Scripture itself appears in
     this shape, as the remains of what was delivered with powerful
     eloquence. Many parts of it consist of poetry, none of oratory; and
     it is remarkable that the former partakes more of this reserve, the
     latter less so. It speaks of instruction, "precept upon precept,
     line upon line, here a little and there a little," but never of
     powerful appeals of speech. The great teacher of the Gentiles, in
     whom we would most of all have expected to find it, was "weak in
     bodily presence, and in speech contemptible;" and rendered so, it is
     supposed, by "a thorn in the flesh." Whereas, it would be thought by
     many now, that the great requisites for a successful minister are a
     powerful bodily presence and eloquent speech. Indeed, St. Paul says,
     that the effect of the words of men's wisdom would be to render the
     Cross of CHRIST of none effect. It is, moreover, observable, that in
     Scripture all the words denoting a minister of the Gospel throw us
     back on the commission. Such, for instance, is the word "Apostle,"
     or "the Sent," which title is repeated with a remarkable frequency
     and emphasis, and united, in one instance, with the awful and high
     expression, "As my FATHER hath sent me, even so I send you." And the
     word "preaching," as now used, has a meaning attached to it derived
     from modern notions, which we shall not find in Scripture. "A
     preacher," indeed, properly conveys the same idea as "Apostle," and
     really signifies the same thing-"a herald;" for, of course, all the
     office of a herald depends on him that sent him, not so much on
     himself, or his mode of delivering his message. All other words, in
     like manner adopted in the Church, speak the same; they all
     designate him as one ministering or serving at GOD'S altar, not as
     one whose first object is to be useful to men; such, for instance,
     are the appellations of diaconus, sacerdos. It is curious that our
     word "minister," implying also the same, comes to be commonly used
     in the other sense, being applied, like that of preacher, to
     self-created teachers. Thus do men's opinions invest sacred
     appellations with new meaning, according to the change in their own
     views.

     If people in general were now asked what was the most powerful means
     of advancing the cause of religion in the world, we should be told
     that it was eloquence of speech or preaching: and the excellency of
     speech we know consists in delivery; that is the first, the second,
     and the third requisite. Whereas, if we were to judge from Holy
     Scripture, of what were the best means of promoting Christianity in
     the world, we should say obedience; and if we were to be asked the
     second, we should say obedience; and if we were to be asked the
     third, we should say obedience. And it is evident, that if the
     spirit of obedience exists, simple and calm statement of truth will
     go far. Not that we would be thought entirely to depreciate
     preaching as a mode of doing good; it may be necessary in a weak and
     languishing state; but it is the characteristic of this system as
     opposed to that of the Church, and we far the undue exaltation of an
     instrument which Scripture, to say the least, has never recommended.
     And, indeed, if from Revelation we turn to the great teachers of
     morals which have been in the world, we shall be surprised to find
     how little they esteemed it useful for their purpose. The exceeding
     jealous apprehension of rhetoric which Socrates evinces is
     remarkable, as shown throughout the Gorgias. Nor does it ever seem
     to have occurred to the sages of old, as a means of promoting
     morality; and yet some of them, as Pythagoras and Socrates, made
     this purpose, viz., that of improving the principles of men, the
     object of their lives: and the former was remarkable for his
     mysterious discipline, and the silence he imposed; the latter for a
     mode of questioning, which may be considered as entirely an instance
     of this kind of reserve in teaching.

     And here again, if we are referred to expediency and visible
     effects, let us ask what these effects are. They have the effect of
     bringing people together in crowds, of creating strong religious
     impressions: so far it may be well; but even then, to all strong
     feelings the saying may be justly applied, "quod est violentum non
     est diuturnum." But does this system make men more desirous to
     learn, and more exact in adhering to truth? Does this system in the
     long run make men more humble and obedient to their appointed
     ministers, more frequent in attending the daily prayers, more honest
     and just in their dealings with mankind? Does it lead men to think
     more of GOD and His appointments, and less of men and their gifts?
     Does it produce a healthful and reverential tone of feeling
     respecting the blessed Sacraments? Are persons who have been used to
     popular preaching more submissive to Divine ordinances, and more
     easily moved to the self-denying duties of repentance and prayer?
     But on this point, with regard to religious effects, even did they
     appear satisfactory, yet we are, in fact, no judges at all on this
     subject; the next world only can show this: here we walk by faith,
     not by sight. Certainly the silence of Scripture should make us
     cautious how we allow too much to this instrument. The great
     importance now attributed to these means is sufficient to show the
     tendency of the system; it is one of expedience, it looks to man:
     that of the Church is one of faith, and looks to GOD. Their
     principle is to speak much and loud, because it is to man; that of
     the Church is founded on this, "that God is in Heaven, and we on
     earth;" therefore "keep thy foot in the House of GOD," and "let thy
     words be few."

                      8. This system a worldly system.

     It is very remarkable, how much this new scheme of religion is an
     instance of an observation which has been made, that they who set
     out with the profession of principles holier, or wiser, or purer
     than those of Holy Scripture, do ultimately tend to the virtual
     denial of those very truths which they professed most strictly to
     uphold. They who maintain that the Church does not sufficiently
     preach the dependence of man upon GOD, and trust in the Atonement,
     do practically, in their whole system, tend to derogate from those
     truths themselves, while the Church continues to hold them. They
     consider, for instance, that the efficacy of a preacher consists in
     human eloquence and activity, and not in the power of his Divine
     commission, which is, in fact, to set up something else, which may
     be sensibly felt, for the Divine gifts of the SPIRIT. By disparaging
     the efficacy of the Sacraments, they have come to substitute for
     them something like a meritorious act, or opinion, on the part of
     the individual. Professing to be guided exclusively by the written
     Word, they have established a method so opposed to it, as to render
     the greater part of it superfluous. Requiring us to speak loudly of
     Spiritual assistance, they have set at nought all those practices,
     whose sole end and object was to live in that invisible world, and
     to partake of its gifts. For men have been led to reflect, censure,
     and even ridicule, not on the superstitious and wrong observances of
     Sacramental Ordinances, and Creeds, and Prayers, but on the punctual
     observance of them at all; and sentiments are expressed which would
     brand with superstition the devout Daniel for his unbending
     adherence to times and circumstances of devotion; and the widow
     Anna, who departed not from the temple, with formalism. And all this
     arises from the fact, that these opinions are not thoroughly and
     unreservedly based on Holy Scripture, and therefore look too much to
     external support.

     The very principle of sound Religion is that the world "knoweth it
     not, as it knew Him not:" its rules of action are so essentially
     opposed, that they cannot understand each other, from something of
     an essential nature different. The system, on the contrary, of which
     we speak, has ever the indirect object of making a league with
     it,-not externally, on the contrary, it has devised externally
     strongly-marked lines of demarcation and distinctions, which do not
     extend to the thoughts or character; and in every way has
     substituted a great unreal system, nominal, superficial, formal,
     though in name spiritual, and the more formal in reality, because in
     name spiritual. Where GOD is, there must be the fear of Him.

     For this reason it has come to pass that names of the most awful and
     holy import have been so used habitually, that they carry not with
     them their own high and awful meaning, even the Names of the
     ever-blessed Trinity. Not only have they become used without
     reverence, and very much as the distinctive signs of a party,-but
     the very use of them tends to keep up this feeling of unreality, and
     without bearing on the heart and conduct. Whereas homefelt natural
     expressions in which any one who is in earnest is apt to clothe his
     sentiments, and which touch the heart and conscience of another, as
     they come from his own, are disliked; because they break through
     this unreal web, and bear more upon the daily life and conscience.

     All this is substituting a system of man's own creation for that
     which GOD has given. Instead of the Sacraments and external
     ordinances, it has put forth prominently a supposed sense of the
     Atonement, as the badge of a profession. That which is most
     thoroughly internal, most thoroughly spiritual, secret and holy, it
     has made the external symbol of agreement; and therefore has
     completely (so to speak) turned people inside out, wherever it is
     received: and thus it has lost the essential peculiarity of
     Christianity, that purity of heart which is directed to "the Eye
     that seeth in secret." This spirit has thoroughly imbued their whole
     system, in the same manner that it has prevailed in the corruptions
     of Rome. In the case of the latter, the use of external symbols the
     most sacred, has lost much of its power, by rude exposure to the
     gaze of the world; so is it with this system in the use of words;
     they have lost their proper sense and meaning, and have a peculiar
     signification. That dread doctrine so essential as received into the
     heart, the very foundation of life and actions, has come with them
     to consist in that which can be called up from time to time, and
     satisfy the professor in sensible emotions and satisfactions. Works
     as performed strictly in secret, and directed to the eye of GOD,
     cannot but be life-giving and good: the corruptions of Rome have
     substituted for these external actions; and this system external
     professions. The eye of man is on both, unhallowing the holy things
     of GOD, and engendering pride. Hence has arisen among them that
     rejection of natural modesty, and sacred reserve, on the subject of
     religion in discourse and writing:-attempts to remedy certain
     effects and symptoms of the want of religion, instead of that want
     itself. Much indeed of this may arise from a natural craving after
     sympathy on the highest of all subjects, and from having lost the
     legitimate expressions of it. External visible Communion must be
     preserved by external visible means; when these are withdrawn,
     sacred principles or sacred feelings will be outwardly substituted.
     In proof of this, it may be observed, that a Sect which has least of
     all to distinguish it in doctrine or discipline as a separate body,
     the Wesleyans, are most under the influence of what is here
     condemned, to the great injury of their moral character: words with
     them do not signify what they do with others. Instead of visible
     means of grace, and participation in the same Sacraments, being the
     bonds of union, something in external speech or demeanour becomes
     substituted. A still more remarkable instance may be seen in the
     sect denominated the Society of Friends, who, after labouring the
     divest themselves of all the appearances of a visible Church and
     visible Sacraments, have become from external garb and mode of
     speech, the most visible of all Societies.

     It must be allowed that this modern system did for a time partake of
     the "reproach of CHRIST," and did in that strength prevail for a
     season. In that reproach, all good Christians will be glad to share
     with them. Doubtless the very name of CHRIST must ever carry with it
     a blessing; and earnestness in religion, in views however mistaken,
     seems ever to have annexed to it the reward of GOD. And for a time
     this earnestness of mind carried with it incidentally much good, and
     led men to embrace other great truths of Christianity, and perhaps
     that of CHRIST Crucified, in reality as well as in name; being far
     better themselves than their system, and better in their practice
     than in their opinions, which they held rather speculatively and
     controversially, than practically: but these things for a while
     corrected by the sincerity of individuals have gone by, and left the
     legitimate fruits of the system. The evils it has led to in various
     forms of dissent are too evident wherever we turn our eyes, leading
     men to the neglect of honesty and plain dealing, and at length to
     indifference, unsettledness, and infidelity. In the Church it
     excludes with jealous eagerness all things that may alarm the
     consciences of those who heartily adopt the system, obedience to
     Church authority, practices of mortification, the fear of GOD, and
     the doctrine of judgment to come. It sets forth religion in colours
     attractive to the world, by stimulating the affections, and by
     stifling the conscience, rather than by purifying and humbling the
     heart. Hence its great prevalence in places of fashionable resort.
     And to those who have in any way forfeited their character for
     religion and morality or sound doctrine, instead of the process of
     painful secret self-discipline and gradual restoration, or the open
     and salutary penance of the ancient Church, it affords an instant
     and ready mode for assuming at once all the privileges of authority
     and advanced piety. And the consequence is, that real humility of
     heart, and a quiet walking in the ordinances of GOD, finds not only
     the world in array against it, but that which considers itself as
     Christianity also. Through all its appearances it is marked by a
     want of reverence; and therefore it can use worldly instruments and
     worldly organs. It may serve as a ready cloak to cover an unsubdued
     temper and a worldly spirit, concealing them as well from the
     individual himself as from others. It may offer a convenient refuge
     to those who would cling to the Establishment, rather than the
     Church, if she should be spoiled and persecuted. But the effect of
     these opinions is not confined to those who profess and receive
     them; but as a great part of the office of the Gospel is to be a
     witness to all nations, even to those who receive it not, the
     witness itself, or the voice which is heard from it, becomes altered
     in its character. One or two great truths are thus put forth
     exclusively as the whole of religion; and this has a vast effect on
     the whole of society, among those who do not openly avow, nor are
     even secretly con-scious of' these opinions: the world accepts them,
     not even as the professors of them would themselves intend, but as
     pal-liatives to an uneasy conscience, as an assistance to throw off
     the sense of responsibility, and as false easy notions of
     repentance. Therefore it is that these peculiar views in religion
     amalgamate so readily with the liberal notions of the world, and
     both will be found readily to unite against principles of a more
     unbending nature. There exists a secret affinity between them.

     There was one impediment in the Jews throughout, when prevented
     their receiving the truth; they trusted in their being of the seed
     of Abraham. From this point as a centre, the evil one wove around
     them a web of external and specious observances, from which the
     great Teacher of repentance, and our LORD Him-self, and St. Paul, in
     vain endeavoured to extricate them: they bore leaves, but no fruit.
     The Baptist had laid the axe to the root of the tree: our LORD had
     interceded for three years with the FATHER, till He should dig
     around it and dung it: St. Paul had endeavoured to graft within it
     the better stock; but in vain; it still bore leaves, but no fruit.
     The present age is one of affected refinement in sentiment combined
     with loose morals; one of expediency rather than principle, of
     rationalism rather than faith; one that will take all that is
     agreeable and beautiful and benevolent in religion, and reject what
     is stern and self--denying and awful. Now the whole truth in its
     just propor-tions we have in the Creed, which GOD has given us as a
     key to Scripture, the depository of the faith in the Church, to each
     individual a guide and safeguard. But it is very evident that if we
     take one point only in religion, instead of this analogy of the
     Faith, we may produce a religion which may please ourselves and
     others, and yet may be very far from the truth as it is in
     Scripture, and from the principles of that new world wherein
     dwelleth righteousness. And it is an awful and trying question for a
     man to ask himself, whether the reason why he sets aside the Day of
     Judgment, the severe discipline of the Church, and above all the two
     Sacraments, in his public teaching, is not this, that in the secret
     care of himself he does not consider them: and whether the strong
     controversial party feeling, exhibited on these points, does not
     arise from the dislike he has to be disturbed in these easy
     convictions, into the truth of which he will not seriously enquire.

     Now against all this leaven of a worldly system, the reserve that is
     here inculcated seems at once the remedy; for it strips off at once
     all those external indications of a religion which exists not in the
     heart, as rather hindrances to true piety than the promoters of it;
     and requires one to be reverential and considerate in all that
     regards it. We have nothing to show to ourselves or others, to
     encourage the notion that we are better than they; and may be
     induced to cultivate a sincere desire to be approved in the eyes of
     our Father "who seeth in secret." A want of reserve, an artificial
     religious tone in conversation or prayer is, as the good James
     Bonnel observes, a proof that the person is wishing to be, or
     wishing to persuade himself that he is, rather than that he really
     is religious. As far as any one is in earnest, he will act naturally
     with this sacred modesty, seeking to know GOD and do His will. And
     this unaffected reserve will be a great protection to him in keeping
     the spirit of piety fresh and true, and when he loses it, he will
     lose half his strength. This secret devotion will doubtless lower
     him in his own eyes, and in the eyes of the world, and will keep him
     back. He must be content to be not understood, to be misrepresented,
     but this will little concern him, if he may be hid from men's eyes
     in the sanctuary of the Divine presence, where his prayers for them
     will have power with GOD.

                                  PART VI.
                  THE SYSTEM OF THE CHURCH ONE OF RESERVE.

          1. The principle considered with reference to ourselves.

     BUT far be it from us, to put forward this sacred principle merely
     in condemnation of others, and their system; what we have said with
     regard to them is in our defence and for their warning: and we have
     quite as much need of it for the regulation and protection of
     ourselves. Indeed it might have been considered that it is for
     ourselves that it is more especially needed; and the subject should,
     one would think, have been hailed with pleasure as a pledge and
     indication, that what we maintain we would wish to maintain modestly
     and seriously. That when we consider ourselves called upon to put
     forward great Christian truths, which have been forgotten, we imply,
     by connecting this principle with them, that we consider them as
     matters, not for speculation or external distinction, but to be
     embraced practically, and as it were secretly, looking to that time
     when all things will be revealed.

     The whole of the effects which we condemn, and which have developed
     themselves in a system, have been spoken of as putting forward
     religion with a want of reality, an absence of true seriousness; and
     of course the principles of the Church are liable to be taken hold
     of, and turned to the same purpose. But we proceed to show that the
     Church of itself is entirely a system of reserve. In fact, she holds
     all the doctrines which those who agree not with her consider most
     essential, but in a sort of reserve; being calculated to bring men
     to the heart and substance of those things of which this scheme
     embraces the shadow. The Church, moreover, in all her departments,
     is directed to the eye of GOD, and not to man; as the Bride who ever
     looks to the Bridegroom, and to none else. The one instance in her
     usages which partakes least of this reserved character, is the
     practice of preaching which she sanctions and admits, and which
     alone, it is curious to observe, this human system has taken,
     considering it as the only instrument calculated for its purpose.
     The principle of the Church is, that "the secret things belong unto
     the LORD our GOD;" that He Himself dispenses them through His
     Church, as He thinks meet, to faith and obedience. Her system
     therefore is one of reserve.

     But before we proceed to this subject, it may be requisite to say
     something respecting the application of the rule at all to baptized
     Christians. It may be said, that during the gradual revelations of
     the Gospel to mankind, this might have been the mode of the Divine
     proceeding, and very necessary; but that now among baptized
     Christians, "the enlightened," as they were called in the early
     church, all have entered into the fulness of the Christian
     inheritance, and we have no right to withdraw from them any part of
     their birthright. Or it may be said, that the mystery is now made
     known to all the world; every thing is perfectly different; omnia
     jam vulgata.

     But now in answer to this, it must be observed, that this sacred
     forbearance is an universal rule in morals, and not confined to
     circumstances, but accompanies every progress in religious
     knowledge; thus the Fathers speak of it, as a rule to be observed,
     not only towards catechumens, but according to which the mysteries
     of GOD are revealed more and more to the last stage of Christian
     perfection. It is evident, that the knowledge which Scripture speaks
     of as life-giving goes entirely with Christian purity of heart; that
     in this respect, unless it will be maintained that this sincerity
     and purity now prevails, the rule still holds; in the Scriptural
     sense, men are still in darkness, and ignorance, in proportion to
     their vices; knowledge is to be imparted or withdrawn on the same
     principles. And with regard to the circumstance of men having been
     baptized, St. Paul did not make this an occasion of altering this
     rule towards his converts, but he maintains towards them precisely
     the same caution. This St. Augustine observes, speaking of the
     expression of "giving what is holy to dogs," he adds, "when the LORD
     says this, we must believe that He wished to signify, that unclean
     hearts cannot bear the light of spiritual intelligence, and if a
     teacher should compel them to bear that which they do not rightly
     receive, inasmuch as they are not capable of doing so, they either
     rend him with the bitings of reprehension, or by despising, tread
     them under foot. For if the blessed Apostle says that he gave milk,
     and not meat, to those who thought they were already born again in
     CHRIST, yet were still babes; for hitherto were ye not able to bear
     it, neither yet now are ye able. If, in fine, the LORD Himself said
     to His elect Apostles, 'I have yet many things to say unto you, but
     ye cannot bear them now;' how much less can unclean minds of the
     wicked, bear those things that are spoken of incorporeal light?"

     In one point of view, our case indeed differs from that of for-mer
     ages; in that the great and essential truths of our religion, which
     have been so long kept back, are now generally known. Our position
     is therefore in most material respects different, but not so, in any
     way, as to do away with the necessity of this natural principle.

     It must be observed, that the word knowledge is used in two senses,
     or that there are two kinds of knowledge; the one, according to
     which "the knowledge of the LORD fills the earth, as the waters
     cover the sea:" the other, discovering One who still dwelleth in
     secret in the midst of these manifestations, One "whose ways are in
     those deep waters, and whose footsteps are not known." The one is
     she "who lifteth up her voice in the streets, and in the city
     uttereth her cry:" the other is she, "who goeth about secretly,
     seeking those who are worthy of her, trying them in crooked paths,
     and ways of discipline, until she finds that she can trust their
     souls." The one that which is "a savour of life and also unto
     death," as when our LORD says, that he who knew his LORD'S will, and
     did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes; and "if ye know these
     things, happy are ye if ye do them;" a knowledge which without
     charity puffeth up. The other knowledge is that which is truly
     Divine and in-separable from charity; where to know and love GOD, is
     one and the same thing, and both of them eternal life. This is the
     gift especially of GOD alone, and which He dispenses according to
     man's fitness to receive it; and therefore the Church is a system of
     reserve. And this in no way limits or confines, but in every way
     strengthens the most active efforts for propagating the Gospel in
     the world; which can no more be doubted than that our LORD Himself
     took the very best, the most engaging, and at the same time the most
     powerful, means of recommending truth to mankind. And indeed the
     Church, in which our LORD has promised to be present unto the end,
     may very well be compared in this respect to His visible body in the
     flesh; a comparison which may be allowed, as He applied the term
     "temple" to His human person; both served as a veil to His Divinity,
     in both He withdraws from human eyes, through both in the same
     manner, He manifests Himself according as persons will by faith
     receive Him, will take up the cross after Him, and be His disciples.

                  2. The Holiness of God's House of Prayer.

     Now the whole business of the Church, as a system upon earth, is to
     impart to mankind this true saving knowledge; and in so doing she is
     quite opposed to the restless systems of the world for imparting
     mere knowledge of itself. She acts therefore as her Divine Founder
     throughout, on a species of reserve. As one desirous above all
     things to prepare men's minds, and bring them to the truth, but
     communicating it to them as they are able to receive it. She
     contains as it were within herself numerous channels or modes of
     access, by which men may be brought to this knowledge of GOD. Her
     Sacramental ordinances are, in fact, ways to that invisible
     Jerusalem, that celestial fellowship, and the city of the Living
     GOD. The progressive states of proficiency in the school of CHRIST
     have been termed the via purgativa, or the way of repentance; the
     via illuminativa, or the way of Christian knowledge; and the via
     unitiva, or the way of charity and union with GOD. Now it may be
     seen, that Church principles contain within them these modes of
     bringing men to the knowledge of, and to union with GOD, who
     dwelleth in secret, after a reserved, silent, and retiring manner.
     All those that are considered peculiarly Church principles,
     doctrines and practices, are of this character.

     For instance, the Church, contrary to the human system, which we
     have described, looks upon houses of Divine worship as being
     especially sacred, and the place of GOD'S peculiar presence. Now if
     this doctrine of the Church is true, then they must be the abode of
     some great and peculiar blessing; every body must necessarily allow,
     that the Divine presence must be life-giving and hallowing, and as
     it were sacramentally convey spiritual benefit; but now if both
     these opinions of the Church be true, it is evident that these
     blessings cannot be realized, but by particular persons and
     dispositions; by those who make it their reverential study to raise
     their minds to it, and by faith receive the blessing. These
     privileges, so high and spiritual, are held by the Church in a sort
     of reserve and silence. The case is precisely analogous to that of
     our LORD in the flesh; conveying now spiritual blessings, as then
     bodily cures, after precisely the same rule and method; and
     withdrawing Himself from many, who may be inclined to doubt and
     ridicule such a supposition. That such a sense of the holiness of
     Churches is itself beneficial to the moral character, may be
     inferred from the high authority of Bishop Butler, the great master
     of morals, who recommends some devotional act of the mind, as a
     reverential exercise, to be practised at the very sight of a Church.
     And there is something in Holy Scripture most mysteriously striking,
     and awful, on this subject; as for instance, the sanctity, and
     adoration, claimed so strongly in the Old Testament for the place
     where GOD vouchsafed to disclose His presence, of which there are
     many instances. And perhaps there is no circumstance in all the
     account of our SAVIOUR'S life, which so arrests and demands our
     awful attention, as that of His driving the buyers out of the
     temple, when He would suffer no "vessel to be carried through it."
     In the first place, because this action was so different in its
     character to all other actions of our LORD; in the next place,
     because it was twice repeated; and lastly, because it implied a
     sense of holiness so transporting as to have carried Him, humanly
     speaking, beyond Himself, fulfilling the expression of the Psalmist,
     "the zeal of Thine house hath eaten me up." Since therefore no man
     can equal the sense of veneration here expressed, for GOD'S "House
     of Prayer," therefore no one can exceed on this subject; the case is
     in some respect analogous to an adoration of our LORD'S Divinity
     when seen in the flesh. And the effect and cause become mutually
     implicated in bearing on the moral character: the most holy men will
     most reverence the place of GOD'S presence, and he who more values
     the place of GOD'S presence will become the most holy. Now this
     secret of GOD is so entirely disclosed by Him, after this manner of
     reserve, that the difference of regard which men feel for Churches,
     is as great as the difference of estimation in which our LORD was
     regarded by the beloved disciple or by the traitor Judas, for both
     of them were in His presence, but one only derived benefit from it.
     For instance, David speaks of the temple of GOD with words of
     longing desire, as great as could be expressed for any conceivable
     blessing, as being the place of GOD'S presence; and yet many of us
     doubtless feel nothing of the kind. These gifts therefore, the
     greatest that heart of man can devise, are in secret; it is the
     kingdom of heaven upon earth, but seen only by certain persons; a
     treasure hid, "the pure in heart seeing GOD" under those veils: of
     all of which it may be said, as of our LORD'S teaching, "he that
     hath ears to hear, let him hear."

               3. Sacraments, Church Ordinances and practices.

     In the next place, with respect to the Holy Sacraments, it is in
     these, and by these chiefly, that the Church of all ages has held
     the Doctrine of the Atonement after a certain manner of reserve;
     which sense of things this modern system has relinquished, and in
     consequence has put forward this doctrine to the people in a manner
     unknown to former ages. The Church has ever thus held the doctrine
     in its substance, in its fulness, in its life-giving power and
     reality: for which these moderns have substituted what is human;-the
     declaration of it by eloquence of speech, the reception of it in
     excitement of feeling. The Church consi-ders it in the Sacraments as
     a power of substantial and Divine efficacy, conferring spiritual
     gifts and privileges; this system, as nominal and external to
     ourselves. In the Sacraments the doctrine is most intimately and
     closely blended with the life and conduct of man; in this system, it
     is in great measure separated from it. For instance, all ancient
     Baptismal Services, as well as that of our own Church, have most
     closely connected with the doctrine of the Atonement, the
     consideration of our being crucified with CHRIST, being dead with
     CHRIST, being buried with CHRIST, and the consequent necessity of
     our mortifying our earthly mem-bers: in this respect, they
     exemplify, in a wonderful manner, all that we have stated respecting
     this doctrine in the Gospels, and the Epistles of St. Paul, wherein
     our own cross,-the world being crucified to us, and we to the
     world,-is mysteriously connected with that of CHRIST. The Sacraments
     realize the doctrine in a way that no human system can do; for we
     believe that a Divine Power, and the blessings of the Atonement
     especially, are, after some transcendental manner, present in those
     Sacraments, according to the express promise of our LORD. And it is
     very obvious that our Communion Service does support the same
     principle in like manner with the Baptismal Offices; for it
     throughout implies penitence, faith, and charity as indispensable on
     the part of man; and "the body and the blood of CHRIST, verily and
     indeed taken and received," as the highest of gifts on the part of
     GOD. And these it considers as the spiritual life of- Christians.
     And as the very essence of a Church does depend on a due
     dispensation of the blessed Sacraments, so, where a sense of these
     is impaired, or not realized by faith, the doctrine of the Atonement
     itself is put forth to mankind, as if the preaching of this
     constituted all that was life-giving in the Church. Now here it is
     very evident at once that the great difference between these two
     systems, consists in this, that one holds the doctrine secretly as
     it were, and the other openly, in a public and popular manner; one
     in connexion with all other doctrines of Scripture, the other as
     separated from them. It is always the case with the Church, that it
     has considered the Sacraments as certain veils of the Divine
     presence, being not only the signs and tokens, but vehicles and
     conveyances, as it were, of Divine gifts. This is obvious, not only
     from the Discipline of the secret, but from usual modes of speaking
     concerning them. Thus, St. Augustine on the words, "He laid in the
     darkness His secret place," applies this to GOD having laid His
     secret place "in the obscurity of the Sacrament, and secret hope in
     the heart of believers;" "where He Himself might be hid, and desert
     them not even in this darkness, where we walk as yet by faith, not
     by sight."

     The same may be shown with respect to the powers of Priestly
     Absolution, and the gifts conferred thereby. It is not required for
     our purpose to show the reality of that power, and the magnitude of
     those gifts which are thus dispensed. But a little consideration
     will show, that if the Church of all ages is right in exercising
     these privileges, the subject is one entirely of this reserved and
     mystical character. Its blessings are received in secret, according
     to faith: they are such as the world cannot behold, and cannot
     receive. The subject is one so profound and mysterious, that it
     hardly admits of being put forward in a popular way, and perhaps
     more injury than benefit would be done to religion by doing so
     inconsiderately. And yet a faithful Christian may look through the
     actions and offices of the Church, to that which is beyond human
     senses, to CHRIST absolving, CHRIST baptizing, CHRIST interceding,
     CHRIST pronouncing benediction; and may thus by an habitual sense of
     Absolution declared, come to the state of that penitent, who "loved
     much, because she had much forgiven." The same may be said with
     respect to the Benediction: no words and arguments, no learned
     proofs nor eloquent demonstration, of the blessing that is through
     these channels conveyed, render us of themselves capable of
     receiving them; but it is a secret which GOD Himself dispenses as
     men are found worthy. For when our SAVIOUR instructed His disciples
     to pro-nounce the blessing of peace beyond understanding, He annexed
     to it, "that if the Son of peace be there, His peace should rest
     upon that house, if not, it should return to them again." And that
     His peace was mysteriously powerful to convey what it expressed, and
     not like mere human words of salutation, nor in a manner capable of
     being understood by the world, our LORD seems to have signified in
     that expression, "Peace be unto you, My peace I give, not as the
     world giveth give I unto you." And that some blessing would be in
     reality attached to the authoritative declaration, might be inferred
     from the promise, attached to the Levitical Benediction, which GOD
     vouchsafed should be accompanied by His own blessing. To the heart
     of faith, therefore, the Priestly pronunciation of blessing, may be
     productive of greater spiritual benefit than the most moving appeals
     of human eloquence: as GOD is in secret, and His Angels that
     minister to us, and all His paths in the deep waters, so all His
     instruments of benefiting our souls seem to partake of this
     character of Reserve; ways that appear foolishness to the world, for
     its effects are out of sight, but seen and fully acknowledged by
     those who are brought to the sense of them, for "wisdom is justified
     of her own children."

     The like may be shown in many other points, that "the weapons of our
     warfare being not carnal," partake of this secret character, in
     opposition to that system which we condemn. It is the custom of that
     system to recommend persons to seek those ministers which are
     supposed edifying; but the Church considers all edification to be of
     GOD, and by His own means. If they are found unworthy or inadequate,
     the world recommends us to attach ourselves to others; the Church,
     by her Ember Weeks, supplies a remedy, but entirely of a secret
     character. For as our LORD has said, when he beheld the people as
     sheep without a shepherd, "Pray ye the LORD of the harvest, that he
     may send more labourers into his harvest;" therefore, it is clear
     that the remedy for the unworthiness or scantiness of ministers
     depends on the prayers of the people. Here again the Church supplies
     us with a quiet rule of Reserve: the opposite to that which this
     system extensively pursues.

     There is another point which may be mentioned to show the way in the
     which the Church secretly realizes the doctrines of Scripture, which
     doctrines the world will not allow. The modern scheme is very
     careful to separate the cross of Christians from the Cross of
     CHRIST, which the Scriptures, we think, in mysterious and manifold
     ways, unite, in the same way that type and prophecy often combine
     allusions to CHRIST and to His members. Now, consider the Friday
     fast with respect to this subject. The Church has always set apart
     this day for meditation on CHRIST'S death and passion. But how is it
     to be observed? First of all it is a matter of obedience; in the
     next place the Church requires fasting on this day, both of which
     are in fact the bearing of our own cross. And now to take the simple
     matter of fact, in this case fasting and obedience is what would be
     called bearing our own cross, and the effect of this is to dispose
     the heart to prayer, and to heavenly affections, and a sense of
     GOD'S mercy in CHRIST; thus, as Bishop Wilson observes, "the mystery
     of the cross is learned under the cross." Nor can this day be
     rightly observed excepting in such a manner as leads to these
     affections. Something of the same kind may be said respecting the
     LORD'S day, on which the Ancient Church used to observe the posture
     of standing in prayer, to express that we are risen together with
     CHRIST. To realize the Christian Sunday is a matter of faith, and
     requires a knowledge of the "power of the Resurrection:" to insist
     on the observance of the Jewish Sabbath is to insist on an external
     duty, and may be popularly expedient; it comes more among things of
     sight; the former is received by faith in the invisible sanctions of
     long Tradition; the latter insisted on by express legal sanction.

     Again, the mode in which the Church teaches us to regard Holy
     Scripture is one of Reserve. Let us take for instance, the use of
     Psalms in daily public worship; by this circumstance of thus using
     them, it is evident she considers them as a Christian manual of
     devotion. And yet modern systems, which disparage or separate from
     the Church, consider them as very unfit for such a purpose. The
     Church uses them entirely upon a principle of reserve: for of
     course, for a Christian to be repeating expressions concerning war,
     "the shield, the sword, and the battle," or concerning legal
     sacrifices, "offering bullocks and goats," or of "the hill of Sion,"
     and the mountains that surrounded Jerusalem; or of Sihon king of the
     Amorites, and Og the king of Bashan; or of Edom and Babylon being
     laid even with the ground: all these things are of course (as Dr.
     Watts has stated them to be) unfit words for a Christian, excepting
     upon this principle of reserve; according to which we believe that
     the inspiration of GOD is in the words, and reverence them as full
     of Divine meanings with respect to ourselves. Something after the
     same manner that we look upon a Church and altar as holy, though to
     bodily eyes they are nothing more than cold stones or bare wood. And
     after some faint imitation of this vast principle of reserve, which
     thus pervades the Church of GOD, it is supposed that even the
     visible shape and structure of sacred edifices was intended by our
     forefathers to represent sacred mysteries, and the higher doctrines
     of our faith. Indeed, the Lessons themselves which are read in
     Divine worship are many of them not at all understood by some, by
     most very imperfectly. Hence this popular system will not allow this
     reading of Holy Scripture to be sufficient for maintaining their
     opinions, without also what they call the "preaching of the Word,"
     by which it is implied, that the Scriptures themselves are not the
     Word in the sense in the which they use the term. Because they do
     not put forward prominently and explicitly on all occasions the
     doctrine they regard.

     But moreover, with regard to the doctrine of the Atonement, it is
     contained throughout the whole of the Liturgy, after this manner of
     sacred reserve: inasmuch as the whole tone, spirit, and character of
     it, and especially the Litany, is expressive of this doctrine; and
     in fact conveys it, teaches it, infuses a right sense of it, more
     vitally and truly than any set speeches could do, in the same way
     that it is taught by all our LORD'S words and actions. So that they
     of her sons whose spirit is in unison with her prayers, rightly
     receive this great cardinal truth: they whose spirit is not thus in
     accordance with her cannot receive it rightly.

                4. The Church realizes the Kingdom in secret.

     Now to realize all these mysterious blessings contained in the
     Church were, indeed, to understand the meaning of the term by which
     it is designated in Scripture as "the kingdom of Heaven" upon earth.
     It is all founded on that vast principle in Religion, that "he who
     will do the will, shall know of the doctrine." They are all things
     that depend on the state of the heart: they cannot be otherwise than
     real and substantial gifts as they have reference entirely to GOD'S
     unseen presence, and only thus attained by secret faith and
     obedience. Now, some persons will allow that the case is perfectly
     true respecting our LORD'S conduct in the flesh, that He observed
     this reserve (as shown in Tract 80. part i.) but they would confine
     it to that alone: they may be asked then, whether the case of the
     Church in all these respects is not perfectly analogous to it: our
     LORD is present in His Church according to His promise, and in all
     these things as of old, "He doth not strive, nor cry, nor lift up
     His voice in the streets."

     We have in these points endeavoured to show more especially that the
     Church holds, after a living and substantial manner, those great
     truths of our LORD'S Divinity and Atonement: she holds in secret
     what others require to be publicly pronounced aloud. But as the
     Church is more especially the dispensation of the SPIRIT, so it may
     be shown that she realizes, in the same kind of retiring modesty,
     all those influences of the SPIRIT connected with duty and
     dependence on the part of man, which it is thought so necessary
     publicly to profess. It is very evident how this is implied in the
     principle of the Church sacramentally conveying grace: not to all
     indiscriminately, but to those who duly watch and wait for those
     gifts. It might be shown in like manner, how each article in the
     third part of the Creed, respecting the dispensation of the SPIRIT,
     is found fulfilled in the Church after a living manner, and not in
     human plans of religion. "The Holy Catholic Church" is realized
     throughout it, all our principles and practices being thence
     derived, and holding us in union with her. "The Communion of Saints"
     is maintained by unity of worship, by similarity of devotional
     forms, by one Baptism, and also by her Saints' days; whereby various
     Churches throughout the world, by commemorating the same Saints, on
     the same days, preserve a communion of spirit with the living, and
     also with the dead, whom they commemorate. "The Forgiveness of
     sins," is taught by her Sacraments, and Absolution. "The
     Resurrection of the body," by the doctrine of the Eucharist, as
     always considered to have some mysterious connection with the
     resurrection of our bodies by the reverential regard with which she
     looks on Churchyards: and the whole tone of her Liturgy and prayers,
     looks forward to "a life everlasting after death." So fully do her
     Services contain every doctrine and every principle which has a
     reference to the Holy SPIRIT: and as far as her sons, by faith and
     obedience, realize the same, they obtain the blessings of the
     SPIRIT; though the world knows not of it. And if the Church is
     reproached for not exhibiting these sacred truths more publicly,
     that reproach she shares with her Divine Founder and Master, to whom
     it was said, "If thou doest these things, show thyself to the
     world."

     There are many points in which this sacred economy of the Church,
     being directed to the eye of GOD, and not to man, as one of reserve,
     is free from the temptations to which human systems are liable: it
     has no temptation to put forth principles of expediency rather than
     of truth, as that of Regeneration after Baptism: it is in a great
     degree independent of numbers;-are there few or many that hold them,
     it matters not: it is free from the temptation to party spirit; it
     needs no words, no professions, to collect others around in
     sympathy; to make "broad phylacteries," wearing without that which
     should be within: external ordinances serve the purpose of external
     bonds of union, and it thus secretly enters into the Communion of
     Saints. And, again, the House of GOD is, we know, "the House of
     Prayer," for the purposes of worship, but those whose religion
     mainly consists in popular appeals, are used to say, that the sight
     of a thinly-attended Church is perfectly deadening to them: and
     judging from their own feelings, they think it very desirable, that
     a Church should never be open, but when fully frequented: they need,
     moreover, external sympathies more for worship: but not so those who
     are used to realize, or endeavour to realize, in a Church, GOD'S
     presence: where Angels are intermingled as their associates in
     worship. And it is remarkable, that the two systems, that of this
     sacred reserve, and that of popular expediency, cannot exist
     together, without one derogating from the other: in the same way
     that what is carnal, sensible, visible, has tendency to stifle that
     which is spiritual and invisible. Where preaching (or rather
     eloquence of speech) is too highly estimated, prayer and the
     sacraments must necessarily lose their value: spirits excited, and
     moved beyond the tone of GOD'S WORD, cannot enter in the calm and
     deep reality of the sacred services.

     But it may be asked, if the principle of the Church is so much of
     this retiring character, how is she as well calculated to propagate
     the Gospel publicly, and extensively, in the world, as the more
     popular system, and to bring into CHRIST'S fold His sheep that are
     scattered abroad? To this it should be a sufficient answer, that
     these are the ways of GOD; this is the point we maintain; to which
     it may be added, that at that early period when this system was most
     of all observed in the Church, the Gospel spread itself throughout
     the earth in a manner quite beyond any subsequent example: for as
     they then carefully inculcated that saving truths could not be
     known, but by obedience and faith, they preserved that unity to
     which the blessing is attached. But it may be explained in this
     manner, how it is that the Church, under this veil of reserve, must
     necessarily be more powerful than any human modes or principles of
     extending the faith. For all the means we have spoken of, as
     belonging to the Church, are ways of obtaining holiness of life and
     GOD'S favour: and the obedience of Christians is the light of the
     world; example the most powerful of persuasions. But besides these,
     preaching, catechising, and all such means directed to mankind,
     obtain their greatest efficacy from holiness of life. And the point
     we have endeavoured to show in popular systems, is their want of
     real efficacy; that expediency in things Divine is the worst policy:
     for surely the ways of GOD are more powerful than those of man,
     though it is impossible they should appear so to mankind, as they
     are spiritually and morally discerned. A faithful Church is
     necessarily a converting Church, for it is of itself, "a city set on
     a hill that cannot be hid," the true Bethlehem, from which CHRIST
     goeth forth publicly, though there hid in secret: the true
     Bethlehem, the house of bread, which is the Church, the city of GOD.
     Though it be silent, if that were possible, yet in holy reserve it
     preaches aloud; "though there be neither speech nor language, yet
     their voices are heard among them."

     When our LORD in the Sermon on the Mount, after laying down the laws
     of evangelical righteousness, proceeded to give directions
     respecting the three modes by which power should be obtained to
     fulfil His Laws, viz. by Prayer and Almsgiving and Fasting, He
     confined those regulations especially by the law of secrecy,
     commanding that they were to be done in secret, with reference alone
     to our FATHER, who seeth in secret, and will reward openly. It seems
     not unnatural to think that in these He spoke (according to the
     vastness of Divine words) of what must be the essential character of
     His Church, as therein all duties are by faith to be directed to Him
     who dwelleth in secret: and there is something of a reward which is
     openly promised in this world (in prelude to the manifestation
     hereafter), in that, from the strength thus derived in secret, the
     example shines before men, who are able to see the good works, and
     by their own conversion by these means, glorify GOD.

     And thus, is there are persons living in the fear of GOD, and
     entirely given up to the things that are unseen, and making great
     sacrifices to do so, (which has been the purpose with whole bodies
     of Christians in religious houses) not only by the prevailing power
     of their prayers, and such means as are known to GOD only, but as a
     witness, their efficacy is most powerful in supporting a sense of
     piety in the world. Such a religion, which has its anchor in the
     invisible world, is not moved by the storms of this: a city which
     has its foundation on the eternal hills, and standeth fast like the
     great mountains. In contrast to which, this modern system, partaking
     of the character of our own age of expediency, and mostly founded on
     feeling, is moved by every wind; it partakes of the weakness of
     human things, and cannot stand when the floods arise. For surely it
     must be allowed that it consists, not in Sacraments, not in gifts of
     GOD bestowed on His chosen, not in Divinely appointed Ordinances,
     not in Liturgical Services, not in prayer, not in obedience, not in
     the strong holds of the eternal world, and the secret strength of
     GOD: but in words and phrases, in professions and emotions, in
     popular appeals, and party zeal: in confounding all distinctions
     between the Church of GOD and all the sects that prevail among
     misguided men. Very tenderly as we must wish to speak of individuals
     that adopt it (some of whom are in fact but attempting to realize
     the substance of great Christian truths which have been forgotten)
     yet, surely we must see that this religious system has about it
     something which falls in with, and encourages, nay, assumes its own
     character and complexion from, that spirit of disobedience and
     lawlessness, which is to prevail in the last days.

                5. The best preservative of sound principles.

     But it may be asked, do not those who bring forward the doctrines of
     the Church among ourselves, act in a manner at variance with this
     principle? It is sincerely hoped that they have not done so. They
     have indeed put forth the highest and most sacred doctrines,
     respecting the regenerating power of Baptism, and the sacrifice of
     the blessed Eucharist, matters beyond all others of sacred reserve,
     and the discipline of the secret. But they have done so by
     constraint, as bearing witness, which they were bound to do most
     distinctly and fully, to principles and doctrines of the Church,
     vitally important, but very much forgotten, and even denied by many,
     not only of Christians in general, but also of her ministers. And
     this they have done, not so much in popular discourses as in
     argumentative treatises, directed for the most part to the clergy:
     and not, it is hoped, without some sense and due reverence for their
     importance; certainly not in a manner to move the feelings and
     render them popular, by separating them from other distasteful
     truths, but with those accompanying doctrines, which have a tendency
     to make both those that bear and those that speak, serious. Those
     especially (or we might speak in the singular number) who have
     brought forward these two great doctrines just mentioned, might have
     met with a more favourable reception from the world, had they not
     associated with them other subjects equally forgotten, and naturally
     unpopular and unwelcome, such as the danger of sin after Baptism,
     the necessity of mortification, the doctrine of Judgment to come.
     Surely if any thing would dispose men to speak of those high
     doctrines of the Sacraments with reverential reserve, and to hear of
     them with seriousness, it is their connection with these subjects:
     not that they have been thus connected with any designed intention
     of this kind, but that they have naturally gone together, from the
     spontaneous acting of those who felt the importance of what they
     said, and have therefore, as it were accidentally, fallen in with
     the Scriptural mode of teaching. Had all religious matters been
     treated with this spirit, there would have been no need for the
     subject of this Tract. That these Church principles should be
     received by others with this spirit, is perhaps, in this age,
     scarcely to be expected: and yet, from the absence of it, are to be
     apprehended all those evils which we have deprecated under a
     different form.

     The one and sole end of all that has been taught respecting the
     Church, is simply to point out the means of obtaining and continuing
     in GOD'S favour, during our stay in this world, and being accepted
     of Him for the sake of JESUS CHRIST at last, and escaping the sad
     doom that awaits the impenitent world. If considered in any other
     point of view they are thoroughly unprofitable and vain, of no more
     worth than the idle speculations of the day, the schemes of
     business, and plans of politics, merely specious theories respecting
     things most holy, which may touch the fancy with their transcendent
     beauty, and amuse the imagination, but leave the heart worldly, and
     pride unsubdued: nay, with regard to a better world, they are in
     such a case not merely unprofitable, but they may become snares to
     delude the conscience, and leave us at last, like all earthly
     things, with a shadow in our hands, having for ever lost the
     substance.

     For in proportion as they are themselves holy and true and
     life-giving, they must necessarily be dangerous in their abuse. But
     now, if this one end and aim is the most rare thing in the world to
     obtain, the very last thing to be expected of creatures corrupt and
     inclined to evil as we are, then, of course, it is to be feared,
     that these principles may be perverted to other than these the
     highest of all purposes. At all events, if they should spread and
     become popular in the world, then of course one would fear, that
     they are not taught, or at all events not received, in their purity:
     one would apprehend that there was something wrong or possibly, if
     such holy principles are received without a change of life, it may
     be but the raising of that temple of GOD, in which Antichrist will
     sit, and exalt himself at last.

     For as every thing is difficult in proportion to its excellence and
     value; very difficult therefore must it be to enter into the fulness
     of these blessings, which these doctrines of the Church contain. For
     instance, if we take the subject of prayer, the spirit and temper
     and practice of prayer being more essentially that of the Church
     Catholic; how difficult is it to pray aright; so much so, that it
     were not too much to say, that it requires the very utmost stretch
     of our endeavours, the perfection of our highest faculties, the
     labour of a long life, to learn to pray. The very best of men are
     but learners in this art, and become most sensible of their
     deficiencies. How much more so must it be to realize also the Divine
     Sacraments, and attain unto the greatness of their efficacy. Such
     indeed it were to understand the meaning of Divine words, which
     speak of the Church as a "kingdom of Heaven;" it were to be indeed a
     heaven upon earth. And in the progressive attainment of that
     knowledge, "blessed is he that feareth always."

     The less therefore that these most holy doctrines are received into
     the heart, the more loudly will they be spoken of. Divine fear, like
     Divine love, has ever about it this natural modesty it has little to
     say, its chief language is that of prayer, and that in secret: as
     all its ways are directed to One who seeth in secret, it is ever
     fearful of man's praise, and fearless of his reproach.

     Those who most value sacred things will in general say least about
     them: admiration indeed and joy will find a voice, and a spontaneous
     expression, as the shepherds published abroad what they had heard of
     the Angels and seen: but yet in such eloquence there will always be
     a natural reserve. And even these feelings, when increased greatly
     and fixed very deeply, will be silent: the shepherds spake, but Mary
     was silent, she "kept these things and pondered them in her heart."

     Disputation, says Hooker, speaking of the Eucharist, is a sign of a
     want of love, and perhaps a sign of a want of faith also, for it was
     something of a disputatious spirit, that St. Thomas evinced, when he
     said that he must feel and handle. Whenever, also, there is a secret
     doubt of an opinion which we wish to entertain, there is a
     disposition to dispute and persuade, in order that by obtaining the
     persuasions of others, we may establish our own convictions. This
     may be seen in the origin of the doctrine of Transubstantiation: it
     arose in a dereliction and forgetfulness of the discipline of
     reserve on that subject; in a want of the high and ancient
     reverence; in a desire to establish and prove to the world a great
     secret of GOD. The result was profaneness in both parties. Not only
     in the denial of Sacramental grace on the one side, but in the low
     and carnal conceit which Transubstantiation introduced. So awful in
     its consequences has been the attempt to bring out the doctrine of
     the Eucharist from the holy silence, which adoring reverence
     suggests; the attempt of the human understanding with unhallowed
     boldness to fathom the deep things of GOD; to circumscribe the
     Ineffable, who hath made His pavilion in dark water, with thick
     clouds to cover Him; to look into the ark of GOD; to pry into those
     secret things which the ALMIGHTY has reserved unto Himself. The
     Primitive Church thought otherwise, as of a doctrine to be realized
     by devotion, rather than capable of being expressed in human
     language; considering it impossible for human reason to define its
     nature, or to think and speak worthily of that which is Divine. It
     is no part of our duty to censure the state of other Churches, but
     where, for our own protection, Christian wisdom and charity require
     it. And it is worthy of observation, that, in the Church of Rome,
     that which is Roman and Tridentine, in distinction from that which
     is Catholic, is characterized by a want of this reserve. The want of
     reserve and reverence which attends the elevation of the Host, and
     the public processions connected with it, is very great indeed:
     these are indications (like many things of a different nature in the
     system we have condemned) that it is popular impression, and not a
     sense of GOD'S presence, which is considered: for here there can be
     no true veneration; and "where GOD is, there must be the fear of
     Him." They are of the nature of religious frauds; it is effect which
     is more thought of than truth.

     The same may be shown in many other circumstances of their religion:
     it is indeed the Catholic Church, but decked out with tinsel and
     false ornaments to catch the eye; like a statue of the purest marble
     painted and besmeared, till scarce a vestige of its true substance
     is seen. Consider, for instance, their sacred edifices: the Church
     holds these to be worthy of the deepest veneration as the places of
     GOD'S peculiar presence; and the altar more especially. But what is
     to be said of tawdry decorations of Churches and sacred things?
     Would we wish to see any human being that we venerated and respected
     thus meretriciously adorned? It is an attempt at comparatively
     little cost to catch the eye, very unlike that ancient religion
     which is costly, and chaste, and simple; which would gladly be poor
     in this world, that it may offer to GOD what is most worthy and
     valuable, and cares not, but in a secondary manner, for the effect
     on mankind; for we always look to that which we most love.

     In these things to look to GOD will lead us to the reserve of a
     sacred simplicity: ostentatious singularity and display is a looking
     to man. To know GOD in His holy places; to know GOD in His
     Sacraments, in His Word, in prayer, is the kingdom of Heaven. But if
     the Israelites could fall away with the pillar of fire before them,
     and the destruction of the Egyptians behind; if, in the light of the
     Baptist's teaching, men could "rejoice for a season only;" and could
     eat of the loaves from our SAVIOUR'S hands, and yet deny Him; we
     have more reason to fear for the abuse of sacred truth, than presume
     on its being revived among us.

     And how are the many evils to be avoided which we would guard
     against? To say that we are always to be reverent on sacred things,
     to speak with reverence, to act with reverence, surely this will not
     produce what we want; but rather the very opposite; for to put on
     the appearance of reverence for example's sake, or for the
     edification of others, were but the very thing which we condemn, and
     were no better than formal hypocrisy. All that can be said is, not
     to seek to remedy by external effects, that which can only be from
     within; to think less of appearance, more of the reality; to be
     natural, serious, forbearing, as considering what, and where we are,
     and what we are coming to.

    6. Caution necessary with respect to the latent senses of Scripture.

     There is another subject which necessarily must attract much
     attention, as men's minds are turned more to Theology: and which
     comes on this generation with all the attractions, and all the
     dangers, of novelty; and that is, the depth and vastness of type,
     analogy, and prophecy contained in GOD'S WORD. Now with regard to
     these things it must be remembered, that attention to them has been
     revived by person of some experience, and some reading; and the
     right and true understanding of such subjects, the Fathers, to whom
     they refer us, speak of as being the result of a life of devotion
     and piety. Such, for instance, is the knowledge of these mystical
     and deeper senses of Scripture; they consider them to be disclosed
     to prayer rather than learning. But of course there is no reason why
     these should not become matters for mere speculative inquiry, and
     curious research: they are at once highly attractive and pleasing to
     the imagination: the analogies of Scripture open new worlds to the
     mind, like discoveries in the material Heavens, and may excite the
     curiosity we derive from our fallen parents. The accurate closeness
     of its phrases, is like the nice formation in each flower of the
     field; its light like the body of the Heavens in its clearness; its
     vastness like the bosom of the sea; its variety like scenes of
     nature. Nothing, therefore, can be more captivating, more sublime,
     more engaging; tempting the mind by its indefiniteness to fresh
     pursuits, and new inquiries; and from thence to speculate, to talk,
     to be eloquent, on such points; to make even them also matters of
     display. Here, therefore, the reserve of natural piety will be
     broken, for these are not the uses for which GOD'S revealed WORD was
     intended, but only that we might come to the knowledge of Him and of
     ourselves.

     One thing is certain, that the deep senses and hidden knowledge of
     Scripture, are intended to enlighten the heart and exercise the
     affections, not to gratify the intellect or try the ingenuity. With
     regard to any knowledge that is truly valuable, the unhallowed
     intellect can of itself learn nothing. As in all other matters, in
     His Providences, His moral government, in the events of life, and
     the thoughts of man's mind, GOD will reveal Himself only to the pure
     in heart, to the humble, and such as keep His commandments: so also
     in His written Word, He will manifest Himself to such only. He will
     disclose Himself to each in that particular way, perhaps, in which
     they reverently seek Him; to one in exercises of devotion; to
     another in acts of charity; to another in the practice of
     humiliation; to another in the religious fulfilment of practical
     duties; to another in the study of Holy Scripture. Not that either
     of these can be pursued exclusively to the neglect of the others,
     for he, who breaks one law of his Christian calling, is guilty of
     all: but as the peculiar sphere of each is regulated by the great
     Disposer of all, so the line which is appointed unto each, is that
     course which, if rightly pursued, will lead him to GOD, and to the
     manifestation of some one of His attributes, which are variously
     disclosed to each. To search out and study in Holy Scripture nothing
     more than the beauty of its analogies, the strength and depth of its
     figures, the harmony of its proportions, and its perfection as a
     whole, were indeed but a poor and barren study of itself alone: and
     poor would be its reward, if it could attain unto the greatest skill
     in this knowledge. It would be like scientific studies in the
     natural world, which, if exclusively pursued, will, we know, draw
     away the heart from GOD, and not nearer to Him. But if they are
     pursued at every step in a thorough dependence on Him, from whom
     alone cometh down every good and perfect gift; with a devout
     acknowledgment of His perfections whenever they are disclosed; and a
     desire to know Him, in order to serve and worship Him better; then,
     no doubt, He will through these studies impart that wisdom, to the
     attainment of which St. Paul so earnestly exhorts his Ephesian
     converts, that knowledge which is one with faith;-these two being as
     closely united with each other as light and heat, the one
     illuminating, and the other quickening the soul after some heavenly
     manner. The knowledge of Holy Scripture, which is thus life-giving,
     may be ever progressive, leading more and more into hidden riches
     and treasures: the promise is given, and to him who knocks at the
     door by humble prayer, it will infallibly be opened. And he will
     still have to knock again at the door, and be admitted again into
     the inner shrine of ever-increasing light; and as he advances onward
     into better knowledge, and more light, he will see himself more and
     more deformed and unsightly, until, at length, he will wish to be
     entirely withdrawn from the sight of man, and to be hidden with GOD.

     Now, if we study Scripture with this single eye, under the guidance
     of GOD'S good SPIRIT, we shall so far be preserved and protected by
     this sacred modesty; it will prevent us from exposing the treasures
     of GOD, or His secret gifts; and will suggest to us, that so far as
     we are truly desirous to do good to others, we shall observe towards
     them this forbearance, according as their case requires. We shall
     have no need of a system, for we shall do it naturally: the example
     of St. Paul on this subject of the mystical senses of Scripture is
     quite sufficient; he does not, we may suppose, set himself any
     system or rule of secrecy; on which account his example is of more
     weight in always observing it: as it shows that it is a law of
     natural piety, which the HOLY SPIRIT has stamped on our souls. So
     that if any body be otherwise minded, and yet is seeking His
     heavenly guidance, He will reveal even this unto him, so that "he
     will walk by the same rule, he will mind the same thing." For
     consider St. Paul's reserve in the Epistle to the Hebrews on the
     subject of Melchisedeck: how different is his conduct to that which
     the modern wisdom of expediency would suggest? These mystical
     prophecies in the Old Testament, so long secretly contained in it
     respecting the Messiah, so distinct and so minute, must, (it might
     have been thought) if publicly brought forward, have struck these
     carnally-minded Hebrews very much; such wonderful circumstances,
     couched in such apparently accidental mention, in a book written at
     so early an age, would have been a great confirmation of their
     faith, and would have inspired them with awe for the sacred volume,
     and for the person of CHRIST, for whose coming there had been such
     solemn and so long preparation; and how (might it have been urged)
     would it have increased their awe for the Holy Eucharist to find the
     allusion to it contained in this passage in Genesis. But St. Paul
     thought otherwise. It is precisely in the same manner that we might
     have supposed our LORD'S fully disclosing Himself would have been so
     beneficial to the unbelieving Jews. But the conduct of our LORD and
     of His Apostles is perfectly analogous: and that of the Fathers on
     the same subject is so similar, that we cannot but suppose it is by
     the same SPIRIT. We may, indeed, sometimes speak of these things
     publicly: and may even enlarge on the sacred mysteries of the most
     blessed Eucharist, (which is so awfully depreciated) but afterwards
     we shall, I think, feel some misgiving, some instinctive feeling, as
     if reverence was hurt: in such cases, a man's own mind will tell him
     more than ten men that stand on a watchtower. Though of course, they
     who have to combine theological studies with popular teaching, will
     often find some difficulty on this subject, which St. Augustine
     describes himself as struggling with.

         7. Secret religious duties, conversation, and controversy.

     There is another point, in which it would seem that the Roman Church
     of late years has out-stepped the retiring nature of Christian
     piety, to the great injury of the religious character, viz. in the
     observation of fast days, which has become very external, and looks
     too much to human obligation: thereby bringing in some degree into
     the sanctuary of GOD, the unsanctifying eye of man. On this subject,
     therefore, we require to be reminded of our LORD'S sacred injunction
     of a reserved secrecy. We would, of course, keep the fasts of the
     Church religiously and scrupulously, for as Bishop Wilson says, Woe
     be to that Christian, who knows not what it is to fast, even when
     the Church requires it. And with regard to the shame which men, and
     especially the young, are apt to feel at being thought under the
     subjection of rule and ordinances, we would take for our especial
     warning those awful words, "Whosoever is ashamed of me and of my
     words of him shall the Son of man be ashamed." But when this shame
     is once overcome, if it be before the heart be humbled, and any
     thing is to be gained in the way of countenance or sympathy, there
     is a danger of a feeling being introduced alien to Christian
     delicacy, on this most delicate of all subjects. There are duties to
     the unseen, but ever-seeing GOD, and expressions of love to Him; and
     what an exceedingly delicate thing this love is? What a breath of
     air seems to sully it, how it shrinks from the light of common day?
     This may be seen in Mr. James Bonnel's treatment of himself on these
     points; how does his own moral feeling exemplify our SAVIOUR'S very
     remarkable and particular directions on the subject of these duties.
     It is indeed true, that the observance of these things is so out of
     fashion, that a public warning, and a public profession of them is
     almost needful: but such public testimonies, while they are
     necessary, are painful; and when they cease to be painful, become a
     snare. The strength of truth is from its connexion with other
     worlds, and, therefore, is in secret; "Thy words have I hid within
     my heart"-and why? "That I should not sin against Thee." Or again,
     if we press these duties on others beyond what they are able to
     bear, or beyond what they may reasonably think our own sincerity
     will warrant, how may we rather repel than invite them! The cause of
     truth may suffer in our hands. Let our private self-denial exceed,
     and precede, our public testimony.

     Others again, may be half inclined to cast aside this reserve, from
     feelings of natural pride at the greatness of that high cause in
     which they are interested; in which the best names of all ages have
     been engaged. There is, moreover, something of refinement and good
     taste connected with the highest principles, which it is honourable
     to be associated with; these may tempt some to be too forward in so
     holy a cause, too forward in externally maintaining, far too
     backward in practically realizing them. But, above all, there is a
     humble quietness in all these retiring ways of seeking GOD; whereas
     our natural tempers seek for excitement, and press forward to
     something beyond.

     Such persons, who are tempted to feel as if they were supporters of,
     rather than supported by, the Church, her friends rather than her
     disciples, should be requested to consider, what it is to be
     supporting the cause of the Holy Catholic Church, and that of great
     and good men. Who are we, that we should venture to do so? It is our
     highest honour to be supposed capable of a lively interest for the
     former, and to be allied in sympathy with the latter. It is a
     privilege and high favour we may well aspire to. But are we in our
     lives and habits worthy to take this upon us; may we not by doing
     so, bring discredit, by our favour and zeal, on that sacred cause?
     Is there not something of presumption in venturing too freely to
     connect our names with theirs? Here again, do we not require a
     certain reserve and modesty, to keep us faithful? Servants about a
     king's presence, may be proud of that nearness, and of the company
     that it brings them into; but they venture not to speak of this; but
     in the exact fulfilment of their duties are more zealous not to be
     found wanting. We know that Sir Matthew Hale was cautious not to be
     too much thought religious, lest he should fall into sin, and so
     bring discredit on the cause of GOD: is not something of this
     feeling a right and good one, with respect to the great principles
     and great names when our profession may bring into disrepute by some
     fault? And besides, surely our great object must be to cherish in
     ourselves deep and quiet principles; to strengthen in ourselves more
     and more a right and adequate sense of what we believe, rather than
     to hold them externally and disputatiously. A desire for
     disputation, is no sign of a regard for truth: how much the habit of
     looking at things with this view, eats out the seriousness and
     delicacy of Christian piety, is too sadly evident in the Roman
     controversialists. Deep waters are still and unruffled, and scarce
     perceptible in their motion to the ear and eye: shallow streams are
     noisy and disturbed.

     But as on this, and some other points to which this subject refers,
     there have existed strange misapprehensions, or rather, it must be
     said, vague suspicions of some meaning neither expressed nor
     intended, it seems requisite to say a little more distinctly, what
     it is which has been neither taught nor meant. It will be observed,
     that nothing whatever is said in this treatise to recommend our
     forming a system of reserve, nor our watching over ourselves to
     suppress the natural expression of what we revere and love, nor our
     forming a close society for the freer communication of religious
     sentiments: but that we endeavour above all things to cherish in
     ourselves a habit of reverence, that we speak as truth dictates, and
     speak naturally. What has been said, has been put forth defensively;
     in order to show that the assuming of a religious tone, is so far
     from being necessary, that it is highly to be deprecated, as
     injurious to ourselves and others; that in an age which looks so
     much to effect and appearance, we must thoroughly study truth and
     reality. No rule of silence need perhaps be even thought of by a
     simple-minded piety, that has not dimmed the light within, nor lost
     the single eye. But few of us are of this kind. It has been shown in
     the former treatise to be rather the unavoidable effect in good men,
     under the teaching of GOD'S good SPIRIT, than any thing to be
     recommended as a rule; because all we say is, that such reserve is
     natural, and that, where it is lost, religion has lost its best
     protection and its strength. We have only to repeat, therefore, our
     former admonition, (Tract 80. Part iii.) that we follow in this as
     in all other matters our LORD'S example, who was ever watching to do
     good, never ostentatiously and unnecessarily obtruding religion and,
     as it were, ever spoke naturally.

     The fact is, that this is one of the many subjects in which we have
     to go back, and learn of children; there is remarkable in children,
     together with that openness and freedom which accompanies simplicity
     and singleness of heart, that modesty also and reserve which is here
     inculcated; it is one of the most beautiful and interesting traits
     of that age: like the bloom on the flower; when this is spoiled in
     children they have lost the highest hopes we can entertain of them;
     it is one of the first indications of the loss of innocency.

     It must also be observed, that there are among mankind great
     constitutional diversities of temper and character, which render the
     same free expressions of their sentiments, in some perfectly
     natural, which would be far from being so in another. So far,
     therefore, as it is natural, it will not offend against this rule of
     modesty; but, of course, being the teaching of GOD, will be the best
     means to promote the cause of His truth.

     Certain it is, notwithstanding, that persons of deep feeling and
     seriousness of mind have thought it requisite to prescribe to
     themselves rules of reserve; have felt, that when they have not done
     so they have injured their better mind, and it has been a subject of
     regret to them. Now the statement of this principle should be a
     protection to such, that they should not be harshly and
     inconsiderately judged for so doing.

     And indeed, in such cases, the reserve of a reverential and
     thoughtful character is of itself the most emphatic language, this
     silence the strongest eloquence of affection. This even nature
     dictates on the common law of our poor earthly affections,-

     "Incipit effari, mediâque in voce resistit."

     Even heathen piety, in holy places, and on subjects that are holy,
     would say, eufhmeite, which expression, though it literally implied
     "use words of good," was piously interpreted to mean silence or
     reserve, and a guard on the thoughts. And doubtless that is a
     beautiful and right feeling, which quite shrinks from an affectation
     of religious discourse: "it is quite nauseous," says Bishop Butler;
     tot eipein eupeteV musagma pwV, says the Greek Poet. Such a practice
     must be very injurious. Even where sacred principles are truly
     cherished, this natural reserve strengthens, tries, and matures
     them, when they have to snake their way through difficulties, and
     are not fully explained; whereby they show themselves in fruit
     rather than leaves, in action rather than words. "Be swift to hear,"
     says Holy Scripture, "slow to speak;" "be ready to give an answer
     with meekness and fear, to him who asks a reason of your hope."

     The subject ought also to suggest to us some little forbearance with
     regard to matters of disputation and controversy. If, where truth is
     (according to the often repeated remark of Tertullian), "there GOD
     is, and where GOD is, there must be the fear of Him," we have to
     apprehend the worst consequences from that prevailing irreverence in
     religion, which it has been the object of this treatise to call
     attention to; and it makes it incumbent on each to look to himself.
     With regard to controversial disputations, either in discourse or
     writing, where the object can scarcely be con-ceived to be a sincere
     desire of knowing the truth, surely we should thoughtfully weigh our
     LORD'S example, and His very remarkable silence on many occasions,
     or His indirect answer, and that under the strongest accusations.
     "The chief Priests accused Him of many things, but He answered
     nothing; and Pilate asked Him again, saying, answerest Thou nothing?
     behold how many things they witness against Thee. But JESUS yet
     answered nothing, so that Pilate marvelled." This silence, says St.
     Jerome, expiates the excuses of Adam: and Origen has spoken of it as
     the example, which we are to follow in attacks on our faith, except
     where the circumstances call for a reply. We may observe throughout
     our LORD'S exceeding watchfulness (so to speak) to meet every desire
     of knowing the truth in those around Him, and how, from His
     knowledge of their hearts, He often anticipated their expressions;
     how continually, even with those who were not thus desirous, He kept
     suggesting thoughts, which, if pursued, might serve them as a clue
     to their arriving at the truth, or would remove their prejudices.
     But with regard to entering into their captious difficulties, or
     answering their unreasonable accusations, He appears to have avoided
     it, and patiently submitted, although their false or falsely
     coloured charges were loud in the ears of others, "committing
     Himself unto Him who judgeth righteously."

     It is moreover too evident, how many things come in to instigate to
     controversial attacks and disputations, besides a regard for the
     truth: how much of self, how much of careless inattention to the
     whole matter in dispute; what slowness to comprehend, combined with
     determination to deny. Persons will often admit accidentally and
     unconsciously their knowledge of that truth which their arguments
     are intended to controvert. It is the state of the heart in such
     matters which is to be changed; a mind set earnestly on the
     attainment of truth itself will avoid such disputations; and
     therefore perhaps it is told us, that though we are to be "ever
     ready to give an answer to Him that asketh," and we may add to Him
     who desireth, "with meekness and fear:" that the servant of the LORD
     must be "gentle and apt to teach;" yet it is said that he "must not
     strive: Foolish and unlearned questionings avoid, knowing that they
     gender strifes," is St. Paul's advice to the Christian minister. In
     the case of infidelity in the nearest of relatives, it is enjoined,
     that such may be gained over without argument, by "beholding chaste
     conversation, coupled with fear." To take a very strong instance of
     that subtle and secret hypocrisy which we have been speaking of, we
     all know that there are instances of persons standing forth as the
     public champions of a Church, or some form of faith, whose lives
     deny their belief in the very existence of a GOD. Let us take care
     that there be nothing of this, the same in kind, though less in
     degree, in our-selves.

       8. Untenable objections on the ground of our present position.

     But there are some objections to this treatise, of a very obvious
     and simple kind, which it is difficult to know how to answer, as
     they arise from a strange misapprehension in limine of the nature of
     the subject: objections which, as was stated before, are necessarily
     implied in the very word revelation. It is thought, for instance,
     that the command, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
     unto every creature," is an insurmountable objection to the whole
     argument. Whereas, it should be considered, that the whole matter
     under consideration is, not whether the Gospel is to be preached or
     not, for of course there could be no doubt among Christians on that
     subject, but respecting the most effectual mode of preaching it:
     without taking this for granted as the first axiom among Christians,
     viz. that the Gospel is to be preached, the whole inquiry has no
     meaning.

     With rather more appearance of reason it is alleged, that our LORD'S
     conduct is no example for us in this case; as He has said, "what I
     tell you in the ear, that preach ye on the housetops;" and "men do
     not light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick,
     and it giveth light unto all that are in the house." Now if there
     was any weight in these passages against this reserve, it would be
     merely that of one Scripture expression opposed to another; for
     there are several commands in the same discourse of an opposite
     character, and therefore of course they admit of explanation without
     contradicting each other. The obvious meaning of these passages of
     course is "Think not that My kingdom is to be confined, as now it
     is, to you few alone, it is to be preached to all the world;" and
     such a declaration evidently does not interfere with this principle
     of holy reserve, as the guide and mode of doing this most sincerely
     and effectually. And indeed to the latter text it is added, as if
     showing us the way by which we were to extend the truth, "Let your
     light shine before men, that they may see your good works," as
     Chrysostom says, not of course that they were to display their works
     in any way, but that if they keep the fire burning within them, it
     necessarily must shine. And besides which it appears, on many
     occasions, when expressions of this kind are used, that they have a
     reference also to the day of Judgment; as if it had been said,
     "Wonder not that My ways are so much in secret, and that I require
     your works also to be done so much in secret, and unlike those of
     the Pharisees; a time is coming when every thing whatever shall be
     publicly made known, to all men and angels." As if it were in some
     measure an explanation given, that that great manifestation will be
     a counterpart to this reserve.

     But that these expressions respecting the general knowledge of the
     Gospel throughout the world, do in no way affect this rule of
     reserve, will be evident if we consider the various periods of the
     Divine economy as various manifestations of CHRIST. And it will be
     easily perceived that they are all characterized by this same law.
     First of all the term manifestation is applied to our LORD'S
     appearing in the flesh; it is applied to Him at His birth; it is
     applied to the coming and calling of the Gentiles; it is applied to
     the Presentation in the temple; it is applied to our LORD at His
     Baptism: and to the first miracle He performed in Cana of Galilee.
     It is applied to Him more especially in His miracles and teaching.
     All these we celebrate in the Epiphany, as will be seen in the
     successive Gospels for that season; but how secretly and
     mysteriously were they all conducted? All these are manifestations
     of GOD seen in the flesh, our Immanuel. And all these are with this
     reserve. In like manner the preach-ing of the Gospel, and the
     extension of the Kingdom, are more fully manifestations of GOD; but
     as in the former cases CHRIST was known and acknowledged but by a
     very few, notwithstanding those manifestations of Himself; so is it
     now. It is evident that in some sense even now the manifestation of
     Himself must be according to some law of exceeding reserve and
     secrecy, for our LORD has said that if any man will keep His
     commandments He will love him, and will manifest Himself unto him;
     that He would "manifest Himself to His disciples, and not unto the
     world." Now as it is too obvious that many do not keep His
     commandments, therefore to many He is not manifested. So that to us
     all, even now our LORD observes this rule of concealing Himself even
     in His manifestations; and therefore all His manifestations in His
     Church are ways of reserve.

                  9. This principle more than ever needed.

     But great surprise is expressed, because we have maintained that the
     spread of religious knowledge throughout the world renders it a
     matter for serious apprehension, lest we should abuse that
     knowledge. Surely, since to him who knoweth and doeth not to him it
     is sin, all knowledge of GOD should be accompanied with this
     apprehension. All things seem to be tending to the one great
     manifestation of GOD, in the day of Judgment, which will be in
     destruction as well as in salvation; and therefore it may be, as
     intimations going before of that time, that all manifestations of
     GOD even now are awful, and often as it were kept back with a
     gracious and merciful forbearance to mankind. It will, I think, be
     observed in Scripture throughout, that greater manifestations of
     GOD, and declarations accompanied with the least reserve, are ever
     the most awful and severe. For instance, when St. John the Baptist
     first of all proclaimed the kingdom, it was with fearful words,-of
     "the axe at the root of the tree," and the "fire unquenchable." And
     when our LORD went up at last to Jerusalem, He spoke more openly and
     publicly, before the Jews and in the temple; but then the things
     that belonged unto their peace were hidden from their eyes, and they
     could not believe; and His teaching was far more severe than it had
     been; therefore the more open manifestation was an awful matter, a
     matter for serious apprehension.

     Again, after His death the Jews were given one trial more; the HOLY
     GHOST was sent down, and the preaching of the Gospel was more open
     and public than ever before, and this preceded their condemnation;
     as if in some degree, and in some sense, guilty of sin against the
     HOLY GHOST, of the terrible effects of which they had been so
     strongly warned; then their final destruction came. This more public
     manifestation therefore was, I say, matter for serious apprehension.

     A far more extensive manifestation is now taking place over the
     whole world. Now the event to be apprehended in the last days, as
     closing the period of the world's trial, when GOD will spare it no
     longer, is sin against the HOLY SPIRIT. And one does not see how
     this can take place, how the SPIRIT can be rejected, excepting when
     the SPIRIT is manifested. Therefore the knowledge of religion, which
     is now extending over the world, is a matter for serious
     apprehension. Not of course that this consideration affords any
     reason for withholding that knowledge: for to preach the Gospel to
     the world, is our office and duty, whether men will hear, or whether
     they will forbear; we are bound to do it, marturein kai kerussein;
     but to learn how we may best do it is the part of Christian wisdom.
     But our having this knowledge should lead us to take the more heed,
     that we do not fall into that sin for which there are provided no
     further means of recovery.

     And let it be remembered that the whole of this treatise is, under
     another name, on the subject of irreverence; but as reverential
     words, or a reverential demeanour, may be but a specious irreverence
     and hypocrisy, this sacred reserve seems a better designation. Every
     step in this irreverence, every indication of it, is so far a state
     of progress towards the sin against the HOLY SPIRIT. And as this
     latter is unpardonable, so we may perceive that a state of
     irreverence, where it has thoroughly affected the character, is
     irremediable. For if men have lost all reverence for GOD, how can
     they pray to Him? and if they cannot, nor have any sense of
     reverence for His power, who can help them? Under any other
     circumstances men may be guilty of the worst sins, and when greater
     light is manifested to them, even at the last hour, they may repent
     and be forgiven: but when that light has been habitually rejected,
     the case becomes very different, the SPIRIT is quenched, the light
     within is darkened. When the power of acknowledging GOD'S presence,
     which is the eye of the soul, is lost, what else can restore it?
     None can approach Him without His help, and His help cannot be
     attained without a reverential acknowledgment of His presence.

     It would appear, therefore, that under the dispensation of grace in
     which we live, in the light of these full revelations of GOD, as the
     highest privileges are to be derived from a due acknowledgement of
     GOD, so there is the greatest conceivable danger from an absence of
     that fear and reverence. A danger incalculably increased, and
     infinitely beyond that of former generations, if our knowledge be so
     much greater. And this irreverence is more especially to be guarded
     against in all our approaches to GOD, and our imperfect modes of
     serving Him. We must remember that one of the Ten commandments
     refers to it, which is expressed in more awful terms than any
     other,-viz., that we take not that awful Name in vain, the meaning
     of which is not to be limited to open profaneness, but must be as
     extensive in its intentions as all the other commandments. It is to
     be observed, again, that the first petition in the LORD'S prayer
     seems to be for this reverence of mind, as the first thing to be
     obtained in all acts of devotion,-a prayer that GOD'S Name may be
     hallowed: the efficacy of our prayers depending on the reverential
     regard we have for that dreadful Name: And the last clause in the
     same prayer is an act or expression of reverence. And one of our
     SAVIOUR'S first rules with regard to prayer, is, that we do not use
     "vain repetitions," i.e. use idle words without a sense of Whom we
     are speaking to. Indeed, the first words of that prayer,-"Our FATHER
     which art in Heaven,"-may teach us the same, for that GOD is in
     Heaven and we on earth, is given as a reason why our words should be
     few. And in religious worship our SAVIOUR'S charges are chiefly
     directed against, what is called in Scripture, "hypocrisy." Of
     course, we cannot confine this most subtle and pervading habit to
     those circumstances in which it was developed in the religion of
     that day; but of all other vices it is that which most changes its
     complexion with the aspects of the age, being in itself equally
     applicable to human nature in all times; and surely there is none
     which more thoroughly destroys in the heart all love of truth. Such
     formalism may of course be found in a strict observance of the
     formal duties of religious worship; in a shape no less dangerous and
     subtle will it be developed in adopting modes of expression; and
     what is perhaps of all the worst, in taking hold of the most
     touching and sacred doctrines of Religion, entering as it were into
     the Holiest of Holies. In all things it consists in a want of
     reverence and fear, in having the form of godliness while the power
     of it is lost, the peculiar danger we are warned of in the last
     days.

                    10. Want of reverence now prevailing.

     Let is be again considered, what this principle suggests respecting
     this knowledge which is now abroad, and how greatly our position is
     altered on account of that knowledge. For if the ALMIGHTY (according
     to His providential dealings with mankind) does withhold religious
     truth in a remarkable manner, the reason is because such truth is
     dangerous to us. It is dangerous to us to know it. Therefore,
     because we have these truths revealed to us, we are in a peculiar
     danger,-danger of neglecting them. There is no reserve in holding
     back that which is fully known; but there is reverence necessary
     because it is known. And therefore, the very fact of the Atonement,
     and other great doctrines being known, is an occasion for reverence
     respecting them of the very highest degree.

     It will be seen by a little consideration, how the circumstance of a
     Divine Revelation, greater spiritual light, i. e. a knowledge of
     GOD'S presence, immediately alters the character of all actions, in
     the same manner as an action in Church, or near the Altar, is
     perfectly different from a similar action out of Church. So much is
     this the case as to render things, which on common ground would be
     indifferent, to be profane and sacrilegious in holy places. And this
     seems to explain how it is that Capernaum was worse than Sodom,
     Pharisees worse than heathens. In that walking in the nearer light
     of GOD'S presence, if we may so speak, from the knowledge vouchsafed
     them, the complexion of their actions was thus altered. And, indeed,
     were we to look to the accounts of other writers, and human
     narrators, we should, perhaps, neither suppose those Jews, nor those
     places to be so far worse than others, as our LORD has pronounced
     them to be. It is in like manner that a habit of irreverence in a
     Church, is more injurious to the character than thoughtlessness
     without.

     We have said, therefore, that GOD'S present dealings with mankind
     are a subject for awful apprehension; surely, all manifestations
     which GOD is pleased to make of Himself ought to be so to sinful
     creatures, as they ever were to good men in Scripture. And far more
     so when it is considered with what little awe and apprehension these
     manifestations of GOD are being now received: how little reverential
     fear accompanies this knowledge the disunion that prevails, and
     spirit of disobedience. When we add to this, that it was Israel that
     rejected CHRIST, that it was Jerusalem that put Him to death; that
     it was the place of His continual abode, which he declared worse
     than the cities of destruction; the dwelling place of His parents
     that thrust Him out. That it was more than once declared, as if
     proverbially and prophetically, and with a mysterious significancy,
     that CHRIST was to bear witness, that in his own country a prophet
     is not received. When we consider these things, then, I say, that
     the knowledge of GOD is an occasion for fear; and the more so
     because not now consi-dered so. "Many shall run to and fro, and
     knowledge shall be increased," but yet, notwithstanding, "the unholy
     shall be unholy still, and the unclean unclean;" "the wicked shall
     do wickedly, and none of them shall understand."

     The fearful extent to which this want of reverence in religion has
     gone, is, it is to be feared, very little considered or calculated
     upon. The degree to which all sense of the holiness of Churches is
     lost, is too evident; the efficacy of the Sacraments, the presence
     of GOD in them, and in His appointed ministerial ordinances is, it
     will be allowed, by no means duly acknowledged, and, indeed, less
     and less: men's eyes being not opened, they do not see with the
     patriarch, "how dreadful is this place," "the LORD was in this
     place, and I knew it not." There is also another point in which all
     due fear of GOD'S awful presence is lost, very far beyond what many
     are aware of, and that is in regard for the Holy Scripture. Some
     indeed, who profess to uphold and value them, in order to do so,
     depreciate the Apocryphal books, and all others of less plenary
     inspiration; as if by so doing they were exalting the Scriptures.
     But in fact, they do but lower their own standard of what is holy;
     and then lower the Scriptures also to meet it. The effect also of
     setting aside the Catholic Church as the interpreter of Holy
     Scripture, as if it needed none, is of the same kind; it
     incalculably lowers the reverence for Scripture, by making it
     subject to the individual judgment. From these things it follows,
     that although the Holy Scriptures are pronounced Divine (for no evil
     is done, but under a good name) they are treated as if they were
     not; as if human thought could grasp their systems, could limit
     their meanings, and say to that boundless ocean in which the
     Almighty walks, "Hitherto shalt Thou come and no further." If Holy
     Scripture contains within it the living Word, has a letter that
     killeth, and a Spirit that giveth life, with, far different a temper
     ought we to regard it: by prayer, as the Fathers say, we should
     knock at the door, waiting till He that is within open to us; it
     should be approached as that which has a sort of Sacramental
     efficacy about it, and therefore a savour of life, and also unto
     death; in short, as our SAVIOUR was of old, by them who would
     acknowledge Him as GOD, and receive His highest gifts. As the
     Centurion who sent the elders of the Jews unto Him, not venturing
     himself to approach; thus, humble faith from the dark corner of
     these latter days would rather seek to interpret through the Ancient
     Church than herself to presume. Far otherwise are the Sacred
     Scriptures now treated in evidences, in sermons, in controversial
     writings, in religious discourse. Divine words are brought down to
     the rule, and measure, and level of each man's earthly
     comprehension. And hence arise our Theological disputings, founded
     on words of Scripture, first brought down to some low, limited
     sense, and then thought to clash with and exclude each other. The
     Ancients, on the contrary, considered the Holy Scriptures like the
     heavens which were marked out by the lituus of the heathen
     soothsayer, wherein every thing that was found was considered full
     of Divine import: and speaking from GOD to man. They took Scriptural
     words as Divine words, replete with pregnant and extensive meaning.
     Thus when believing, in CHRIST, or confessing CHRIST, is spoken of
     as Salvation, St. Augustine remarks that such words are not to be
     taken after a low and human interpretation, but imply believing and
     confessing after a real and substantial manner according to the
     import of Divine words: and that to believe and confess this,
     according to truth and the vastness of Scripture, is indeed entering
     into the greatness of the Christian inheritance, which is signified
     by believing in CHRIST as GOD, with that corresponding awe and
     obedience which such a belief requires. With like reverential regard
     St. Chrysostom, when commencing his commentary on St. Matthew,
     likens it to approaching the gates of the heavenly city, and adds,
     "Let us not then with noise, or tumult enter in, but with a mystical
     silence. In this city must all be quiet and stand with soul and ear
     erect. For the letters not of an earthly king, but of the LORD of
     angels are on the point of being read." How many thousands of modern
     books had been unwritten; how much jealous controversy spared, had
     this sense of Holy Scripture been among us!

     It is, of course, from the want of a saving knowledge of GOD that
     there exists such a want of religious fear: for fear cannot but
     increase with an increasing knowledge of His presence, and,
     therefore, with all holiness of life. The subtle and predominant
     spirit, which is the source of the irreverence of the age, consists
     in a forgetfulness of GOD, even in religion, and, therefore, in
     looking to impression rather than truth. It finds a place in
     Ministers, in reading the prayers, in preaching, in conversation. It
     is seen in a higher regard paid to the pulpit than to the altar. In
     setting preaching above the Sacraments, for that arises from looking
     to man rather than to GOD. This is, in fact, that which we would
     condemn in the spirit of the age respecting building of Churches,
     distribution of the Scriptures, and the like. Not things of course
     in themselves to be reprehended, but in the mode and tone which
     characterizes religious actions in the present day. There is a want
     of fear. The same may be said, when right conduct is pursued, having
     for its end rather to set a good example to men, than to obtain
     favour of GOD, which is a species of what Holy Scripture calls
     hypocrisy. The numerous schemes of education which are abroad
     partake of the same earthly character, and the futility of them is
     of itself a proof of something wrong. They are founded on the idea
     of education consisting in knowledge, whereas it consists rather in
     affording right pleasures and pains. They are vain attempts after
     something different from that path which GOD has marked out, which
     is obedience to Parental, and Pastoral, and Episcopal authority,
     whereas these commence in breaking one of these ties. Hence the
     disunion which prevails; each has a prejudice, each a system, each
     an opinion, while the centre of union, the key-stone is lost. It was
     very well for heathen philosophers to be forming schemes of
     education and schemes of politics; and if human wisdom could have
     effected any thing they had far better chance of success than we. We
     have it revealed from Heaven, that there is no way of wisdom, but
     that of obedience and the Cross. What else can be right education,
     but that which consists in entering more fully into the privileges
     of that kingdom of Heaven which is among us? of what little value is
     any knowledge, excepting so far as it brings us into the invisible
     world? This is the consideration which makes us unwilling to expose
     the sacred things of GOD. Not as if we enviously withheld a boon
     that has been in any degree freely given to ourselves; but that with
     a due sense of its value, GOD has ever connected a reverential
     modest in imparting knowledge: for the very nature of Christian
     knowledge necessarily implies a desire to communicate, while it
     regulates itself by the laws of true wisdom. Such a desire will ever
     show itself, in a forebearance towards the errors of others,
     allowance for their unavoidable ignorance, and aptitude to teach,
     arising from watchful endeavours to do them real good.

     We may well suppose that the knowledge of CHRIST can scarcely be
     better described than by those many descriptions of the pursuit
     after wisdom, and the way in which she discloses herself to them
     that seek her. It is the fear of GOD throughout which is the only
     access to her; "the fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom:"
     "the fulness of wisdom is the fear of the LORD:" "the crown of
     wisdom is the fear of the LORD:" "come unto her as one that ploweth
     and soweth:" "he that is without understanding will not remain with
     her. She will be upon him as a mighty stone of trial; and he will
     cast her from him, ere it be long. For Wisdom is according to her
     name, and is not manifest unto many . . . . . Put thy feet into her
     fetters . . . bow down thy shoulder, and bear her, and be not
     grieved with her bonds. Come unto her with all thy whole heart, and
     keep her ways with all thy power. Search, and seek, and she shall be
     made known unto thee; and when thou hast got hold of her, let her
     not go. For at the last, thou shall find her rest." All these
     expressions, and such as these, may range themselves as comments and
     lessons around that one great truth,-a subject worthy of our most
     thoughtful contemplation, viz., that CHRIST Crucified was exposed to
     the view of all mankind, CHRIST Risen only seen by a few witnesses
     chosen of GOD.

                      11. Summary of the whole subject.

     All that has been observed of our LORD'S conduct may suggest to us
     much respecting our own condition, as now living in this His
     dispensation of grace. That the meaning of the kingdom of heaven
     upon earth, and the Evangelical revelations may be said to consist
     in this; that GOD is (as when revealed in the flesh) infinitely near
     to us, and that if we discern Him not, it is our own fault. It is as
     if heaven itself were not a local change, but that the invisible
     FATHER, and SON, and HOLY GHOST, and the Majesty of heaven were
     around us, and with us, and that we might have this truth disclosed
     to us, after some ineffable manner, if we will bow our heads to that
     lowly portal. This reserve by which GOD discloses Himself, in all
     natural and revealed religion, proves the entrance to be narrow and
     confined. That it is not by speculative inquiry, nor learned
     research, but by deepest humiliation of soul and body, that we must
     feel after Him, and expect pain and trouble in doing so, knowing
     that He is "a consuming fire," and therefore will burn up what is
     human about us, as we approach Him. Infinitely happy if we may do so
     at any cost. That sensible good of all kinds dims and obscures the
     due perception of Him; that every step towards it is contrary to our
     natural tendencies, for to know GOD is entirely a matter of faith;
     which is to the spiritual life what breath is to the natural life,
     the beginning of it, and co-extensive with it; of which it may be
     said, "when Thou takest away their breath they die, and are turned
     again into their dust."

     That out position is, after some mysterious and transcendent manner,
     analogous to that of those who saw our LORD in the flesh; that this
     knowledge, which is the reward of obedience, has the effect of
     bringing men into some intimate connexion with Himself, would appear
     from the descriptions which are given of it. For unto him that will
     keep His commandments, and act up to His sayings, JESUS CHRIST will
     be as mother, and sister, and brother. Which, and many other like
     expressions, imply being brought into some mysterious consciousness
     of His Presence. Obedience itself is quickened and enlivened by
     CHRIST'S Presence, without which, it could not be, and therefore is
     often called faith or love, as being that in many by which he
     apprehends Him, in opposition to the human understanding. Revelation
     has supplied us through the whole of our moral probation with living
     means, a living way, and a living end. The end is Personal, and the
     means also a living Person. The yearnings of our nature after
     knowledge, the yearnings after love, here find their object: the
     friendship and the wisdom, which the heathen philosopher considered
     as the end and perfection of the practical virtues, and most needful
     for the soul's rest, are here combined,-combined in one living
     object of affection, Personal, Human, Divine.

     Such reflections should encourage in us habits of reverence,
     reserve, and fear, as considering the awful dispensation under which
     we walk. We may observe how much there is in this principle to
     withdraw us from the world, and from the busy excitement that
     prevails. Every messenger that comes from the world in these evil
     times, may well cause the Christian to feel as did the prophet,
     "When he settled his face stedfastly" on the messenger, and then
     turned aside "and wept."

     As GOD has declared Himself not to be in noise and tempest, but in
     the still small voice, so has He shown Himself in all His
     manifestations to mankind. In the older dispensation He was ever as
     One who, in disclosing, hideth Himself. When our LORD appeared on
     earth in His incarnation, He was still ever as one who, ever
     desirous to manifest, yet in love for mankind withdrew Himself. The
     same was ever the case in His Church in its purest and best days; it
     was ever (as in faint imitation of her LORD) a system of reserve, in
     which the blessings of the Kingdom were laid up, as a treasure hid
     in a field. And such is still the system of the Church throughout
     all her ways; GOD dwelleth in secret, and by faith only can be
     discerned. Faith is the key to His secret treasures. All that is
     directed to the eye of GOD will in some measure partake of this
     reserve. In opposition to which, all the ways of the world, of human
     expediency, all systems and practices that look to man, will be
     marked by an absence of this reserve. As far as we look to GOD we
     shall have this; as far as we look to man we shall have it not; and
     as far as thoughts of man are allowed to enter into the sanctuary
     and worship of GOD, our conduct will be marked by an absence of this
     reserve. The world knows not GOD, and cannot know Him; so far,
     therefore, as we know Him, so far also, the world also will not know
     us, and will not understand our ways, and our words. So that from
     the very nature of the case, this reserve becomes necessary and
     unavoidable. If we make those secrets of GOD known to it, we shall
     injure ourselves, by bringing the gaze of the world into the secrets
     of GOD, and His holy place; and injure others also, for those things
     which they cannot understand, they will not reverence. If we wish to
     do good to the world we must not look to it, but unto GOD; our
     strength must be in secret where GOD is; the bad instruments of the
     world (such as the daily periodical) must not be ours; the platform
     is not our strength, nay even the pulpit itself is not our chief
     strength, in these we must yield to others if they wish it: but our
     chief strength must be the Altar; it must be in Sacraments and
     prayers, and a good life to give efficacy to them; and in secret
     alms to the poor to buy their prayers, which have great power with
     GOD. Our strength must be in secret where GOD is. If others have
     recourse to thoughtless controversial disputations, we must leave
     such to them, and endeavour, ourselves, to learn the truth, and our
     obedience shall be their light. Remembering always, that this
     reserve of Holy Scripture, in which every thing that is good must be
     now, more or less, concealed, is ever calculated to lead on our
     thoughts by a necessary connection to that great manifestation, when
     there is "nothing secret that shall not be manifest;" neither any
     thing hid that shall not be known and come abroad, when He who now
     "seeth in secret, shall reward openly" those that wait for Him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Project Canterbury
