                      THE EPISCOPAL CHUCH APOSTOLICAL.

                                 [Number 7]

     There are many persons at the present day, who, from not having
     turned their minds to the subject, think they are Churchmen in the
     sense in which the early Christians were, merely because they are
     Episcopalians. The extent of their Churchmanship is, to consider
     that Episcopacy is the best form of Ecclesiastical Polity; and
     again, that it originated with the Apostles. I am far from implying,
     that to go thus far is nothing; or is not an evidence (for it is,)
     of a reverent and sober temper of mind; still the view is defective.
     It is defective, because the expediency of a system, though a very
     cogent, is not the highest line of argument that may be taken it its
     defence: and because an opponent may deny the Apostolicity of
     Episcopacy, and so involve its maintainer in an argument. Doubtless
     the more clear and simple principle for a Churchman to hold, is that
     of a Ministerial Succession; which is undeniable as a fact, while it
     is most reasonable as a doctrine, and sufficiently countenanced in
     Scripture for its practical reception. Of this, Episcopacy, i. e.
     Superintendence, is but an accident; though, for the sake of
     conciseness, it is often spoken of by us as synonymous with it. It
     shall be the object of the following Tract to insist upon this
     higher characteristic of our Church.

     My position then is this;-that the Apostles appointed successors to
     their ministerial office, and the latter in turn appointed others,
     and so on to the present day;-and further, that the Apostles and
     their Successors have in every age committed portions of their power
     and authority to others, who thus become their delegates, and in a
     measure their representatives, and are called Priests and Deacons.
     The result is an Episcopal system, because of the practice of
     delegation; but we may conceive their keeping their powers
     altogether to themselves, and in the same proportion in which this
     was done would the Church polity cease to be Episcopalian. We may
     conceive of the Order of Apostolic Vicars (so to call it,)
     increased, till one of them was placed in every village, and took
     the office of parish Priest. I do not say such a measure would be
     justifiable or pious;-doubtless it would be a departure from the
     rule of antiquity-but it is conceivable; and it is useful to
     conceive it, in order to form a clear notion of the Essence of the
     Church System, and the defective state of the Christian Societies
     which are separate from the Church Catholic. It is a common answer
     made to those who are called High Churchmen, to say, that "if GOD
     had intended the form of Church Government to be a great
     consequence, He would have worded His will in this matter more
     clearly in Scripture." Now enough has already been said to show the
     irrelevancy of such a remark. We need not deny to the Church the
     abstract right, (however we may question the propriety,) of altering
     its own constitution. It is not merely because Episcopacy is a
     better or more scriptural form than Presbyterianism, (true as this
     may be in itself,) that Episcopalians are right, and Presbyterians
     are wrong; but because the Presbyterian Ministers have assumed a
     power, which was never intrusted to them. They have presumed to
     exercise the power of ordination, and to perpetuate a succession of
     ministers, without having received a commission to do so. This is
     the plain fact that condemns them; and is a standing condemnation
     from which they cannot escape, except by artifices of argument which
     will serve equally to protect the self-authorized teacher of
     religion. If they may ordain without being set to do so, others may
     teach and preach without being sent. They hold a middle position,
     which is untenable as destroying itself; for if Christians do
     without Bishops (i. e. Commissioned Ordainers), they may do without
     Commissioned Ministers (i. e. the Priests and Deacons). If an
     imposition of hands is necessary to convey our gift, why should it
     not be to convey another?

     1. As to the fact of the Apostolical Succession, i. e. that our
     present Bishops are the heirs and representatives of the Apostles by
     successive transmission of the prerogative of being so, this is too
     notorious to require proof. Every link in the chain is known from
     St. Peter to our present Metropolitans. Here then I only ask,
     looking at this plain fact by itself, is there not something of a
     divine providence in it? can we conceive that this Succession has
     been preserved, all over the world, amid many revolutions, through
     many centuries, for nothing? Is it wise or pious to despise or
     neglect a gift thus transmitted to us in matter of fact, even if
     Scripture did not touch upon the subject?

     2. Next, consider how natural is the doctrine of a Succession. When
     an individual comes to me, claiming to speak in the name of the Most
     High, it is natural to ask him for his authority. If he replies,
     that we are all bound to instruct each other, thus reply is
     intelligible, but in the very form of it excludes the notion of a
     ministerial order, i. e. a class of persons set apart from others
     for religious offices. If he appeals to some miraculous gift, this
     too is intelligible, and only unsatisfactory when the alleged gift
     is proved to be a fiction. No other answer can be given, except a
     reference to some person, who has given him license to exercise
     ministerial functions; then follows the question, how that
     individual gained his authority to do so. In the case of the
     Catholic Church, the person referred to, i. e. the Bishop, has
     received it from a predecessor, and he from another, and so on, till
     we arrive at the Apostles themselves, and then our LORD and SAVIOUR.
     It is superfluous to dwell on so plain a principle, which in matters
     of this world we act upon daily.

     3. Lastly, the argument from Scripture is surely quite clear to
     those, who honestly wish direction for practice. CHRIST promised He
     would be with His Apostles always, as ministers of His religion,
     even unto the end of the world. In one sense the Apostles were to be
     alive, till He came again; but they all died at the natural time.
     Does it not follow, that there are those now alive who represent
     them? Now who were the most probable representatives of them in the
     generation next their death? They surely, whom they have ordained to
     succeed them in the ministerial work. If any persons could be said
     to have CHRIST'S power and presence and the gifts of ruling and
     ordaining, of teaching, of binding and loosing, (and comparing
     together the various Scriptures on the subject, all these seem
     included in His promise to be with the Church always,) surely those,
     on whom the Apostles laid their hands, were they. And so in the next
     age, if any were representatives of the first representatives, they
     must be the next generation of Bishops, and so on. Nor does it
     materially alter the argument, though we suppose the blessing upon
     Ministerial Offices made, not to the Apostles, but to the whole body
     of Disciples; i. e. the Church. For, even if it be the Church that
     has the power of ordination committed to it, still it exercises it
     through the Bishops as its organs; and the question recurs, how has
     the Presbytery in this or that country obtained the power? The
     Church certainly has from the first committed it to the Bishops, and
     has never resumed it; and the Bishops have no where committed it to
     the Presbytery, who therefore cannot be in possession of it.

     However, it is merely for argument sake that I make this allowance,
     as to the meaning of the text in Matt. xxviii; for our LORD'S
     promise of His presence "unto the end of the world," was made to the
     Apostles, by themselves. At the same time, let it be observed what
     force is added to the argument for the Apostolical Succession, by
     the acknowledged existence in Scripture of the doctrine of the
     standing Church, or permanent Body Corporate for spiritual purposes.
     For, if Scripture has formed all Christian into one continuous
     community through all ages, (which I do not here prove,) it is but
     according to the same analogy, that the Ministerial Office should be
     vested in an order, propagated from age to age, on a principle of
     Succession. And, if we proceed to considerations of utility and
     expedience, it is plain, that, according to our notions, it is more
     necessary that a Minister should be perpetuated by a fixed law, than
     that the community of Christians should be, which can scarcely be
     considered to be vested with any powers, such as to require the
     visible authority which a Succession supplies.
