                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                                  THOUGHTS
                  ON THE BENEFITS OF THE SYSTEM OF FASTING,
                           ENJOINED BY OUR CHURCH.

                                 [Number 18]
     __________________________________________________________________

     To a person but little accustomed to observe any stated Fasts, the
     directions given by our Church on this subject, would probably
     occasion two very opposite feelings. On the one hand, he would bee
     struck by the practical character and thoughtfulness evinced by some
     of the regulations; on the other, he would probably feel repelled by
     the number of days, and the variety of occasions, which the Church
     has appointed to be hallowed. Most Christians, who really loved
     their SAVIOUR, (unless prevented by the habits of early education,)
     would probably see something appropriate and affectionate in the
     selection of the Friday, for a weekly commemoration of their
     SAVIOUR'S sufferings, and of humiliation for their own sins
     which caused them; or, at all events, they would feel that there was
     some thoughtfulness in the direction annexed, that this weekly Fast
     should not interfere with the Christian joyousness brought back by
     the Festival of their LORD'S Nativity when these should in the
     cycle of years coincide. Again, if they should fail to appreciate
     the wisdom of appointing certain days to be kept sacred in memory of
     the holy men who left all to follow CHRIST, and consequently should
     be rather deterred than attracted, by observing that many of these
     days were ushered in by a preceding Fast; still they would hardly
     fail to be struck by the provision, that this previous fast should
     not interfere with the Christian's weekly Festival of his
     LORD'S Resurrection, but that "if any of these Feast-days
     should fall upon a Monday, then the Fast-day should be kept on the
     Saturday, not upon the Sunday next before it." Again, he must
     observe, that during certain periods of the Church's year,
     which are times of especial joy to the faithful Christian, those,
     namely, which follow the Nativity and the Resurrection, these
     preparatory Fasts are altogether omitted. Some or other of these
     regulations would probably strike most thoughtful minds, as
     instances of consideration and reflection in those who framed them.
     The clergy, more especially, would appreciate, abstractedly at
     least, the imitation of the Apostolic practice of Fasting, when any
     are to be ordained to any holy function in the Church; and some
     probably will feel mournfully, that if the Church were now more
     uniformly to observe those acts of Fasting and Prayer, which were
     thought needful, before even Paul and Barnabas were separated for
     GOD'S work, we should have more reasonable grounds to hope,
     that many of our Clergy would be filled with the spirit of Barnabas
     and Paul.

     On the other hand, it is naturally to be expected, that one not
     accustomed to any outward restraint in this matter, would feel
     indisposed to ordinances so detailed; that although he could
     reconcile to himself the one or the other of these observances,
     which most recommended themselves to his Christian feelings, he
     would think the whole a burdensome and minute ceremonial, perhaps
     unbefitting a spiritual worship, and interfering with the liberty
     wherewith CHRIST has made him free. This is very natural; for we are
     by nature averse to restraint, and the abuse of some maxims of
     Protestantism, such as the "right of private judgment," has made us
     yet more so: we are reluctant to yield to an unreasoning authority,
     and to submit our wills, where our reason has not first been
     convinced; and the prevailing maxims of the day have strengthened
     this reluctance; we have been accustomed to do, "every one that
     which was right in his own eyes," and are jealous of any authority,
     except that of the direct injunctions of the Bible: in extolling
     also the spirituality of our religion, we have, I fear, intended
     covertly to panegyrise our own, and so, almost wilfully withdraw our
     sight from those more humbling provisions, which are adapted to us,
     as being yet in the flesh: in our zeal for the blessed truths of the
     cross of CHRIST, and of our sanctification by the HOLY SPIRIT, we
     have begin insensibly to disparage other truths, which bring us less
     immediately into intercourse with GOD, to neglect the means and
     ordinances, which touch not upon the very centre of our faith.

     The practical system of the Church is altogether at variance with
     that which even pious Christians in these days have permitted
     themselves to adopt; much which she has recommended or enjoined
     would now be looked upon as formalism, or outward service: in our
     just fear of a lifeless formalism, we have forgotten that wherever
     there is regularity, there must be forms; that every Christian
     feeling must have its appropriate vehicle of expression; that the
     most exalted act of Christian devotion, that our closest union with
     our SAVIOUR, is dependent upon certain forms; that the existence of
     forms does not constitute formalism; that where the Spirit of CHRIST
     is, there the existence of forms serves only to give regularity to
     the expression, to chasten what there might yet remain of too
     individual feeling, to consolidate the yet divided members "in the
     unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the SON of GOD unto a
     perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of
     CHRIST."

     Yet, as in every case in which the current of prevailing opinions,
     either in faith or practice, has for some time set in one direction,
     there have not been wanting indications, that Christians have felt
     their system incomplete; that there was something in the tranquil
     piety of former days, which they would gladly incorporate into the
     zealous excitement of the present; that although religion is in one
     sense strictly individual, yet in the means by which it is kept
     alive it is essentially expansive and social; that the only error
     here to be avoided, is a reliance upon forms; that the forms
     themselves, as soon as they are employed to realize things eternal,
     and to cherish man's communion with his SAVIOUR, become again
     spiritual and edifying.

     It is accordingly remarkable, in how many cases individuals have of
     late been led back by their own Christian experience to observances,
     in some respect similar to those which the Church had before
     suggested and provided for them. In the more advanced stages of
     their Christian course, or when, by a period of sickness or
     distress, GOD has granted them a respite from the unceasing circle
     of active duty, they have seen the value of those rites, the
     scrupulous adherence to which they once regarded as signs of
     lifelessness. In either case they would willingly own, that the
     union provided by the Church is not only more ordered, and less
     liable to exception, than one which individuals could frame; but
     also, that, as being more comprehensive, it would more effectually
     realize their objects.

     It is granted, then, that the proportion of the Fast Days enjoined
     by the Church will, to persons unaccustomed to observe them, appear
     over-large, and the variety of the occasions for which they are
     adapted, over-minute and arbitrary. The question, however, occurs,
     whether we ought to be influenced by such considerations to reject
     the entire system, or whether, we ought not rather to be moved by
     the indications of a practical character evinced in some
     regulations, to make the trial of those, whose benefit we do not at
     present discern. Now it would seem plain that, in a practical
     matter, he who from the traces of wisdom or thoughtfulness in one
     regulation should infer the probable wisdom and reasonableness of
     others emanating from the same source, would act more wisely than
     one, who, on account of the apparent unreasonableness and
     superfluity of some provisions, should proceed to condemn the whole.
     For in practical matters, the great test of the expediency of any
     habit, for which we have not direct divine authority, is experience:
     they only who have tried a line of conduct, or narrowly watched its
     effects upon others, can speak with certainty as to its result. Of
     all the lesser courses of action, which tend so powerfully to form
     our moral habits, it would be impossible probably, for one who had
     not tried their effect, to predict certainly what that effect would
     be: or if we could guess the nature of the effect, certainly we
     should be able to foresee its degree and amount. With the exception
     of gross and flagrant sins, whose character and wages we know from
     authority, there is probably no one line of action, with regard to
     which we might not before hand prove very plausibly to ourselves,
     that it would not have the effects, to which it is in fact tending,
     and which we afterwards perceive to have been its natural results.
     Yet such abstract reasonings about the possibilities or tendencies
     of things would not be listened to in any other case. When sick, men
     easily listen to the means, however improbable, by which any
     disease, resembling their own, was removed. Be it a poison, which
     they are bidden to take, yet if it be proved satisfactorily that, in
     cases like their own, that poison has been the messenger of health,
     they would not hesitate. They would listen to no abstract
     reasonings, that it was improbable that what had been an instrument
     of death could be their life; they would look to those, whom it had
     restored to health, and would do the like. The sight of one person,
     undeniably raised from a state of death to life, would affect men
     more than any a priori demonstration that the medicine was
     pernicious or deadly. Much more then, since this medicine bas been
     recommended to us by the great Physician of our souls; since it has
     been beneficial, wherever it has not been substituted for all other
     means of restoring or maintaining our spiritual health. The only
     question open to us, is,---not whether Fasting be in itself
     beneficial, this has been determined for us by GOD Himself,
     but---whether certain regulations concerning it tend to promote
     or to diminish its efficacy; and in this case, the testimony of
     those who have proved their value, is manifestly of primary
     importance; the pre-conceived opinions of such as have not tried
     them, are but mere presumptions. When then, in the regulations
     preserved in our Church, we find instances of thought which imply
     that the framers of these rules formed them upon their own
     experience, or again, when in the histories of these holy men, we
     see that they habitually practised what they inculcated, we have
     evidence of the value of their advice, which we may not, without
     peril of injury to our souls, neglect.

     It was in part, by some such process as the preceding, that the
     writer of these pages was led to consider what people have come
     habitually to regard as the less solemn Fasts of the Church, and now
     ordinarily pay less regard to; for the first day of Lent, and the
     annual commemoration of our SAVIOUR'S sufferings, are, I
     suppose, still very commonly observed. As the history of every mind
     is, under some modifications, the mirror of many others, it may to
     some be useful to see by what course of reflection or experience an
     individual was brought to feel the value of the regulations of the
     Church in this respect.

     It will perhaps to some seem strange to find placed among the
     foremost of these advantages, the Protection thereby
     afforded---protection against one's self; protection against
     the habits and customs of the world, which sorely let and hinder one
     in systematically pursuing what one imagines might be beneficial. I
     speak not, of course, of any known duty; in that case the opinion or
     practice or invitations of the world were nothing: but with regard
     to those in definite duties or disciplines, which one thinks may be
     performed as well at one period as at another, and which on that
     very account are frequently not performed at all, or at best
     occasionally only, and superficially. No thoughtful Christian will
     doubt of the propriety and duty of fasting, whatever he may
     understand by the term. "The bridegroom is taken away from us, and
     so we must fast in these days:" the Apostles were "in fastings
     often:" in fastings, as well as in sufferings for the Gospel, or by
     pureness, by knowledge, by all the graces which the HOLY GHOST
     imparted, they approved themselves the Ministers of GOD. Our blessed
     SAVIOUR has given us instructions how we ought to fast, and
     therefore implied that His disciples would fast: He has promised
     that His Father, in the sight of all the Holy Angels, shall reward
     the right performance of this exercise: how then should it not be a
     duty? "Our LORD and SAVOUR," says Hooker, "would not teach the
     manner of doing, much less propose a reward for doing, that which
     were not both holy and acceptable in GOD'S sight." And yet,
     after all the allowances which can be made for that fasting which is
     known to our FATHER only who seeth in secret, one cannot conceal
     from one's self that this duty is in these days very
     inadequately practised. It is, in fact, a truth almost proverbial,
     that a duty which may be performed at any time, is in great risk of
     being neglected at all times. The early Christians felt this, and
     appointed the days of our Blessed SAVIOUR'S betrayal and
     crucifixion, the Wednesday and Friday of each week, to be days of
     fasting and especial humiliation. Those days, in which especially
     the bridegroom was taken away, the days, namely, in which He was
     crucified and lay in the grave, were, besides, early consecrated as
     Fasts by the widowed Church. Nor was it because they were in perils,
     which we are spared; because they were in deaths oft, that they
     practised or needed this discipline. Quite the reverse. Their whole
     life was a Fast, a death to this world, a realizing of things
     invisible. It was when dangers began to mitigate, when Christianity
     became (as far as the world was concerned) an easy profession, it
     was then that the peril increased, lest their first simplicity
     should he corrupted, their first love grow cold! Then those who had
     spiritual authority in the Church increased the stated Fasts, in
     order to recall that holy earnestness of life, which the recentness
     of their redemption, and the constant sense of their SAVIOUR'S
     presence, had before inspired. Fasts were not merely the voluntary
     discipline of men, whose conversation was in heaven; they were
     adopted and enlarged in periods of ease, of temptation, of luxury,
     of self-satisfaction, of growing corruption.

     To urge that Fasts were abused by the later Romish Church, is but to
     assert that they are a means of grace committed to men; that they
     would subsequently be unduly neglected, was but to be expected by
     any one, who knows the violent vacillations of human impetuosity. It
     was then among the instances of calm judgment in the Reformers of
     our Prayer-Book that, cutting off the abuses which before prevailed,
     the vain distinctions of meats, the luxurious abstinences, the
     lucrative dispensations, they still prescribed, Fasting "to
     discipline the flesh, to free the spirit, and render it more earnest
     and fervent to prayer, and as a testimony and witness with us before
     GOD of our humble submission to His high Majesty, when we confess
     our sins unto Him, and are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of
     heart, bewailing the same in the affliction of our bodies ."

     Our Reformers omitted that, which might be a snare to men's
     consciences; they left it to every man's Christian prudence and
     experience, how he would fast; but they prescribed the days upon
     which he should fast, both in order to obtain an unity of feeling
     and devotion in the members of CHRIST'S body, and to preclude
     the temptation to the neglect of the duty altogether. Nor is the
     interference in this matter any thing insulated in our system, or
     one which good men would object to, had not our unhappy neglect of
     it now made it seem strange and foreign to our habits. In some
     things we are accustomed to perform a duty, which is such
     independently of the authority of the Church, in the way in which
     the Church has prescribed, and because she has so appointed. We
     assemble ourselves together on the LORD'S day, because GOD has
     directed us by His Apostle not to forsake such assemblies; but we
     assemble ourselves twice upon that day rather than once, not upon
     any reason of the abstract fitness of so doing, but because the
     Church has prescribed it. And yet we should rightly think, that it
     argued great profaneness of mind and a culpable carelessness of our
     privileges, if we were habitually to neglect this ordinance, one the
     ground that GOD has not in His Word directly enjoined it, And
     probably, at an early period of our lives, (perhaps even later, when
     indisposition or indolence or any prevailing temptation has beset
     us,) there are few amongst us who have not owed their regular
     perseverance in public worship to this ordinance of the Church:
     there is no one assuredly who having broken this ordinance, has
     afterwards by GOD'S mercy been brought back to join more
     uniformly in the public worship of his GOD and SAYIOUR, who has not
     been thankful for this restriction. This then is protection.

     Again, to search the Scriptures is a duty expressly enjoined by OUR
     SAVIOUR. The Church has stepped in to direct this study, and
     prescribed that nearly the whole of the O. T. should be read in each
     year, the N. T. thrice in the same period, the Psalms once every
     month. Since our Daily Service has been nearly lost, many pious
     individuals, it is well known, have habitually read just that
     portion which the Church has allotted. Now, laying aside certain
     cases in which this duty will be lifelessly performed, (for such
     there will be under any system,) can any one doubt, that those who
     have from childhood been trained to follow this direction of the
     Church, have read their Bible more regularly and more fully than
     others? and has not the Word of GOD often exerted its power even
     when it has been read simply as an act of duty, and when but for
     this direction it would not have been read at all?

     The like has undoubtedly taken place even in the celebration of the
     Supper of our LORD. Individuals have been induced to join, and that
     beneficially to themselves, in the Communion even of their
     SAVIOUR'S Body and Blood, just so often in the year as their
     Church has prescribed to them. This is not so unusual a case as it
     might seem. One cannot doubt, that in many cased, where the Holy
     Communion is celebrated but three times in the year, this is so
     done, because such is the smallest number, of which the Church
     admits, and the Minister supposes that his flock would not join with
     him more frequently. Had the Church made no such regulation, many
     probably, who now partake three times a year, might not have joined
     even thus often; yet it would not be true to say that such persons
     in all cases partook without real devotion, or any love to their
     SAVIOUR. Again, where there are opportunities of a monthly
     Communion, there may be some, who would not have desired the
     privilege, unless the provision had been made for them, and they had
     been invited by the Church so to do; yet will it not of necessity
     follow, that they partake coldly or unacceptably. A warmer love
     would indeed lead the one to a more frequent, the other to a more
     glad Communion; nor have such persons well understood the principles
     of their Church; still, GOD forbid that we should judge that they
     had not partaken worthily and devotionally.

     Here again then is protection: in each case, we have a command of
     GOD, obeyed in such wise as is prescribed by the Ministers, whom He
     has made the Stewards of His Word and Sacraments; and since in these
     cases we admit their regulation, why should we think it strange or
     incongruous, that they have given us their pious admonitions in
     another ordinance of God?

     Nor is it to the undecided, or the timid, or the hesitating, or the
     notice only, that this protection is beneficial; although no
     reflecting Christian will speak lightly of the value of any means,
     which tend to strengthen the bruised reed or to kindle anew the
     smouldering flax. The comparison of our own times with those of the
     Reformers were proof enough of the benefit of authoritative
     interposition in these matters. Is human nature changed? or have we
     discovered some more royal road, by which to arrive at the
     subjugation of the body, the spiritualizing of the affections? or
     have we even from without fewer temptations to luxury and
     self-indulgence? or will not even the more pious and decided
     Christians among us confess, upon reflection, that they had probably
     been more chastened and lowly, more single in following hall they in
     this point adhered to the Ancient Discipline of the Church? Our
     Reformers kept and enjoined one hundred and eight days in each year,
     either entirely or in part, this manner sanctified: two-sevenths of
     each year they wished to be in some way separated by acts of
     self-denial and humiliation. Let any one consider what proportion of
     each year he has himself so consecrated, and whether, had he
     followed the ordinances of the Church, his spirit would not probably
     have been more chastened and lowly, more single in following even
     what he deems his duty, whether self would not have been more
     restrained, whether he would not have walked more humbly with his
     GOD.

     Yet authority is a valuable support against the world, even to minds
     which yet are not inclined to compromise with the world unlawfully.
     There are many situations in life, in which it were almost
     impossible to continue, without observation, a system of habitual
     and regular Fasting, certainly not one, attended with those
     accompaniments, which the Fathers of our Church thought it desirable
     to unite with it. It is true, that every Fast may be made a Feast,
     and every Feast a Fast, that as far as self-denial is concerned, if
     there be a stedfast purpose, the object may perhaps be as well
     accomplished in the midst of plenty and luxury, as by the purposed
     spareness of a private board; it is possible also, that the acts
     might be in some measure concealed; still there are very many minds,
     and those such as one would be the most anxious to protect, to whom
     the very suspicion that they might be observed, would be a matter of
     pain and a species of profanation; they would shrink from any thing
     which might be construed into Pharisaic abstinence, or which would
     seem to pretend to more than ordinary measures of Christian
     prudence. To such mild and unobtrusive spirits, the recommendation
     or direction of the Church is an invaluable support: they may now
     adopt the line of conduct which they love, unimpeded by any scruple,
     lest their good should be evil spoken of; they are acting under
     authority; they pretend to do nothing more than the Founders of
     their Church have deemed expedient for every one; their conduct
     involves no lofty pretensions; they follow in simplicity and
     faithfulness an old and trodden track, which has been marked out for
     them as plain and safe.

     The first advantage then which may result from the authoritative
     interposition of the Church in regulating this duty, is the securing
     of greater regularity and more uniform perseverance in its
     performance; not undoubtedly as in itself an end, but as leading to
     great and important ends; for as those pious men, who laid so much
     stress thereon, themselves say, "when it respecteth a good end, it
     is a good work; but the end being evil, the work is also evil."
     "Fasting is not to be commended as a duty, but as an instrument;
     and, in that sense, no man can reprove it, or undervalue it, but he
     that knows neither spiritual acts, not spiritual necessities."

     But further, it is not even true, that all the purposes of Fasting
     can be attained by mere self-denial in the midst of luxury. For this
     acquisition of the habit of self-denial, although an important
     object, is by no means the sole end of Fasting. The great purpose,
     in connexion with which it is chiefly mentioned in Holy Scripture,
     is prayer. The influences of Society, rightly chosen, may dispose
     the mind to more fervent (possibly only more excited) prayer; it is
     solitude generally, or communion with a single friend, which brings
     us to a humble, contrite, lowly intercourse with our GOD. In the
     present day, the first paramount evil which destroys its tens of
     thousands, is probably self-indulgence; the second which hinders
     thousands in their progress heavenwards, is the being "busy and
     careful about many things," whether temporal or spiritual. "We have
     kept the vineyards of our mother's children; but our own
     vineyards we have not kept." The tendency of the age is to activity,
     and we have caught its spirit; if we be but active about our
     Master's calling, we deem ourselves secure; we think not, until
     we are precluded from active exertion, "how much activity belongs to
     some (ages and some) natures, and that this nature is often mistaken
     for grace." Meanwhile an activity which leads us not inwards, has
     taken place of that tranquil retiring meditation on the things of
     the unseen world which formed the deep, absorbing, contemplative,
     piety of our forefathers; even the conception of the joys of heaven,
     which very many of us form, is but a glorified transcript of our
     life here; we look, when through GOD'S mercy in CHRIST we shall
     be delivered from the burthen of the flesh, to be like the
     "Ministers of His who do His pleasure;" but we look not,
     comparatively at least, to that which our Fathers longed for, to be
     with CHRIST, and to see Him as He is. Our age is in general too
     busy, too active, for deep and continued self-observation, or for
     thoughtful communion with our GOD. It would not be too broad or
     invidious a statement to say, that for real insight into the
     recesses of our nature, or for deep aspirations after GOD, we must
     for the most part turn to holy men of other days: our own furnish us
     chiefly with that which they have mainly cherished, a general
     abhorrence of sin; they guide us not to trace it out in the lurking
     corners of your own hearts: they teach us to acknowledge generally
     the corruption of our nature, the necessity of a Redeemer, and the
     love we should feel towards Him; but they lead us not to that
     individual and detailed knowledge of our own personal sinfulness,
     whence the real love of our Redeemer can alone flow. A religious
     repose and a thoughtful contemplation would be a second advantage of
     complying in this respect with the instructions of our Church.

     Braced and strung by retirement into ourselves, and tranquil
     meditation upon GOD, we should return to our active duties with so
     much more efficiency, as we ourselves had become holier, humbler,
     calmer, more abstracted from self, more habituated to refer all
     things to GOD. Were human activity alone engaged on both sides, then
     might we the rather justify the prevailing notions of the day, that
     energy is to be met by counter-energy alone: but now, since " we
     wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, I
     against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world,"
     it especially behoves us too look wherein our great strength lies,
     and to take heed that "the weapons of our warfare be not carnal." It
     is tempting to adopt into the service of GOD the weapons or the mode
     of warfare, which in the hands of His enemies we see to be
     efficacious; but the faithful soldier of CHRIST must not go forth
     with weapons which he has not proved; the Christian's armoury,
     as the Apostle goes on to describe it, is mainly defensive; and when
     he has urged his brethren to assume it, he exhorts them to add that
     whereby alone it becomes effectual---a duty in which again we
     appear to ourselves to be inactive---"praying always with all
     prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with
     all perseverance and supplication for all saints." Fasting,
     retirement, and prayer, as they severally and unitedly tend to wean
     us from ourselves and cast us upon God, will tend to promote
     singleness of purpose, to refine our busy and over-heated
     restlessness into a calm and subdued confidence in Him, in whose
     strength we go forth. Nor shall we, until the day of Judgment, know
     how much of the victory was granted to those, who in man's
     sight took no share in the conflict; how far the "unseen strength"
     of Fasting, humiliation, prayer, put forth by those of whom the
     world took no account, was allowed by God to prevail. The world saw
     only that the Apostle whom they had imprisoned, escaped their power;
     they knew not that the prayer of the Church had baffled their
     design. In the present conflict throughout the world, in which the
     pride of human and Satanic strength seems put forth to the utmost
     humility and a chastened dependent spirit would seem to have an
     especial efficacy. On these, as the graces most opposed to the
     world's main sin, we might look the more cheerfully for
     GOD'S blessing; thus shall we at least be saved from augmenting
     the evil we would oppose. "Fasting directly advances towards
     chastity, and by consequence and indirect powers to patience,
     humility, and indifference. But then it is not the fast of a day
     that can do this; it is not an act, but a state of fasting, that
     operates to mortification."

     A third benefit, which might be hoped to result from the more
     assiduous practice of this duty, would be a more self-denying
     extensive charity. "Fasting without mercy, is but an image of
     famine; Fasting without works of piety, is only an occasion of
     covetousness:" and an Apostolic Father gives us this excellent
     instruction, "A true Fast is not merely keep under the body, but to
     give to the widow, or the poor, the amount of that which thou
     wouldest have expended upon thyself; that so he who receives it may
     pray to GOD for thee."

     It may perhaps seem strange to some that the present age should be
     thought wanting in self-denying charity. And yet let men but
     consider with themselves not what they give only, but what they
     retain; let them inquire a little further, not only what wants are
     relieved, but what remediable misery remains unabated; or let them
     but observe generally the glaring contrasts of extremest luxury and
     softness, and pinching want and penury; between their own ceiled
     houses, and the houses of GOD which lie waste; or let them only
     trace out one single item in the mass of human wretchedness,
     disease, insanity, religious ignorance, and picture to themselves
     what a Christian people might do, what the primitive Christians
     would have done, to relieve it,---and then turn to what is done,
     to what themselves do, and say whether means to promote self-denying
     charity can well be spared.

     A further important object of the stated and frequent recurrence of
     the prescribed Fasts of our Church, is the public recognition of the
     reality of things spiritual. Here also very many have felt, (and it
     is a feeling whose strength is daily increasing,) that some public
     protest is needed against the modes of acting, tolerated (would one
     must not say, reigning!) in our nominally Christian land: that the
     Church, or the body of believers, ought to have some recognized
     modes of distinguishing themselves from those, who manifest by their
     deeds, that although "amongst us, they are not of us;" and who, on
     the principles of our Church, ought to have gone out or to have been
     removed from us. It has been with a right view of what the ideal of
     the Christian Church should be, its holiness, and its purity,
     although not, I must think, with a just conception of the nature of
     the Church, that mean jealous for the honour of their God and their
     REDEEMER, have in some measure formed Churches within the Church.
     The plan has, I think been defective, sacred and praiseworthy as was
     the object contemplated. It is true, that the mere union in the
     celebration of the weekly festival of our LORD'S Resurrection
     does not, as things now are, furnish a sufficient condemnation of
     the maxims and offences of the World; that the Church and the World
     are too much amalgamated; that while the light of the Church has in
     part penetrated the gross darkness of the World, there is yet
     danger, lest that light itself should be obscured. Yet the remedy
     for this, under GOD'S blessing, is not to be sought in rescuing
     or concentrating some scattered rays of that Church, while the
     Church herself is abandoned to the World. Her own Ordinances afford
     the means of her restoration. Not to speak of those ulterior and
     fearful powers committed to her, (and which other Communions
     exercise,) of ejecting from her bosom "the wicked person," the
     observance of her own other institutions would virtually eject them.
     Not indeed at once, (as indeed GOD Himself has thought fit to allow
     even His own Blessed Spirit but gradually to leaven our corrupted
     mass,) not at once, (for at present, long continuance in opposed
     habits would prevent many from receiving the Ordinances of the
     Church,) but yet, one should trust, steadily and increasingly; the
     mists which now encircle the Church, would disperse, and its
     glorious elevation on Zion's hill would more effectually be
     seen. Those, whom the easy Service of the LORD'S Day repels
     not, who would fain serve GOD on the seventh day, and Mammon on the
     remaining six, would by these severer or more continuous services,
     be brought to some test of what spirit they were; more frequent
     Communions, more constant Worship, more regular fasting, would show
     men, whether they belonged to the Church or to the World: and if the
     Church, like Him, who is its Head, and because joined to that Head,
     becomes a stone of stumbling, if some shall more openly fall back
     unto perdition, still it will have performed its office; many, one
     may be sure, (for our assurance rests on GOD'S Word,) would
     also be awakened from their lethargy of death; and if it be to some
     a "savour of death," it will, by GOD'S mercy, be to many more a
     "savour of life, unto life." Yet the result of any system,
     sanctioned by GOD'S Word, belongs to us. Were the consequences
     of more Apostolic practice a great apparent defection and
     desolation, we dare not hesitate. "It must be made manifest that
     they are not all of us." Meanwhile a beacon will be held out by
     those, who would wish to see their path: the Church would, in
     example, as well as in her theory and directions, hold up a higher
     standard of performance: she, in theory the most perfect, would no
     longer be in proportion the least influential; the pleas, that every
     show of religion, which the world tolerates not, is the mere excess
     and badge of a party, could no longer be held: those who shrink from
     what might seem a voluntary or ostentatious forwardness, would no
     longer be deterred from uniting in observances, which, if
     authorized, they would love: and there might again be no separation
     but between those who serve GOD, and those who serve Him not. The
     world has seen that its own principles are leading to its own
     destruction; it acknowledges that its increased laxity has fearfully
     increased its corruption; offences, which even it abhors, are
     multiplied; vices, which disturb even its peace, stalk more openly;
     yet while it reaps the bitter fruits of its own ways, it dares not
     strike the root.

     The Fasts, appointed by our Church, appear eminently calculated, not
     in truth as a panacea of all evil, but as one decided protest
     against the "corruption which is in the world by lust," as one
     testimony to the conviction of men of the reality of things eternal.

     Men may "fast for strife and to smite with the fist of wickedness,"
     as they may also "for pretence make long prayers:" yet men will not,
     in general, submit to inconvenience and privation,---except for a
     real and substantial object: the world has easier paths for its
     followers; he, who suffers hardship for an unseen reward, at least
     gives evidence to the world of the sincerity and rootedness of his
     own conviction; he attests that he is a pilgrim journeying to a
     better country, and however men may for a while neglect his
     testimony, yet if it be consistent and persevering, it cannot be
     silenced.

     Such are some of the advantages, which a recurrence to the system of
     our Church in respect of Fasting might, in dependence upon
     GOD'S blessing, tend to realize: a more uniform, namely, and
     regular observance of an injunction of our Blessed SAVIOUR; a deeper
     humiliation, and a more chastened spirit in carrying on His will; a
     more thorough insight into ourselves, and a closer communion with
     our GOD; a more resolute and consistent practice of self-denying
     charity; a more lively realizing of things spiritual; a warning to
     the world of GOD'S truth and its own peril. I have spoken with
     reference to prevailing habits and general character only, partly
     because they are these habits which the regulations of a Church must
     mainly contemplate; in part also, because, in whatever degree, they
     will probably form a portion of our own. The evil or defective
     character of any period is not formed by, nor will it exist in those
     only who are evil; it encompasses us, is within us: we also
     contribute in our degree to foster and promote it; nay, it is from
     us probably that it receives its main countenance and support. Our
     own standard is insensibly lowered by the evil with which we are
     environed. A self-indulgent age is not a favourable atmosphere for
     the growth of self-denial; nor an age of busy and self-dependent
     activity for that of a calm and abiding practical recognition, that
     every thing is in GOD'S hands; nor a period absorbed in the
     things of sense for thoughtful meditation on things eternal. The
     predominant evils will indeed appear in the Christian faith in a
     subdued form; yet whether the temptation be to an unconscious
     compliance with them, or unwittingly to oppose evil with evil, the
     danger lies nearer here than in any other part of duty. And if the
     salt in any wise lose its savour, wherewith shall the
     self-corrupting world be preserved? wherewith the salt itself be
     salted?

     The benefits above names are such as depend on the increased degree
     of Fasting, exercised in compliance with the directions of the
     Church, independently of the consideration of the days or seasons
     selected for the purpose. The results to be anticipated from a more
     general adherence to these rules appear, however, to be heightened
     by that selection. The general objects of the Church were, 1. to
     impress upon the mind and life the memory of her SAVIOUR'S
     sufferings; 2. to prepare the mind for different solemn occasions,
     which recur in her yearly service. The first, or the Friday Fast, as
     above stated, was universally adopted in the early Church, and in
     all probability was coeval with the Apostles; it was continue
     uninterruptedly, alike in the Eastern and the Western Church, and
     preserved in our own, through the respect which she bore to
     primitive antiquity, and the experience of the elder Church. It was
     perhaps at the first adopted, as the natural expression of sorrow
     for the loss of their LORD and for His bitter sufferings. With this
     would soon connect itself, almost to the exclusion of the former,
     sorrow for the sins, which caused those sufferings. "We do not
     fast," says Chrysostom, "for the Passion or the Cross, but for our
     sins; ---the Passion is not the occasion for fasting or mourning,
     but of joy and exultation.--We mourn not for that, GOD forbid, but
     for our sins, and therefore we fast." As then the LORD'S day
     was the weekly festival of their SAVIOUR'S resurrection a
     weekly memorial of our rising again, in Him and through Him, to a
     new and real life; so was the Friday's Fast a weekly memorial
     of the death to sin, which all Christians had in their SAVIOUR died,
     and which, if they would live with Him, they must continually die.
     Thus each revolving week was a sort of representation of that great
     week, in which man's redemption was completed: the Church never
     lost sight of her SAVIOUR'S sufferings; each week was hallowed
     by a return of the "Good Friday." One need scarcely insist upon the
     tendency of such a system, deeply to impress on men's hearts
     the doctrine of the Atonement, by thus incorporating it into their
     ordinary lives, and making them by their actions confess the truth,
     In the early Church its efficacy was without doubt increased by the
     accession of the Fast of Wednesday, or fourth day of the week; so
     that no portion of the week was without some memorial of the SAVIOUR
     of the Church. There is however another object, which, although not
     originally contemplated, was in fact attained by this institution,
     the holier celebration, namely, of our most solemn day, that our
     SAVIOUR'S death. Most Christians, probably, who have
     endeavoured to realize to themselves the events of that day, have
     been painfully disappointed in so doing; instead of

     Touching the heart with softer power

     For comfort than an angel's mirth

     it has been to them an oppressive day: its tremendous truths
     overwhelmed rather than consoled; it was so unlike all other days,
     that the mind was confounded by its very greatness: it seem
     unnatural to do any thing, which one would do even on any other holy
     day, and the heart was equally unsatisfied with what it did or did
     not do. Something of this kind has taken place in very many minds;
     and the reason probably was, that the solemnity of that day was too
     insulated; that (if one may use the expression) it was out of
     keeping with the religious habits of the rest of the year. This then
     the weekly Fast and solemn recollection recommended by the Church
     are calculated to remedy; as indeed, had they been observed, these
     feelings would never have found place. In whatever degree its advice
     is adhered to, Good Friday becomes a day of more chastened, and yet
     of intenser feeling; it is connected with a train of the like
     emotions, affections, and resolves; insulated no longer, but the
     holiest only among the holy. "Neither in moral or religious, more
     than in physical and civil matters," says a very acute observer of
     human nature, "do people willingly do any thing suddenly or upon the
     instant; they need a succession of the like actions, whereby a habit
     may be formed; the things which they are to love, or to perform,
     they cannot conceive as insulated and detached; whatever we are to
     repeat with satisfaction, must not have become foreign to us." The
     principle is of important application in the whole range of our
     duties; nor cold it be too often repeated, in warning, "that what is
     not practised frequently, can never be performed with delight." We
     are sensible of the value of habits in moral action, and are not
     surprised that one who make only desultory efforts should never
     succeed in acquiring any habit; we feel it in some degree in our
     public worship of GOD, and think it natural that one who does not
     diligently avail himself of all his opportunities of attending it,
     should join in it but coldly and lifelessly; it is strange to him,
     and therefore at best a stiff and austere service; and yet, in other
     matters, we act in defiance of this maxim; we have allowed our Fasts
     to become rare, and therefore it has come to pass, that so many
     never fast at all: our holy days have passed for the most part into
     neglect, and therefore the few that remain excite but little
     comparative feeling; our daily service is well nigh disused, and
     therefore our weekly is so much neglected; we have diminished the
     frequency of our communions, and therefore so many are stranger to
     the LORD'S Table, so many formal partakers. Not so the
     Apostles, nor the Primitive Church, nor our own in its Principles,
     or in its most Apostolic days: they knew human nature better; or,
     rather, acting from their own experience and self-knowledge, they
     ordained what was healthful for men of like nature with themselves;
     what was a duty an any period of the year, must needs be performed
     throughout; each portion had its Festivals and its Fasts, and the
     varying circle formed one harmonious whole of Christian humiliation
     and Christian joy.

     The Church was in those days consistent; its ministers derived their
     commission not of man, but of GOD, who called them inwardly by His
     Spirit, and outwardly through those to whom, though His Apostles, He
     had delegated this high office. The admission into Holy Orders was
     no mere outward consecration or ceremony, but an imparting of
     GOD'S Spirit to those who were separated to this work, through
     the prayers of the congregation, and the delegated authority of the
     Bishop. Christian edification was not left to each man's
     private judgment, but each was taught by those who had authority and
     experience, what was good and expedient for his soul's health.
     We also have been in these days becoming consistent; if we fast, we
     fast for ourselves; if we keep a holy day, or select a portion of
     the weekly service, it is because we of our own minds deem it
     convenient; we have become in all things the judges of the Church,
     instead of reverently obeying what has been recommended to us; we
     judge beforehand what will be useful to us, instead of ascertaining
     by experience whether the system recommended by elder Christians be
     not so.

     Yet I would fain hope that there will not long be this variance
     between our principles and our practice; but that, instead of
     examining what is the present practice of any portion of our Church,
     and inquiring how this may be amended, men would first investigate,
     in the Canons and the Rubrics, what the real mind of the Church is,
     and see whether adherence to these would not remove this regretted
     fact.

     One only objection can, I think, be raised by any earnest-minded
     Christian to this weekly fast, namely, that the means employed, mere
     self-denial in so slight a matter as one's food, is so petty
     and trifling a thing, that it were degrading the doctrine of the
     Cross to make such an observance in any way bear upon it. One
     respects the feelings of such a person and his love for the Cross;
     but the objection probably proceeds from inexperience in the habit
     of Fasting. For let any one consider, from his childhood upwards, by
     what the greater part of his habits have been formed, and by what
     they are continued: not by any great acts or great sacrifices, (as
     far as any thing might be relatively great,) but by a succession of
     petty actions, whose effect he could not at any time foresee, or
     thought too minute to leave any trace behind them, and which have in
     fact, whether for good or for evil, made him what he is. Practice
     will universally show, that the motive ennobles the action, not that
     the action dishonours the motive. "True it is," says Bishop Taylor,
     "that religion snatches even at little things; and as it teaches us
     to observe all the great commandments and significations of duty, so
     it is not willing to pretermit any thing, which, although by its
     greatness it cannot of itself be considerable, yet by its smallness
     it may become a testimony of the greatness of the affection, which
     would not omit the least minutes of love and duty." He who
     pronounced a blessing upon the gift of a cup of cold water to a
     disciple in His name, will also bless any act of sincere self-denial
     practised in memory of Him. Only let us not mock GOD, let us deny
     ourselves in something which is to us really self-denial; let us, in
     whatever degree we may be able to bear it without diminishing our
     own usefulness, put ourselves to some inconvenience, in sorrow and
     shame for those sins, "the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
     eye, and the pride of life," which made our SAVIOUR a man of
     sorrows, and exposed Him to shame, and we shall not afterwards think
     the practice degrading to Him, or without meaning. The Fast of the
     early Christians during Lent was an entire abstinence until evening,
     on the Wednesday and Friday, until three o'clock: unused as we
     for the most part are to any such discipline, many of us would at
     the first not be well able to endure it; the difference also of
     climate might render that degree of abstinence oppressive top us,
     which in more southern altitude would recruit only and refresh the
     spirit: the weak and sickly again have always been exempt from those
     more rigid abstinences: they might not beneficially be able to
     deprive themselves of an early or an entire meal: yet doubtless many
     of them will have been enabled to trace in themselves the evils of
     even a necessary softness and indulgence of the body; and the mind
     which shall have become alive to these, will no be slow in
     discovering some mode of "keeping under the body, and bringing it
     into subjection." The early Church, besides its more rigid Fasts,
     admitted also of the substitution of less palatable and diminished
     nourishment; and our own has, in insulated directions accompanying
     her occasional Fasts, recognized the same principle: in general, she
     has left the mode of observing her Fasts free to the conscience of
     each; only let them consist in real self-denial, and be accompanied
     by charity, retirement, and prayer.

     The early Church acted, as it supposed, upon our Blessed
     SAVIOUR'S own authority, in connecting these acts of bodily
     abstinence with the memory of His death. The Bridegroom was taken
     away! Yet if anyone should find in himself any abiding repugnance to
     associate matters, necessarily humiliating, with the doctrine of the
     Cross, let him not endeavour to force his feelings: the Church
     wished to lay no yoke upon her members; let him perform the acts in
     mere compliance with the advice of the Church, and the experience of
     elder Christians: when we shall have attained the habit of
     self-denial and self-humiliation, the doctrine of the Cross will,
     without effort, connect itself with each such performance.

     The other Fasts of the Church require the less to be dwelt upon,
     either because, as in Lent, her authority is yet in some degree
     recognized, although it be very imperfectly and capriciously obeyed;
     or, as in the case of the Ember Weeks, the practice has direct
     scriptural authority; or in that of the other Festivals, because
     when we shall again value the privilege of having the blessed
     examples of Martyrs and Saints set before us, to

     ---------------Remind us, how our darksome clay

     May keep the ethereal warmth our new Creator brought,

     we shall feel also the advantage of ushering in each such day by
     actions which may impress upon us how they entered into their glory,
     by taking up their SAVIOUR'S cross and following Him.

     Only with regard to the Ember Weeks, it may be permitted to observe,
     how this institution yet more fully embraces the objects which some
     good men are endeavouring, by voluntary association, to attain. For
     the solemn period of the four Ember Weeks is obvious calculated for
     prayer, not for those only who are to be ordained to any holy
     function, but for all who shall have been so called, that GOD "would
     so replenish them with the truth of His doctrine, and endue them
     with innocency of life, that they may faithfully serve Him;" and
     thus, not only some few individuals, more nearly known to each
     other, but all the Ministers and all the people of CHRIST should,
     with one mind and one mouth, implore a blessing upon the Ministry
     which He has appointed.

     And this also is an especial privilege of the whole system of
     regular Fasting prescribed by our Church, beyond the voluntary
     discipline adopted by individuals, that it presents the whole Church
     unitedly before GOD, humbling themselves for their past sins, and
     imploring Him not to give His heritage to reproach. The value of
     this united prayer and humiliation only GOD knoweth; yet since He
     hath promised to be present where two or three are gathered together
     in His name, how much more when His Church shall again unite before
     Him "in weeping, fasting, and praying;" how much more shall He
     spare, though we deserve punishment, and in His wrath think upon
     mercy. He who spared the Ninevites, how much more may we trust that
     He will spare us, for whom He has given his well-beloved SON.

     "LET us, therefore, dearly beloved, seeing there are many more
     causes of fasting and mourning in these our days, than hath been of
     many years heretofore in one age, endeavour ourselves both inwardly
     in our hearts, and also outwardly with our bodies, diligently to
     exercise this godly exercise of fasting, in such sort and manner, as
     the holy prophets, the apostles, and divers other devout persons for
     their time used the same. GOD is now the same GOD as He was then;
     GOD that loveth righteousness, and that hateth iniquity; GOD which
     willeth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn from his
     wickedness and live; GOD that hath promised to turn to us, if we
     refuse not to turn to Him: yea, if we turn our evil works from
     before His eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek to do
     right, relieve the oppressed, be a right judge to the fatherless,
     defend the widow, break our bread to the hungry, bring the poor that
     wander into our house, clothe the naked, and despise not our brother
     which is our own flesh: Then shalt thou call, saith the prophet, and
     the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and He shall say, Here am I:
     yea, GOD, which heard Ahab, and the Ninevites, and spared them, will
     also hear our prayers, and spare us, so that we, after their
     example, will unfeignedly turn unto Him: yea, He will bless us with
     His heavenly benedictions, the time that we have to tarry in this
     world, and, after the race of this mortal life, He will bring us to
     .His heavenly kingdom, where we shall reign in everlasting
     blessedness with our SAVIOUR CHRIST, to whom with the FATHER and the
     HOLY GHOST be all honour and glory, for ever and ever. Amen." Homily
     on Fasting, part 2.

     "LORD, have mercy upon us, and give us grace, that while we live in
     this miserable world, we may through thy help bring forth this and
     such other fruits of the SPIRIT, commended and commanded in thy holy
     word, to the glory of thy name, and to our comforts, that after the
     race of this wretched life, we may live everlastingly with thee in
     thy heavenly kingdom, not for the merits and worthiness of our
     works, but for thy mercies' sake, and the merits of thy dear Son,
     JESUS CHRIST, to whom, with thee and the HOLY GHOST, be all laud,
     honour, and glory, for ever and ever. men." Homily on Fasting, part
     1.

                                 POSTSCRIPT.

     IN the preceding remarks, the observance of the Fasts enjoined by
     the Church has been recommended on the ground of the practical
     wisdom and spiritual experience of the Holy Men, by whose advice
     they were adopted, rather than on that of the direct authority of
     the Church. And this has been done, not because the writer doubted
     of the validity of that authority in this instance, but because it
     involved a question, which would to many appear distant and
     abstract; whether, namely, the Church's Laws on this subject
     were by long disuse virtually abrogated. For I am persuaded that
     many excellent men, who would shrink from contravening a distinct
     command of their Church, do in fact neglect these, from some notion
     that the Church herself has tacitly abandoned them. This notion does
     indeed appear to me to rest on a wrong supposition.

     For, 1st. Since the Church has not annexed any censures to the
     neglect of this Ordinance, (which may correspond to the penal
     provisions of a civil law,) the mere silence of the Church, or of
     her Spiritual Authorities, is no proof of her acquiescence in the
     breach of her directions.

     2. It would be admitted in any other case, that the mere multitude
     of those who broke any law did not alone abrogate that law; that the
     intrinsic sanctity of the law cannot depend upon the obedience which
     men may yield to it; that the laxity or remiss ness of men, at one
     period, cannot annihilate the authority by which that remissness was
     to be controlled. The disobedience of others, be they many or few,
     nay, though they should be even the majority, can have no force in
     absolving us from the law by which we are in common bound. It is
     true that observances, which the Church has at one time on her own
     authority ordained, she may at another abrogate; yet, until she do
     this, it is to be presumed that she wishes them to be retained in
     force. And it has already happened, that ordinances have for a time
     fallen into disuse, which yet were never allowed to be abrogated,
     and which afterwards have been very beneficially revived. It is
     within the memory of man, that the yearly Commemoration of our
     Blessed SAVIOUR'S death was in country congregations very
     generally omitted. This solemn day is now, I trust, almost
     universally observed; nor is there any apparent reason, why this
     other ordinance of the Church, whereby we humble ourselves for the
     sins which caused that Death, should not, if men once came seriously
     to consider it, be promptly, and with very wholesome results,
     restored. I doubt not that if the question were formally proposed to
     the Spiritual Authorities of our Church, whether they would think it
     advisable that our stated Fasts should be abolished, they would
     earnestly deprecate it. Their silence therefore on this subject is
     rather to be ascribed to the supposed hopelessness of at tempting to
     bend our modern manners to Ancient Discipline, than to any
     disparagement of the institutions themselves. Our institutions in
     many cases sleep, but are not dead; nay, one has reason to hope
     that, although the many neglect them, a faithful few have ever been
     found, who have experienced and could testify the value of those
     which the world seems most entirely to neglect.

     One might refer, in proof, to the practice of a daughter Church, the
     Episcopal Church of the United States. Sprung from our Church and
     supplied by her with Ministers, until the State was separated from
     us, they carried with them her principles, as they had been modified
     by the habits and feelings and practice of the period which had
     elapsed since her Reformation. She may be regarded then as
     representing the then state of opinions amongst us. Yet formerly
     re-considering the subject of the Church's Fasts, they omitted
     only the Vigils; while they retained the weekly Friday Fast, those
     of Lent, the Ember and Rogation days, as days "on which the Church
     requires such a measure of abstinence, as is more especially suited
     to extraordinary acts and exercises of Devotion."

     Yet, although these grounds of Church authority appear to myself
     perfectly valid, and I doubt not that many others will feel their
     weight, as soon as they shall reflect upon them, the other argument,
     drawn from the practical wisdom and experience of the enactors of
     these regulations, seems to lie nearer to men's consciences.
     The argument lies in a narrow compass. Regular and stated Fasts
     formed a part of the Discipline by which, during almost the whole
     period since the Christian Church has been founded, all her real
     sons, in every climate, nation, and language, have subdued the flesh
     to the spirit, and brought both body and mind into a willing
     obedience to the Law of GOD. They thought this Discipline necessary
     as an expression and instrument of repentance, as a memorial of
     their SAVIOUR, to "refrain their souls and keep them low," to teach
     them to "trust in the LORD," and seek communion with Him. To this
     system our own Church during all her happier times adhered. The
     value of this remedy for sin has come to us attested by the
     experience, and sealed by the blood, of Martyrs; who having learnt
     thus to endure hardships, like good soldiers of CHRIST, at last
     resisted to the blood, striving against sin. Shall we, untried,
     pronounce that to be needless for our selves, which the Glorious
     Company of the Apostles, the Goodly Fellowship of Prophets, the
     noble army of Martyrs, the Holy Church throughout the world, found
     needful?

     I can hardly anticipate other than one answer. Only let not any one
     be deterred by the irksomeness, or perplexities, or harassing
     doubts, which every one must find in resuming a neglected portion of
     duty. It were scarcely a discipline, if its practice brought with it
     an immediate reward; and we have besides to pay the penalty of our
     sloth and diseased habits. "Patiently to lack what flesh and blood
     doth desire, and by virtue to forbear what by nature we covet, this
     no man attaineth unto, but with labour and long practice." And if it
     be that blessed instrument of holiness, which they who have tried it
     assure us, it will not be without some struggle with our spiritual
     enemy, that we shall recover the ground which we have lost. Only let
     us persevere, not elated with the first petty victories over
     ourselves, which may be perhaps conceded to us in order to produce
     over-confidence and carelessness; nor dejected by the obstacles
     which a luxurious and scoffing age may oppose; nor by the yet
     greater difficulties from within, in acquiring any uniform or
     consistent habit. Men, aided by GOD, have done the like; and for us
     also, His grace will be sufficient.

     OXFORD,
     The Feast of St. Thomas.
