                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                           THE GREAT NECESSITY AND
                         ADVANTAGE OF PUBLIC PRAYER.

         (Extracted from Bishop Beveridge's Sermon on the subject.)

                                 [Number 25]
     __________________________________________________________________

     BESIDES our praying to, and praising GOD in the midst of other
     business, we ought to set apart some certain times in every day
     wholly for this. The Saints of old were wont to do it three times a
     day, as we learn from Daniel. For when King Darius had signed the
     decree, "That whosoever should ask a petition of any god or man for
     thirty days, except of the king, should be cast into the den of
     lions," it is written, "That when Daniel knew that the decree was
     signed, he went into his house; and, his windows being open in his
     chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a
     day, and prayed, and gave thanks unto his GOD, as he did aforetime."
     (Daniel vi. 10.) As he did aforetime; which shows that this had been
     his constant practice before, and he would not leave it off now,
     though he was sure to be cast into the den of lions for it. But what
     times of the day these were, which were anciently devoted to this
     religious purpose, we may best gather from king David, where he
     saith, "Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry
     aloud; and He shall hear my voice." (Psal. lv. 17.) He begins with
     the evening, because day then began, according to the Jewish
     account; but he observed all these times of prayer alike. And so
     questionless did other devout people as well as he. The Jews have a
     tradition that those times were ordained to that use, the morning by
     Abraham; noon, by Isaac; and evening by Jacob. But whether they have
     any ground for that or no, be sure this custom is so reasonable and
     pious, that the Church of CHRIST took it up, and observed it all
     along from the very beginning. Only to distinguish these times more
     exactly, the Christians called them, (as the Jews also had done
     before,) by the names of the third, the sixth, and the ninth hours.
     Of which Tertullian saith, "Tres istas horas ut insigniores in rebus
     humanis, ita et solenniores fuisse in orationibus divinis; ;as
     they were more famous than others in human affairs, so hey were more
     solemn in divine prayers.' " (Tertul de Jejun c. 10.)

     I know the Primitive Christians performed their private devotions at
     other times as well as these; but at these set times every day,
     especially at the third and ninth hour, they always performed them
     publicly, if they could get an opportunity. And if we would be such
     Christians as they were, we must follow their pious example in this,
     as well as in other things.

                                   * * * *

     As the Jewish Church had by GOD'S own appointment the Morning
     and Evening Sacrifice every day in the year; so all Christian
     Churches have been used to have their Morning and Evening Prayers
     publicly performed every day. As might easily be shown out of the
     Records of the Church, from the beginning of Christianity.

     Not to insist upon other Churches, I shall instance at present only
     in our own; which, as in all things else, so particularly in this,
     is exactly conformable to the Catholic and Apostolic Church. In the
     First Book of Common-Prayer, made by our Church at the beginning of
     the Reformation, there was a form composed both for Morning and
     Evening Prayer: the title of that for the Morning ran thus; An Order
     for Mattins daily through the year; and of that for the Evening, An
     Order for Even Song throughout the year: and accordingly there were
     Psalms and Chapters appointed both for the Morning and Evening of
     every day. About three or four years after, the same book was
     revised and put forth again. And then the Church taking notice that
     Daily Prayers had been in some places neglected, at the end of the
     Preface she added two new Rules, or, as we call them, Rubrics; which
     are still in force, as ye may see in the Common-Prayer Books which
     we now use.

     The first is this:

     And all Priests and Deacons are to say daily the Morning and Evening
     Prayer, either privately or openly, not being let by sickness, or
     other urgent cause.

     By this, every one that is admitted into Holy Orders, although he be
     neither Parson, Vicar, nor Curate of any particular place, yet he is
     bound to say both Morning and Evening Prayer every day, either in
     some Church or Chapel where he can get leave to do it, or else in
     the house where he dwells, except he be hindered by some such cause
     which the Ordinary of the place judges to be reasonable and urgent.

     The other Order is this:

     And the Curate that ministereth in every Parish Church or Chapel,
     being at home, and not being otherwise reasonably hindered, shall
     say the same in the Parish-Church or Chapel, where he ministereth,
     and shall cause a bell to be tolled thereunto, a convenient time
     before he begin, that people may come to hear God's Word, and
     pray with him.

     Here we have a plain and express command, that the Curate, whether
     he be the Incumbent himself, or another procured by him to do it;
     whosoever it is that ministereth GOD'S Holy Word and Sacraments
     in any Parish-Church or Chapel in England, shall say the same
     Morning and Evening Prayer daily in the Parish-Church or Chapel
     where he ministereth, and shall take care that a bell be tolled a
     convenient time before he begins, that people having notice of it,
     may come to GOD'S House to hear His Holy Word read, and join
     with the Minister in performing their public devotions to him. This
     every Minister or Curate in England is bound to do every day in the
     year, if he be at home, and be not otherwise reasonably hindered.
     And whether any hindrance be reasonable or no, the Minister himself
     is not the ordinary Judge; for in all such cases that is referred by
     the common laws of the Church to the Bishop of the Diocese, or the
     Ordinary of the place where he ministereth.

     The law hath made this the duty of every Minister, and the Bishop or
     Ordinary is to see he doeth it; and whether any have reasonable
     cause ever to omit it, or whether the cause they pretend for it be
     reasonable or no; this is left by the law to him. He may allow or
     disallow of the pretence, as he upon the full hearing of it shall
     see good; and may punish with the censures of the Church any
     Minister within his jurisdiction that doth not read the Prayers of
     the Church, or take care they be read every Morning and Evening in
     the year, except at such times when the Minister can prove that he
     had such a reasonable hindrance or impediment as will justify him
     before GOD and His Church.

     This care hath our Church taken, that Public Prayers be read every
     Morning and Evening throughout the year in every parish within her
     bounds, that all who live in her communion may, after the example of
     the Apostles....., go every day into the Temple or Church at the
     Hour of Prayer. She hath not appointed the hour when either Morning
     or Evening Prayer shall begin; because the same hour might not be so
     convenient in all places. So that in some places it might be
     pretended that there was a reasonable hindrance; that it could not
     be done just at the time. Wherefore to prevent any such plea, and to
     make the duty as easy and practicable, both to the Minister and
     people, as it could be, the Church hath left that to the Ministers
     themselves, who considering every one his own and his people's
     circumstances, may, and ought to appoint such hours both for the
     Morning and Evening Prayer in their respective places, as they in
     their discretion shall judge to be most convenient. Only they ought
     to take care in general that Morning Prayers be always read before,
     and Evening after noon. And it is very expedient that the same hours
     be every day, as much as it is possible, observed in the same place,
     that people knowing it beforehand, may order their affairs so as to
     be ready to go to the Church at the hour of prayer.

     But notwithstanding this great care that our Church hath taken to
     have daily prayers in every parish, we see by sad experience, they
     are shamefully neglected all the kingdom over; there being very few
     places where they have any Public Prayers upon the Week-days, except
     perhaps upon Wednesdays and Fridays; be cause it is expressly
     commanded, that both Morning and Evening Prayers be read every day
     in the Week, as the Litany upon those. And why this commandment
     should be neglected more than the other, for my part I can see no
     reason. But I see plain enough that it is a great fault, a plain
     breach of the known laws of CHRIST'S Holy Catholic Church, and
     particularly of that part of it, which by his blessing is settled
     among us. But where doth this fault lie? I hope not in the Clergy.
     For I dare not suppose or imagine, but that every minister in
     England that hath the care of souls committed to him, would be
     willing and glad to read the Prayers every day, for their
     edification, if the people could be persuaded to come to them. I am
     sure there is never a Minister but is obliged to read them daily;
     and never a parish in England but where the people may have them so
     read, if they will; for they may require it by the laws both of our
     Church and State, except at such times when their Minister is
     reasonably hindered from the execution of his office, in the sense
     before explained.

     But the mischief is, men cannot, or rather will not be persuaded to
     it. They think it a great matter to come to Church upon the
     LORD'S Day, when they cannot openly follow their particular
     calling if they would. Upon other days they have other business to
     mind of greater consequence, as they think, than going to Prayers.
     To some it is a great disturbance to hear the bell sounding in their
     ears, and calling them to their duty, which they being resolved not
     to practise, it makes them very uneasy to be so often put in mind of
     it. Others can make a shift to bear that pretty well, as not looking
     upon themselves concerned in it. For they take it for granted, that
     Prayers were intended only for such as have nothing else to do. As
     for their parts, they have a great deal of work upon their hands,
     and must mind that, without troubling their heads about any thing
     else. This is the plain case of some; but not of all. Blessed be
     GOD, He hath opened the eyes of many, especially in this city, who
     now see "the things that belong to their everlasting peace," and
     therefore are as constant at their public devotions, as they are at
     their private business. And I trust in His infinite Goodness and
     Mercy, that He who hath "begun so good a work among us," will one
     day perfect it, that we may all meet together with one heart, and
     with one mouth to pray unto Him," and praise and glorify His great
     name every day in the week, both in this city, and all the kingdom
     over. What a happy city, what a glorious kingdom would it then be!
     And how happy should I think myself, if it would please GOD to make
     me, the unworthiest of all His Servants, an instrument in His
     Almighty hand towards the effecting of it in this place! It is too
     great a felicity for me to flatter myself with the least hopes of.
     Howsoever I must do my duty, and leave the issue to Him who hath the
     hearts of all men in His hand.

                                   * * * *

     That it is His [CHRIST'S] pleasure that we should constantly
     use the Form of Prayer, which He, as our Great LORD and MASTER, was
     pleased to compose for all His Disciples, is so plain that I wonder
     how any can doubt of it; there being no command in all the Bible
     more plain than that, "When ye pray, say, Our Father, which art in.
     Heaven," &c. (Luke xi. 2.) But it is as plain, that He designed this
     Prayer should be used publicly, and in common, by His Disciples when
     met together in their public assemblies: in that He hath drawn it up
     all along in the plural number, that many may join together in it,
     and say, " Our Father, which art in Heaven. Give us this day our
     daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
     trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us
     from evil." So that there is not one petition, nor one expression in
     it, but what a whole congregation may jointly use. From whence St.
     Cyprian truly observed, that this is Publica et Communis Oratio: a
     Public and Common Prayer Not but it may, and ought to be used also
     privately by every single Christian apart by himself; because every
     Christian is a member Of CHRIST'S Catholic Church, and should pray
     as such in private as well as in public; and for all his
     fellow-members, as well as for himself, they being all but one body.
     But however, it must be acknowledged, that, it being so exactly
     fitted to a public congregation, it was primarily and chiefly
     intended for that purpose. And that our SAVIOUR would have us say
     this Prayer every day, appears most plainly from that petition in
     it, "Give us this day our daily bread." For this shows, that as we
     depend upon GOD every day for our necessary food, so we ought to
     pray unto Him every day for it. And if we must put up this petition
     every day, we must put up all the rest with it. For CHRIST hath
     joined them together, and therefore we must not put them asunder.
     Neither is there any part of the Prayer but what is as necessary to
     be said every day as this.

     Wherefore seeing our Blessed SAVIOUR Himself was most graciously
     pleased to compose this Prayer so as to suit it to our daily public
     devotions, and hath plainly commanded us to use it, according as He
     had composed it; we may reasonably from thence infer, that it is his
     divine will and pleasure that we should publicly pray to our
     Heavenly FATHER every day, as His Church had all along before done
     it, Morning and Evening. Be sure His Apostles thought so, when they
     had received His Holy Spirit, "to lead them," according to His
     promise, "into all truth," and to "bring into their remembrance all
     things that He had said unto them." For after the day of Pentecost,
     on which the HOLY GHOST came upon them, the next news that we hear
     of any of them is, that "Peter and John went up together into the
     Temple at the hour of Prayer, being the ninth hour," or the hour of
     Evening Prayer; which they would not have done, if they had not
     believed it to be agreeable to the doctrine which He had taught
     them.

                                   * * * *

     The more pleasing any duty is to GOD, the more profitable it is to
     those who do it. And therefore He having so often, both by word and
     deed, manifested Himself well-pleased with the public or common
     Service which His people perform to Him, we cannot doubt but they
     always receive proportionable advantage from it. The Jews call
     stated public Prayers [Hebrew text] Stations; and have a saying
     among them, "that without such Stations the world could not stand."
     Be sure no people have any ground to expect public peace and
     tranquillity, without praising and praying publicly unto Him, who
     alone can give it. But if all the people (suppose of this nation)
     should every day with one heart and mouth join together in our
     common supplications to ALMIGHTY GOD, how happy should we then be!
     how free from danger! how safe and secure under His protection! This
     is the argument which CHRIST Himself useth, why "Men ought always to
     pray and not to faint;" in the Parable of the unjust Judge, who was
     at last prevailed with to grant a widow's request, merely by
     her importunity in asking it. "And shall not GOD," saith He, "
     avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto Him, though He
     bear long with them? I tell you that He will avenge them speedily."
     But then He adds, "Nevertheless, when the SON of man cometh, shall
     He find faith on the earth?" (Luke xviii. 7, 8.) As if He had said,
     GOD will most certainly avenge and protect those who cry day and
     night, morning and evening, to Him. But men will not believe this;
     and that is the reason why there are so few who believe that He will
     hear their prayers, according to His promise. But blessed be GOD,
     though they be but few, there are some, who really believe
     GOD'S Word, and accordingly pray every morning and evening, not
     only for themselves, but for the country where they live, for all
     their Governors both in Church and State, and for all sorts and
     conditions of men among us. To these the whole kingdom is beholden
     for its support and preservation. If they should once fail, I know
     not what would become of us. But so long as there are pious and
     devout persons crying day and night to GOD for aid and defence
     against our enemies, we need not fear any hurt they can ever do us;
     at least according to GOD'S ordinary course of dealing in the
     world. I know that He is sometimes so highly incensed against a
     people, that He will hearken to no intercessions for them. As when
     He said of the idolatrous and factious Jews; "Though Moses and
     Samuel stood before me, yet My mind could not be towards this
     people," (Jer. xv. 1.) Moses had before diverted His wrath from
     them, (Exod. xxxii. 11, 12. 14) and so had Samuel, (1 Sam. vii. 9.)
     but at this time He saith, Though both of them stood before Him, and
     besought Him for it, yet He would not be reconciled to this people.
     Which plainly implies, that this was an extraordinary case, and that
     He ordinarily used to hearken to the prayers which His faithful
     servants, such as Moses and Samuel were, made to Him in behalf of
     the people among whom they dwelt: according to that of the Apostle
     St. James, "The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth
     much," (Jam. v. 16.) To the same purpose is that parallel place in
     the Prophet Ezekiel, where GOD saith, "That if a land sin grievously
     against Him, and He send the famine, the sword, the pestilence, or
     the like punishment, to cut off both man and beast from it; though
     these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should
     deliver none but their own souls." (Ezek. iv. 14. 16. 18. 20.) But
     here we may likewise observe, that in such an extraordinary case as
     this, (which GOD grant may not be our own ere long!) although such
     righteous persons by all their prayers and tears can deliver none
     else yet they themselves shall be delivered. As Lot was out of
     Sodom, and the Christians at the final destruction of Jerusalem,
     when eleven hundred thousand Jews perished, (Joseph. de Bel. Jud. 1.
     7. c. 17.) and not one Christian, they being all, by the secret
     providence of GOD, conveyed out of the city before the siege began.
     (Euseb. Hist. Eccl. 1. 3. c. 5.) Which shows the particular care
     that GOD takes of all that believe and serve Him. And that one would
     think is enough to prevail with all that consult their own and
     others' welfare, to neglect no opportunities which they can get of
     serving so great and good a Master, all the ways they can, and
     particularly by performing their daily devotions to Him. In that
     they have good ground to hope that He will hear their prayers for
     others, but may be sure He will take care of them, whatsoever
     happens.

     OXFORD .
     The Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul.
