                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                 ON THE ANTIQUITY OF THE EXISTING LITURGIES.

                                 [Number 63]
     __________________________________________________________________

     ALL Liturgies now existing, except those in use in Protestant
     countries, profess to be derived from very remote antiquity. So
     likely is it, however, that in the lapse of ages, considering the
     extreme ignorance in which many parts of Christendom have been
     immersed, interpolations almost to any extent should have crept into
     the formulae of the different Churches, that little weight seems at
     first sight due to them as traditionary depositories of ancient
     doctrine. Judging from the opinions and character of those to whose
     custody they have been committed, one would be disposed to treat
     them rather as accumulations of every kind of superstition, than
     relics of ancient evangelical simplicity, to examine them rather as
     exhibitions of the gradual decay of Christianity, than as monuments
     of what it was.

     Unlikely, however, as it might appear beforehand, learned men who
     have undertaken the laborious task of examining them, have been led
     to form a different estimate of their value. Certain, indeed, it is
     that they have been much interpolated, and in parts, corrupted; but
     it seems to be admitted at last, after long and patient research,
     that much likewise has been handed down from the first
     uninterpolated, and that means exist for ascertaining what parts are
     interpolated, and what pure and genuine.

     Among many remarkable facts which have been brought to light
     respecting the antiquity of existing Liturgies, the following is
     among the most striking:---

     There exists at the present day, scattered through Judaea,
     Mesopotamia, Syria, and the southern part of Asia Minor, which
     formerly made up the Patriarchate of Antioch, a sect of heretical
     Christians, called Jacobites or Monophysites, who were anathematized
     1383 years since, at the council of Chalcedon, A. D. 451. This
     ancient sect has from that time to this persisted in its separation
     from the orthodox Church, and no communion has subsisted between the
     two: each regarding the other as heretical. For a long time each
     preserved their separate establishments in the different Churches
     and dioceses, and each their own patriarch in the metropolitan city.
     By degrees, however, the Orthodox became the inferior party, and on
     the Mahometan invasion, finding themselves no longer able to
     maintain an independent existence, fell back on the support of the
     patriarch of Constantinople, whose dependents they acknowledge
     themselves at the present day. The Monophysites, on the contrary,
     were patronized by the invaders, and having been thus enabled to
     support their ancient establishment, remain in undisturbed
     possession of their sees, and represent the ancient Patriarchate of
     Antioch. Now these Monophysites use at this day a Liturgy in the
     Syriac language, which they ascribe to the Apostle St. James; and
     the remarkable fact about this Liturgy is, that a great part of it
     coincides with a Greek Liturgy used once a year by the orthodox
     Church at Jerusalem, expression for expression. So that one must
     evidently be a translation of the other.

     A coincidence of this kind between the most solemn religious rites
     of two Churches, which have for 1383 years avoided all communion
     with each other, of course proves the parts which coincide to be
     more than 1383 years old.

     Another remarkable fact, not indeed so striking as this, but perhaps
     as essentially valuable, is exhibited to us in the Patriarchate of
     Alexandria. The history of the Monophysites and Orthodox in that
     country, is much the same as in the Patriarchate of Antioch; except,
     indeed, that the depression of the Orthodox has been still more
     complete. In this Patriarchate the Monophysites still profess to use
     the ancient Liturgy of the country, which they ascribe to St. Cyril,
     one of the early patriarchs. It is in the Coptic language, but
     appears to be a translation from Greek, and is sometimes spoken of
     as "the Liturgy of St. Mark which Cyril perfected." Now it cannot,
     indeed, be said in this instance, that any thing resembling this
     Liturgy is still in use among the Orthodox in Egypt; however, we
     know, that as late as the twelfth century a Liturgy was in use among
     them which bore the title of St. Mark's: and very curious it is that
     in a remote convent of Calabria, inhabited by oriental monks of the
     order of St. Basil, a Greek manuscript has been found of the tenth
     or eleventh century, entitled the Liturgy of St. Mark, evidently
     intended for the use of Alexandria. It contains a prayer for the
     raising the waters of the Nile to their just level, and another for
     "the holy and blessed Pope," the ancient style of the Alexandrian
     patriarchs: and, on comparing it with the Coptic Liturgy of the
     Monophysites, it is at once recognised as the same rite, except,
     indeed, that in a few points it approximates to the Liturgy of
     Constantinople.

     If then it should be thought that St. Mark's Liturgy, as given in
     this manuscript, is the same St. Mark's Liturgy which was once in
     use among the Orthodox of Alexandria, we can hardly doubt that, so
     far as it coincides with that now in use among the Monophysites,
     both are anterior to the separation of the parties, i. e. more than
     1383 years old.

     Other Liturgies there likewise are, besides those of Antioch and
     Alexandria, to which we may safely assign very great antiquity. One
     of these, which bears the name of St. Basil's, and is now
     universally adopted by the Greek Church, "from the northern shore of
     Russia to the extremities of Abyssinia, and from the Adriatic and
     Baltic Seas to the farthest coast of Asia," is believed to have
     undergone very little alteration, from times still more remote than
     even the era of the Monophysite schism. A MS. of this Liturgy was
     found by Montfaucon in the Barbarini Library at Rome, which that
     profound antiquary pronounced to be above 1000 years old at the time
     he wrote, i. e. 124 years since, and which, consequently, was
     written about the time of the Council of Trullo; A. D. 691. Now, at
     the time of this council, we know that not so much as a doubt
     existed of the genuineness of the text, as it was cited by 227
     Eastern Bishops, as an undoubted record of St. Basil's
     opinions. Their decree opens thus:---[kai gar Basileios ho tes
     Kaisareion ekklesias Archiepiskopos, hou to kleos kata pasan ten
     oikoumenen diedramen gegraphos ten mustiken hemin hierourgian
     paradedoken, k. t. l. ....]

     If then we possess the text of St. Basil's Liturgy, such as it
     was when appealed to on a controverted question only 310 years after
     it was written, and that too by an assembly so likely to be
     well-informed respecting its value, we may perhaps admit its
     genuineness without much hesitation.

     Another Liturgy, which can be traced back with tolerable certainty
     to very remote times, is the Roman Missal. Mr. Palmer has shown that
     we have abundance of materials for ascertaining the text of this
     Liturgy, as it stood in the time of Gregory the Great, patriarch of
     Rome, A. D. 590, by whom it was revised and in some parts enlarged.
     There also seems to be good reason for believing that one of the
     MSS. which has been preserved, exhibits it to us in a still earlier
     stage, such as it was left by Pope Gelasius, its former reviser,
     about 100 years before the time of Gregory. This ancient MS. as
     found by Thomasius in the Queen of Sweden's library. It is
     divided into several books, as the Gelasian Sacramentary appears to
     have been, and in other respects diers from that of Gregory just
     where history informs us the Gelasian did. It appears to have been
     written during, or not long after, the time of Gregory the Great,
     but in some remote proince to which the additions and alterations
     introduced by that prelate had not yet penetrated. Nay, farther,
     learned men appear to agree that there exists a MS. still more
     ancient than this, from which the canon of the mass may be
     ascertained as it stood before the revisal of Gelasius, even so long
     back as the time of Leo the Great, i. e. as early as the Monophysite
     schism. This MS. was found in the library of the Chapter of Verona,
     and its merits have been very minutely canvassed by the most learned
     antiquaries. It also deserves to be noticed, that at the time when
     the Roman Liturgy was undergoing these successive revisals, a
     tradition all along prevailed attributing to one part of it an
     apostolic origin; and that this part does not appear to have
     undergone any change whatever. Vigilius, who was Pope between the
     times of Gelasius and Gregory, tells us that the "canonical
     prayers," or what are now called the "Canon of the Mass," had been
     "handed down as an apostolical tradition." And much earlier we hear
     the same from Pope Innocent, who adds that the Apostle from whom
     they derived it was St. Peter.

     On the whole, then, it appears that of the existing Liturgies, one,
     viz. that of St. Basil, can be traced with tolerable certainty to
     the fourth century, and three others to the middle of the fifth; and
     that respecting these three a tradition prevailed, ascribing one of
     them to the Apostle St. James, another to St. Mark, and the third to
     St. Peter.

     But curious as these results are, those which follow from comparing
     the above Liturgies with others now existing, and with one another,
     are still more curious. The Liturgies of Rome, Alexandria, and
     Antioch, differ so materially as compositions, that neither can with
     any reason be supposed to have been taken from the other; it is
     however true, with a singular exception, to be presently noticed,
     that no other Liturgy either exists now or ever appears to have
     existed, which is not a copy from one or other of them. The Liturgy
     of St. Basil, striking as are some of the features in which it
     differs from that of Antioch, is, nevertheless, evidently a
     superstructure raised on that basis: the composition of both is the
     same, i. e. the parts which they have in common follow in the same
     order. The same may be said of the Constantinopolitan Liturgy,
     commonly attributed to St. Chrysostom, of that of the Armenian
     Church, and of the florid and verbose compositions in use among the
     Nestorians of Mesopotamia. So that the Liturgy of Antioch, commonly
     attributed to St. James, appears to be the basis of all the oriental
     Liturgies. In the same manner a remarkable correspondence subsists
     between the Liturgy of Ethiopia and the Alexandrian Liturgy
     attributed to St. Mark. And so likewise the ancient Liturgies of
     Milan, and of Roman Africa, which last indeed has not been
     preserved, and can only be collected from the writings of the
     Fathers, are characterized by the marked peculiarities of the Roman
     Missal of St. Peter. The exception which I above noticed, is the
     ancient Gothic Liturgy of Gaul and Spain, which from the fragments
     that have been preserved of it, appears to have agreed in
     composition with neither of the three; but to have been an
     independent rite; and this Liturgy, Mr. Palmer, by a very curious
     argument, traces to the Apostle St. John. Here, then, we arrive at
     one remarkable result: it appears, from all we can learn, that
     throughout the whole world, there neither exist now, nor ever have
     existed, more than four independent forms of Liturgy; a circumstance
     which, of itself, gives some credibility to the supposition
     otherwise suggested, that these four were of Apostolic origin.

     The confirmation of this supposition, which results from comparing
     the four independent rites, is, if possible, still more remarkable.
     For while, on the one hand, the diversity of the compositions proves
     that their authors, whoever tb,ey were, did not feel bound to copy,
     either from the other, or from any common original; so the identity
     of the matter proves that they were exactly agreed in sentiment, and
     intimately conversant with each other's habits of thought. Had
     these Liturgies resembled one another less, we might have attributed
     them to sources wholly independent, to the influence of any four
     great minds, which may have arisen at different times, and acquired
     ascendency in their own regions of Christendom. Had they differed
     less, it might have been supposable that some single Saint, though
     not an Apostle, some Ambrose, or Athanasius, or Cyprian, might
     gradually have extended his religious influence still more
     universally. Though, even so, great difficulties would have attended
     either supposition. As it is, however, we have to look for four
     persons, each with predominating influence in distinct and distant
     portions of the world; yet, all so united in thought as to make it
     certain they had been educated in the same school. Nothing less than
     this will account at once for the resemblances and differences of
     the four ancient Liturgies; and this it would be vain to look for
     after the Apostolic age.

     Such is the general character of the argument resulting from a
     comparison of these curious documents, each of which can
     independently be traced back to the middle of the fifth century, and
     which appear, at that time, to have commanded the same exclusive
     respect as at present.

     To institute the comparison here in such a manner as to enable the
     reader to judge for himself, is, of course, out of the question,
     involving as it does very minute and extensive researches. The
     following-particulars, however, may perhaps be not altogether
     uninteresting, however incomplete.

     I. It appears from Mr. Palmer's valuable work, that all the ancient
     Liturgies now existing, or which can be proved ever to have existed,
     resemble one another in the following points:---

     (1.) All of them direct, that previous to communion, those who
     intend to communicate shall exchange "the kiss of peace."

     (2.) In all of them, the more particularly solemn part of the
     service commences with words exactly answering to the English, "Lift
     up your hearts," &c. as far as "Holy FATHER, almighty everlasting
     God."

     (3.) All contain the Hymn, "Therefore with Angels and Archangels,"
     &c. with very trifling varieties of expression.

     (4.) Also, they all contain a Prayer, answering in substance to ours
     "for the whole state of Christ's Church militant:"

     (5.) And likewise another Prayer (which has been excluded from the
     English Ritual) "for the rest and peace of all those who have
     departed this life in GOD'S faith and fear;" concluding with a
     Prayer for communion with them.

     (6.) Also a commemoration of our LORD'S words and actions in the
     institution of the Eucharist, which is the same, almost word for
     word, in every Liturgy, but is not taken from any of the four
     Scripture accounts.

     (7.) A sacrificial oblation of the Eucharistic bread and wine.

     (8.) A prayer of consecration, that GOD will "make the bread and
     wine the Body and Blood of CHRIST."

     (9.) Directions to the Priest for breaking the consecrated bread.

     (10.) The LORD'S Prayer.

     (11.) Communion.

     II. These parts are always arranged in one of the four following
     orders.

                          St. Peter's Liturgy.
                          Roman, Milanese, African.

     1. Lift up your hearts, &c.
     2. Therefore with Angels, &c.
     3. Prayers for the Church on earth.
     4. Consecration Prayer.
     5. Commemoration of our LORD'S words.
     6. The Oblation.
     7. Prayers for the dead.
     8. Breaking of bread.
     9. The LORD'S Prayer.
     10. The kiss of peace.
     11. Communion.

                          St. James's Liturgy.
                                  Oriental.

     10. The kiss of peace.
     1. Lift up your hearts, &c.
     2. Therefore with Angels.
     5. Commemoration of our LORD'S words.
     6. The Oblation.
     4. Consecration Prayer.
     3. Prayers for the Church on earth.
     7. Prayers for the dead.
     9. The LORD'S Prayer.
     8. Breaking of bread.
     11. Communion.

                           St. Mark's Liturgy.
                           Egyptian and Ethiopian.

     10. The kiss of peace.
     1. Lift up your hearts, &c.
     3. Prayers for the Church on earth.
     7. Prayers for the dead.
     2. Therefore with Angels, &c.
     5. Commemoration of our LORD'S words.
     6. The Oblation.
     4. Consecration Prayer.
     8. Breaking of bread.
     9. The LORD'S Prayer.
     11. Communion.

                           St. John's Liturgy.

                      Gallican, Ephesian, and Mozarabic.

     3. Prayers for the Church on earth.
     7. Prayers for the dead.
     10. The kiss of peace.
     1. Lift up your hearts, &c.
     2. Therefore with Angels, &c.
     5. Commemoration of our LORD'S words.
     6. The Oblation.
     4. Consecration Prayer.
     8. Breaking of bread.
     9. The LORD'S Prayer.
     11. Communion.

     Thus it appears that the four original forms from which all the
     Liturgies in the world have been taken, resemble one another too
     much to have grown up independently, and too little to have been
     copied from one another.

     III. On a comparison of the different forms of Oblation and
     Consecration, it will be seen that in each of the four original
     Liturgies, the Eucharist is regarded as a mystery and as a
     sacrifice.

                               THE ROMAN FORM.

     This is translated from the Missal now in use in the Church of Rome.

     Therefore, O LORD, we beseech Thee graciously to accept this
     oblation of our bounden service, from us and from thy whole family.
     Dispose our days in thy peace, and command us to be delivered from
     eternal damnation, and to be numbered in the congregation of thine
     elect, through CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

     Which oblation do Thou, O GOD, we beseech Thee, vouchsafe to render,
     in all respects, blessed, approved, effectual, reasonable, and
     acceptable; that it may be made unto us the Body and Blood of thy
     most beloved SON, our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

     Who, the day before He suffered, took bread into His Holy and
     venerable hands, and lifting up His eyes to Heaven, to THEE, His GOD
     and FATHER ALMIGHTY; giving thanks to THEE; He blessed it, brake it,
     and gave it to His disciples, saying, Take and eat ye all of this:
     for this is my body. In like manner, after He had supped; taking
     also this glorious cup into His holy and venerable hands, giving
     thanks likewise unto THEE, He blessed it, and gave it to His
     disciples, saying, Take and drink ye all of it: for this is the cup
     of my blood, of the new and eternal Testament, the Mystery of Faith;
     which shall be shed for you and for many for the remission of sins.
     As often as ye shall do these things, ye shall do them in
     remembrance of me.

     Wherefore, O LORD, we thy servants, and also thy holy people, having
     in remembrance both the blessed passion of the same thy SON CHRIST
     our LORD, and also His resurrection from the dead, and likewise His
     triumphant ascension into the heavens, offer unto thy glorious
     Majesty, of thine own gifts and presents, a pure Host, a holy Host,
     an immaculate Host, the holy bread of eternal life, and the cup of
     everlasting salvation.

     Upon which vouchsafe to look with a propitious and serene
     countenance, and accept them as thou wert pleased graciously to
     accept the gifts of thy righteous servant Abel, the sacrifice of our
     patriarch Abraham, and the holy sacrifice, the immaculate Host,
     which thy high-priest Melchizedek offered to Thee.

     We humbly beseech Thee, O ALMIGHTY GOD, command these things to be
     carried by the hands of thy holy Angels unto thy High Altar, in the
     presence of thy divine Majesty, that as many of us as by the
     participation of this Altar shall receive the most sacred body and
     blood of thy SON, may be replenished with all heavenly benediction
     and grace, through the same, CHRIST our LORD.

                              THE ORIENTAL FORM.

     This is taken from Dr. Brett's translation of the Liturgy of St.
     James, used at the present day by the Monophysites throughout the
     Patriarchate of Antioch; and by the Orthodox at Jerusalem on St.
     James's day.

     In the same might that He was offered, or rather offered up Himself
     for the life and salvation of the world, taking bread into His holy,
     immaculate, pure, and immortal hands, looking up to Heaven, and
     presenting it to THEE, His GOD and FATHER, He gave thanks,
     sanctified and brake it, and gave it to His Disciples and Apostles,
     saying---

     Deacon
     .---For the remission of sins and for everlasting life.

     Priest continues
     .---Take, eat: this is my body which is broken and given for you
     for the remission of sins. R. Amen.

     Likewise, after supper He took the cup and mixed it with vine and
     water, and looking up to Heaven, presenting it to THEE, His GOD and
     FATHER, He gave thanks, sanctified and blessed it, and filled it
     with the HOLY; GHOST, and gave it to His Disciples, saying, Drink ye
     all of this; this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed
     and given for you and for many, for the remission of sins. R. Amen.
     Do this in remembrance of Me. For as oft as ye eat this bread and
     drink this cup, ye do show forth the death of the SON of MAN, and
     confess His resurrection, until His coming again.

     People
     .---O LORD, we show forth thy death and confess thy resurrection.

     Priest continues
     .---Wherefore, having in remembrance, His lifegiving passion,
     salutary cross, death, burial, and resurrection on the third day
     from the dead; His ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right
     hand of THEE, His GOD and FATHER; and His second bright and terrible
     appearance, when He shall come with glory to judge the quick and
     dead, and shall render to every man according to his works: We
     sinners offer unto THEE, O LORD, this tremendous and unbloody
     sacrifice, beseeching THEE not to deal with us after our sins, nor
     reward us according to our iniquities: but according to thy clemency
     and ineffable love to mankind, overlook and blot out the
     hand-writing that is against thy servants, and grant us thine
     heavenly and eternal rewards, such as eye hath not seen nor ear
     heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive;
     even such as Thou hast prepared for them that love Thee.

     And reject not this people for me and my sins, O LORD.

     Then is repeated thrice
     .

     Priest
     .---For this people and thy Church make their supplication before
     Thee.

     People
     .---Have mercy upon us, O LORD GOD, ALMIGHTY FATHER.

     Priest continues
     .---Have mercy upon us, O GOD the ALMIGHTY, have mercy upon us, O
     GOD our SAVIOUR. Have mercy upon US, O GOD, according to thy great
     mercy; and send down upon these gifts which are here set before
     Thee, thy most HOLY SPIRIT, even the LORD and Giver of life, who
     with THEE, O GOD the FATHER, and with thine only-begotten SON,
     liveth and reigneth a consubstantial and co-eternal Person: who
     spake by the Law, by the Prophets, and by the New Testament:
     descended in the form of a dove upon our LORD JESUS CHRIST in the
     river Jordan, and rested upon Him, and came down in the shape of
     fiery tongues upon thy Apostles, when they were assembled on the day
     of Pentecost, in an upper room of holy and glorious Sion. Send down,
     O LORD, this thy most HOLY SPIRIT upon us, and upon these holy
     gifts, here set before Thee. That by His holy good and glorious
     presence, He may sanctify and make this bread the body of thy
     CHRIST. R. Amen.

     And this cup the precious blood of thy CHRIST. R. Amen.

     That all who are partakers thereof may obtain remission of their
     sins and eternal life.

                              THE EGYPTIAN FORM

     This is taken from Dr. Brett's translation of the Liturgy of
     St. Mark, used by the Monophysites at this day throughout the
     Patriarchate of Alexandria, and by the Orthodox so late as the
     eleventh century.

     In the same night wherein He delivered himself for our sins, and was
     about to suer death for mankind, sitting down to supper with His
     Disciples; He took bread in His holy, spotless, and undefiled hands,
     and looking up to THEE, His FATHER, but our GOD and the GOD of all,
     He gave thanks, He blessed, He sanctified, and brake it, and gave it
     to them saying, Take, eat.

     Deacon
     .---Attend.

     Priest continues
     .---For this is my body which is broken and given for the
     remission of sins.

     People
     .---Amen.

     Priest continues
     .---In like manner He took the cup after supper, and mixing it
     with wine and water, and looking up to Heaven, to THEE, His FATHER,
     but our GOD and the GOD of all, He gave thanks, He blessed. He
     filled it with the HOLY GHOST, and gave it to His holy and blessed
     Disciples, saying, Drink ye all of this.

     Deacon
     .---Attend again.

     Priest continues
     .---For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed and
     given for you and for many, for the remission of sins.

     People
     .---Amen.

     Priest continues
     .---Do this in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat
     this bread and drink this cup, ye show forth my death and confess my
     resurrection and ascension till my coming again.

     Showing forth, therefore, O LORD ALMIGHTY, heavenly King, the death
     of thine only-begotten SON, our LORD, our GOD, and SAVIOUR, JESUS
     CHRIST, and confessing His blessed resurrection from the dead on the
     third day, and His sitting at the right hand of Thee, His GOD and
     FATHER; and also looking for His second terrible appearance, when He
     shall come in righteousness to judge both the quick and dead, and to
     render to every man according to his works. We, O LORD, have set
     before Thee thine own, out of thine own gifts; and we pray and
     beseech thee, O thou lover of mankind, to send down from thy holy
     heaven, the habitation of thy dwelling, from thine infinite bosom,
     the Paraclete, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy One, the LORD, the
     Giver of Life, who spake in the Law, in the Prophets, and in the
     Apostles; who is every where, and fills all things; sanctifying whom
     He pleases, not ministerially, but according to His own will: simple
     in nature, but various in operation. The fountain of all divine
     graces, consubstantial with Thee, proceeding from Thee, and sitting
     with Thee in the throne of thy kingdom, together with thy SON our
     LORD our GOD, and SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST.

     Send down thine HOLY SPIRIT upon us, and upon these loaves and these
     cups, that the ALMIGHTY GOD may sanctify and thoroughly consecrate
     them: making the bread the body.

     People
     .---Amen.

     And the cup, the blood of the New Testament of our LORD himself, our
     GOD and SAVIOUR, and supreme King JESUS CHRIST.

     Deacon
     .---Descend ye Deacon

     Priest
     .---That they may be to us who partake of them, the means of
     faith, sobriety, health, temperance, sanctification, the renewing of
     our soul, our body, and spirit; the communion of the blessedness of
     eternal life and immortality; the glorifying of thy holy name; and
     the remission of sins.

     The Egyptian rite contains elsewhere the following words, resembling
     a part of the Roman oblation, which would otherwise seem to stand by
     itself.

     "Receive, O LORD, unto thy holy Heaven, and intellectual Altar in
     the Heaven of Heavens, by the ministry of Archangels, the
     Eucharistical praises of those that offer sacrifices and oblations
     to Thee.... Receive them as Thou didst the gifts of thy righteous
     Abel, the sacrifice of our Father Abraham, the incense of Zacharias,
     the alms of Cornelius, and the widow's mite."

                              THE GALLICAN FORM.

     The following fragment was translated by Dr. Brett, from Mabillon's
     edition of an ancient MS. in the Queen of Sweden's Library.

     O JESUS, the good High Priest, come and be in the midst of us, as
     Thou wast in the midst of thy disciples; sanctify this oblation,
     that being sanctified, we may receive it by the hand of thy holy
     Angel, O Holy LORD and eternal REDEEMER.

     Our LORD JESUS CHRIST in that night in which He was betrayed, took
     bread, and giving thanks, He blessed and brake it, and gave it to
     His Disciples, saying, Take and eat: this is my Body which shall be
     delivered for you. Do this as oft as ye eat it in remembrance of me.
     Likewise also the cup, after He had supped, Saying, This is the cup
     of the New Testament, in my blood, which shall be shed for you, and
     for many, for the remission of sins. Do this as oft as ye drink it
     in remembrance of me.

     As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall show the
     LORD'S death till He shall come in brightness from the Heavens. R.
     Amen.

     We, O LORD, observing these thy gifts and precepts, lay upon thine
     Altar the sacrifices of bread and wine, beseeching the deep goodness
     of thy mercy, that the holy and undivided Trinity may sanctify these
     Hosts, by the same SPIRIT through which uncorrupt virginity
     conceived Thee in the flesh: that when it has been received by us
     with fear and veneration, whatever dwells in us contrary to the good
     of the soul may die; and whatever dies, may never rise again!

     "We therefore observing these His commandments, offer unto Thee the
     holy gift of our salvation, beseeching Thee that Thou wouldest
     vouchsafe to send thy HOLY SPIRIT upon these solemn mysteries, that
     they may become to us a true Eucharist, in the name of Thee and thy
     SON, and of the HOLY SPIRIT, that they may confer eternal life and
     an everlasting kingdom on us who are going to eat and drink of them
     in the transformation of the body and blood of our LORD JESUS
     CHRIST, Thine only-begotten SON."

     Such is the view taken of the consecration and oblation of the
     Eucharist in the four independent Christian Liturgies. It is well
     worth the consideration of such Protestant bodies as have rejected
     the ancient forms.

     Further information may be found respecting these remarkable
     documents in the valuable works, already quoted, of Dr. Brett, and
     Mr. Palmer. It is, however, much to be wished, that correct editions
     of the original documents were in the hands of every one. It may
     perhaps be said, without exaggeration, that next to the Holy
     Scriptures, they possess the greatest claims on our veneration and
     study.

     OXFORD,
     The Feast of St. Philip and St. James.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
