

                             Project Canterbury
                            Tracts for the Times

              Testimony of Writers of the Later English Church
                To the doctrine of the Eucharistic Sacrifice,
   With an Historical Account of the Changes Made in the Liturgy as to the
                        Expression of that Doctrine.

                                 Number. 81.
                           Catena Patrum. No. IV.

                         [By Edward Bouverie Pusey]
   __________________________________________________________________

     THE general character and object of these Catenae is the same: viz.
     to exhibit the practical working of the system and peculiar temper
     and principles of our Church upon the minds of the more faithful of
     her sons, whether acting upon them through the channel of reflection
     or learning, or through the deference of a single-hearted
     simplicity. The extent and character of this influence will,
     however, necessarily vary, according to the nature of the several
     doctrines, and the degree in which they enter into that system.
     Doctrines, for instance, are impressed more or less prominently, and
     in different ways, in her Creeds, or her Prayers, or her Catechism,
     or her selection of Holy Scripture: some definitely and tangibly,
     some conveyed in a general tone, which runs throughout, and which
     may be called the hqoV, or spirit of the Church: some again have
     been retained by oral tradition, and maintained by her uniform
     spirit of deference to the early Church, whose hallowed lamp she
     carries on, and whose handmaid she is. Such, for instance, is her
     view of the spiritual benefits of absolution and confirmation, or
     the spiritual gifts in ordination, which are assumed to be great and
     real, where these ordinances are duly and worthily received; but
     what they are, is not dogmatically enunciated, being presupposed as
     already known, through the successive teaching of her Ministers. So
     in other points, wherein they, who at the time had the deposit of
     her faith committed to them, were persuaded to withdraw from common
     use, or to leave hut slight indications of, doctrine, which had
     recently and might again be abused. This might, by a sort of
     analogy, as far as relates to the object, be called the "disciplina
     arcani" of the Anglican Church; only, it was so far a hazardous
     experiment, in that no provision was made (as in the antient Church)
     for authoritatively inculcating upon those fit to receive it, the
     doctrine thus withheld from the unworthy or uninstructed. It was
     left to tradition, but that tradition was not guarded. One must,
     also, herein not speak of the wisdom or foresight of individuals,
     but of the good Providence of God, controlling and guiding the
     genius of the Church. "Not through our merit but His mercy; not
     through our foresight but His Providence; not through our own arm
     but His right hand and His arm were we rescued and delivered." Yet
     since He "saw some good thing in us," He so directed our Church's
     reverence for the good old Fathers of the primitive Church" as not
     indeed to exempt us from "suffering loss" but still with safety of
     our "lives" as a Church. For "loss" He has ordained all to suffer,
     who in any way tamper, whether by adding to or taking away from, the
     Apostolic deposit of sound words; yet since we had in most things
     been faithful, He chastened us only, and gave us not over unto
     death.

     Of this latter kind--a doctrine, namely, which our Church retains,
     but one of the most withdrawn from sight, lest it should, at one
     time, perchance have been misapplied or profaned, is the doctrine of
     a Sacrifice in the Blessed Eucharist. It is not here intended to
     speak disparagingly of those of the revisers of our Liturgy, who
     furthered or consented to the suppression of doctrine visible in the
     2d book of Edward VI. They listened or yielded to foreign advisers,
     who had their minds fixed solely on the "blasphemous fables and
     dangerous deceits," which the Church of Rome had connected with the
     true doctrine, and who had themselves lost it. Happy, if while
     guarding against the errors of Rome, they had escaped the opposite
     danger of fomenting profane indifference or unbelief, which have
     left their own homes desolate! And the revisers of our own Liturgy,
     in the latter part of the reign of Edward VI, would have acted with
     greater wisdom and a firmer faith, had they continued to retain the
     explicit statements of the Catholic doctrine, and sought other means
     of averting its abuse, or left the correction to Almighty God, who
     gave that doctrine. Nor can one doubt that if they could have
     foreseen, whither this half-suppression of true doctrine would lead,
     they would have guarded in some other way against any temporary
     danger which might arise from the association of past errors
     therewith. There is evidence, as will appear hereafter, that those
     of the revisers, who were most yielding, themselves held, and were
     prepared to maintain, the Catholic doctrine of the Eucharistic
     Sacrifice; one cannot indeed suppose that they felt altogether, even
     as men might, its great value and privilege: they had been engaged
     in controverting errors connected with a high view of sacred
     doctrine; and such errors cannot be controverted without great peril
     to the delicacy of our own faith, and our refined and affectionate
     apprehension of it; the office of assault makes the mind rough and
     rude, and associates jarring thoughts with the doctrine thus
     approached, (so that the Spirit of love cannot dwell there,) and,
     again, it almost forces the mind to speak familiarly on high
     mysteries, thereby injuring the reverence by which they must be
     apprehended. Then also, the very notion of disguising the expression
     of any doctrine implies a diminished estimation of it; the debating
     about it, preparing for it, at last, the overt act of doing it, are
     so many acts of forfeiture. For he that hath not, from him shall be
     taken away even that he hath." Whoso watches not jealously over the
     deposit committed to him shall lose it. Still the revisers in
     question had the doctrine, and wished, in their way, to keep it, and
     so would be grieved to find that their mode of acting had nearly
     forfeited it to the Church. But, further, no doctrine can be lost,
     or injured singly. We may not indeed maintain any doctrine, or rest
     its principal importance, upon its connection with or bearings upon
     some other doctrine, lest we arrogate too much to ourselves, and
     lose sight of the intrinsic value of the doctrine, which we presume
     to make thus dependent on another; still it is allowable to point
     out any additional evils, which departure from that doctrine may
     have. We know not then how great may be the loss of the doctrine of
     the Eucharistic Sacrifice in itself; undoubtedly much greater than
     they are aware of, who, while in the flesh, think it the greatest;
     the loss of this, as a devotional act, may he an unspeakable evil to
     the whole Church, and intercept much of the favour of the FATHER
     from us, and of the fulness of His blessings in His SON. And so, on
     the other hand, we may perhaps look upon the "chain of witnesses"
     here adduced, not only as having attested and perpetuated the truth,
     but also, each in their generation (with a multitude of others whom
     they represent, and who more or less consciously and distinctly
     performed the same act of devotion and held the same truth)
     obtaining a measure of favour of GOD for His Church here by pleading
     thus the merits of their LORD. But apart from this, the highest and
     most mysterious part of the subject, it may be noticed as a fact,
     that the way wherein the doctrine of the Communication of the Body
     and Blood of CHRIST in the Holy Eucharist has been received, has
     always been proportioned to this of the "commemorative sacrifice."
     Both were held in high and awful honour in the Primitive Church,
     both perverted in the later Church of Rome, both depreciated by
     Ultra-Protestants; and among ourselves, the reverence felt towards
     the one Mystery has been generally heightened or depressed,
     according to the several degrees in which the other was received;
     and not these only, but (since every portion of our faith is
     indissolubly although invisibly linked with every other portion,)
     other truths also which people do not readily suspect. It was easy
     for those, free from the errors of Rome, to see that her doctrine of
     the sacrifice interfered with that of the one Sacrifice on the
     Cross; but many overlooked that the belief in that Sacrifice might
     then only be altogether sound, when the Eucharistic Sacrifice was
     also reverenced.

     It may be well, however, in these days, before going further, to
     state briefly what that doctrine is, and what the Romanist
     corruption of it. The doctrine then of the early Church was this;
     that "in the Eucharist, an oblation or sacrifice was made by the
     Church to GOD, under the form of His creatures of bread and wine,
     according to our Blessed LORD'S holy institution, in memory of His
     Cross and Passion;" and this they believed to be the "pure offering"
     or sacrifice which the Prophet Malachi foretold that the Gentiles
     should offer; and that it was enjoined by our LORD in the words "Do
     this for a memorial of Me;" that it was alluded to when our LORD or
     St. Paul speak of a Christian "altar" (St. Matt. v. 23. Heb. xiii.
     10.), and was typified by the Passover, which was both a sacrifice
     and a feast upon a sacrifice. For the first passover had been a
     vicarious sacrifice, the appointed means of saving life, when the
     first-born of the Egyptians were slain; and like all other vicarious
     sacrifices, it shadowed out that of our LORD on the Cross; the
     subsequent Passovers were sacrifices, commemorative of that first
     sacrifice, and so typical of the Eucharist, as commemorating and
     shewing forth our LORD'S sacrifice on the Cross. Not that they
     reasoned so, but they knew it to be thus, because they had been
     taught it, and incidentally mentioned these circumstances, which
     people would now call evidence or grounds and reasons. This
     commemorative oblation or sacrifice they doubted not to be
     acceptable to God, who had appointed it; and so to be also a means
     of bringing down GOD'S favour upon the whole Church. And, if we were
     to analyze their feelings in our way, how should it be otherwise,
     when they presented to the ALMIGHTY FATHER the symbols and memorials
     of the meritorious Death and Passion of His Only Begotten and
     Well-beloved SON, and besought Him by that precious sacrifice to
     look graciously upon the Church which He had purchased with His own
     blood--offering the memorials of that same sacrifice which He, our
     great High-Priest, made once for all, and now being entered within
     the veil, unceasingly presents before the FATHER, and the
     representation of which He has commanded us to make? It is, then, to
     use our technical phraseology, "a commemorative, impetratory
     sacrifice," which is all one with saying that it is well-pleasing to
     GOD; for what is well-pleasing to Him, how should it not bring down
     blessings upon us? They preferred to speak of it in language which,
     while it guarded against the errors of their days, the confusion
     with the sacrifices of Jew or Pagan, expressed their reverence for
     the memorials of their SAVIOUR'S Body and Blood, and named it "the
     aweful and unbloody sacrifice," or the like, as men would, with a
     sense of the unfathomable mystery of GOD'S goodness connected
     therewith. This pleading of our SAVIOUR'S merits, by a sacrifice
     instituted by Himself, was (they doubted not) regarded graciously by
     GOD, for the remission of sins; as indeed our LORD had said, "This
     is My Blood which is shed for you and for many for the remission of
     sins." The Eucharist then, according to them, consisted of two
     parts, a "commemorative sacrifice" and a "Communion" or
     Communication; the former obtaining remission of sins for the
     Church; the Communion "the strengthening and refreshing of the
     soul," although, inasmuch as it united the believer with CHRIST, it
     indirectly conveyed remission of sins too. The Communion was (to use
     a modern phrase) the feast upon the sacrifice thus offered. They
     first offered to GOD His gifts, in commemoration of that His
     inestimable gift, and placed them upon His altar here, to be
     received and presented on the Heavenly Altar by Him, our
     High-Priest; and then, trusted to receive them back, conveying to
     them the life-giving Body and Blood. As being, moreover, appointed
     by their LORD, they believed that the continual oblation of this
     sacrifice (like the daily sacrifice appointed in the elder Church)
     was a benefit to the whole Church, independently and over and above
     the benefit to the individual communicants--that the sacrifices in
     each branch of the Christian Church were mutually of benefit to
     every other branch, each to all and all to each: and so also this
     common interest in the sacrifice of the memorials of their SAVIOUR'S
     Passion was one visible, yea, and (since GOD for its sake diffused
     unseen and inestimable blessings through the whole mystical body of
     His SON) an invisible spiritual bond of the Communion of Saints
     throughout the whole Body. "There is one JESUS CHRIST," says St.
     Ignatius, "who is above all: haste ye then all together, as to one
     Temple of GOD, as to one Altar, as to one CHRIST JESUS, who came
     forth from One FATHER, and is in One, and to One returned." [Ep. ad
     Magnes. §. 7] Lastly, since they knew not of our chill separation
     between those who, being dead in CHRIST, live to CHRIST and with
     CHRIST, and those who are yet in the flesh, they felt assured that
     this sacrifice offered by the Church on earth, for the whole Church,
     conveyed to that portion of the Church, which had passed into the
     unseen world, such benefits of CHRIST'S death as (their conflicts
     over, and they in rest) were still applicable to them. For their
     state, although higher far and purified, was yet necessarily
     imperfect, since the consummation of all things was not yet; and so
     they thought, was capable of increased spiritual joys, and fuller
     disclosures of the Beatific Vision. At all events, it had ever been
     the received practice of every branch of the Church Catholic, then
     to remember the "dead in CHRIST," and so whatever might become of
     their own individual surmises as to the mode, or extent of its
     efficacy, they comforted themselves, that being according to the
     will of GOD, it must in some way be of benefit to them. The merits
     of CHRIST'S death it is, which still keeps in subsistence a sinful
     world, and retains GOD'S love for the Church; it is in His Son, that
     the whole Church, notwithstanding her manifold deficiencies and
     unfaithfulnesses, is still acceptable to Him, and, "in the unity of
     the Church" and so in CHRIST, all the several members of the one
     Body: and they who sleep in CHRIST, are in CHRIST. Why then should
     we take upon ourselves to say that they, who are His members, as
     well as we, have no interest in this, which is offered as a memorial
     for all? or why should men think it an unhappiness or imperfection,
     that they should obtain additional joys and satisfactions thereby?

     The Romish Church corrupted and marred the Apostolic doctrine in two
     ways. 1st. By the error of transubstantiation. 2nd. By that of
     purgatory. And in both there occurs that peculiar corruption of the
     administrators of the Romish Church, that they countenance so much
     more of profitable error, than in their abstract system they
     acknowledge. Thus by combining the doctrine of Transubstantiation
     with that of the Sacrifice in the Eucharist, the laity were
     persuaded that not only a commemorative sacrifice, but that CHRIST
     Himself was again offered; as indeed one of their own writers
     confesses; "It is true, and impossible to deny, that many
     theologians of the Romish Church took occasion of the name of
     sacrifice given to the Eucharist, to tell us of a fresh immolation
     and death; to attach to it an efficacy of its own [i. e. independent
     of the one meritorious Sacrifice on the Cross], and an independent
     merit; to make us place therein a confidence which cannot but be
     superstitious, whenever it refers not to the Sacrifice of the
     Cross." [Courayer, Réponse au P. Le Quien, c. xvii. p. 469. Even the
     excellent Nicole frequently repeats: "The sacrifice of the Mass is
     the same as that of the Cross; it is substantially the same
     sacrifice, because it is the same Victim, the same JESUS CHRIST who
     offers to His FATHER the same Body and Blood upon our altars, as He
     offered in Calvary." Esprit de M. Nicole, p. 533. M. Nicole a little
     softens this, but still keeps the main position, "that the
     sacrifices on the Cross and the Altar were the same, because it is
     the same JESUS CHRIST who offers Himself in the one as in the
     other." These writers make the Sacrifice both the same and distinct;
     through Transubstantiation, the same, and yet, in act, distinct. But
     for the doctrine of Transubstantiation, Nicole might have a right
     meaning.] These false notions, in themselves, aggrandized the
     character of the priesthood, and as such, it was part of the unhappy
     policy of Rome to countenance them; and while (to take the mildest
     view) she narrowly observed the erroneous tendencies which were
     almost unavoidably mixed up in the minds of individuals with the
     reformed doctrine, she had no sense for her own; she thought no
     deeds cruel which would remove the motes that threatened to darken
     her sister's eye, but perceived not the beam in her own. While
     repressing even by the shedding of blood the slightest approximation
     to the Reformed doctrine, she rebuked not errors which entrenched on
     the authority of our LORD. Joined, however, with the doctrine of
     purgatory, the sacrifice of the Mass gained for them another
     accession of power, the extent whereof, and of the abuses therewith
     connected, is not now easily appreciated. For the souls oi almost
     all, if not all, who passed out of this life, were supposed to go
     into purgatory; its pains were regarded as intolerable, equal,
     except in duration, to those of Hell. From these torments the
     sacrifice of the Mass came to be practically regarded as the only
     means of deliverance. For when it was believed that CHRIST was
     "truly and indeed, in respect of His very Body and Blood, offered up
     to His FATHER under the form of bread and wine, in the daily
     sacrifice of the Church," [Harding ap. Jewel, Reply, c. xvii. init.]
     nothing else, however abstractedly it might be allowed to be of use,
     could in comparison be of any moment. [One illustration of the
     practical combination of these doctrines may suffice, viz. the way
     in which even Sir Thomas More writes in a practical and popular
     work. A book, namely, "the Supplication of Beggars," had been put
     out, complaining that the charity destined for their relief had been
     turned aside to pay the priests for saying masses. Against this, Sir
     Thomas More, "Counsellor to our Sovereign Lord the King, and
     Chancellor of his duchy of Lancaster," wrote "The Supplication of
     Soules against the Supplication of Beggars." It thus begins; "In
     most piteous wise continually calleth and crieth upon your devout
     charity and most tender pity, for help, comfort, and relief, your
     late acquaintance, kindred, spouses, companions, play-fellows, and
     friends, and now your humble and unacquainted and half-forgotten
     suppliants, poor prisoners of GOD, the silly souls in purgatory,
     here abiding and enduring the grievous pains and hot cleansing fire,
     that fretteth and burneth out the rust and filthy spots of our sin,
     till the mercy of ALMIGHTY GOD, the rather by your good and
     charitable means, vouchsafe to deliver us hence. From whence, if ye
     marvel why we more now molest and trouble you with our writing than
     ever we were wont before, it may like you to wit and understand,
     that hitherto, tho' we have been with many folk much forgotten of
     negligence, yet hath alway good folk remembered us, and we have been
     recommended unto GOD, and eased and holpen, and relieved, both by
     the priests' prayers, of good virtuous people, and specially by the
     daily masses, and other ghostly suffrages of priests, religious, and
     folk of holy Church. But now sith that of late, there are sprung up
     certain seditious persons, which not only travail and labour to
     destroy them by whom we be much holpen, but also to sow and set
     forth such a pestilent opinion against our self, as once received
     and believed among the people, must need take from us the relief and
     comfort that ever should come to us by the charitable alms, prayers,
     and good works of the world; ye may take it for no wonder, tho' we
     silly souls that have long lien and cried so far from you, that we
     seldom break your sleep, do now, in this our great fear of our utter
     loss for ever of your loving remembrance and relief, not yet
     importunately bereave you of your rest with crying at your ears, at
     unseasonable time, when ye would (which we do never) repose yourself
     and take ease," &c. (Works p. 288). In p. 316 they speak of the
     "pains which will else hold them here with us in fire and torments
     intolerable, only God knoweth how long."] The corruptions, occasions
     of avarice, superstition, and profaneness thence ensuing, exceed all
     bounds. Even the Council of Trent was obliged to address itself to
     the remedy of them. [In the decree on Purgatory.] The connection
     then of the doctrine of the sacrifice with the two errors of
     Transubstantiation and Purgatory, at the Reformation, was of much
     moment; and of these, the fundamental error was that of
     Transubstantiation. "St. Cyprian saith," says Bishop Jewell to
     Harding, [Defence of Apology, P. 2. c. 5. v. fin. p. 140.] we offer
     our LORD'S cup mixed with wine. But he saith not as you say, 'we
     offer up the Son of God substantially and really unto the FATHER.'
     "Take away only this blasphemy, wherewith you have deceived the
     world, and then talk of mingling the cup and of the sacrifice while
     ye list." "Do ye take away from the Mass your Trasubstantiation,"
     says Bishop Andrews [Respons. ad Card. Bellarm. c. 8.] to Cardinal
     Bellarmine, "and we shall not long have any question about the
     sacrifice." "This kind of oblation," [the Romish] "standeth upon
     Transubstantiation, his cousin-german," says Bishop Ridley, [Brief
     declaration of the Lord's Supper p. 16.] "and they do both grow upon
     one ground." And at the beginning of his book, [Ibid. p. 6.] "As in
     a man diseased in divers parts, commonly the original cause of such
     divers diseases, which is spreading abroad in the body, do come from
     one chief member,--even so all five points aforesaid do chiefly hang
     upon this one question: What is the matter of the sacrament? Whether
     is it the natural substance of bread, or the natural substance of
     CHRIST'S own body?--For if it be CHRIST'S own natural body, born of
     the Virgin,--then assuredly they must needs grant
     Transubstantiation, that is, a change of the substance of bread into
     the substance of CHRIST'S body. Then also they must needs grant the
     carnal and corporal presence of CHRIST'S body. Then must the
     sacrament be adored with the honour due to CHRIST Himself, for the
     unity of the two natures in one person. Then if the priest do offer
     the Sacrament, he doth offer indeed CHRIST Himself." And again [Ibid
     p. 17.], "Transubstantiation is the very foundation, whereon all
     their erroneous doctrine doth stand."

     How then did those who revised our Liturgy separate the true
     doctrine from the false? The doctrine of Purgatory was entirely
     connected with the private masses, i. e. such as the priest
     celebrated alone, when there was the sacrifice, but no communion;
     for these, as being said especially for the deceased, were more
     costly, and it was profitable to multiply them. ["These monstrous
     things (that the Mass is a sacrifice for the remission of sins, and
     that it is applied by the priest to them for whom he saith or
     singeth, &c.) were never seen or known of the old and primitive
     Church, nor was there not then in one church many masses every day;
     but there were then no daily private masses, where every priest
     received alone, like as until this day there is none in the Greek
     churches but one common-mass in a day. Nor the holy fathers of the
     old Church would not have suffered such ungodly and wicked abuses of
     the Lord's Supper. But these private masses sprung up of late years,
     partly through the ignorance and superstition of unlearned monks and
     friars, which knew not what a sacrifice was, but made of the mass a
     sacrifice propitiatory, to remit both sin and the pain due for the
     same; but chiefly they spring of lucre and gain, when priests found
     the means to sell masses to the people; which caused masses so to
     increase, that every day was sold an infinite number," &c.--Cranmer,
     Defence of the Catholic Doctrine, &c. b. 5. c. 16.] These our Church
     laid aside, as contrary to primitive practice; and therewith a main
     blow was struck at the belief that the sacrifice of the Eucharist
     benefited souls in purgatory; for the rite, with which this error
     was associated, was gone. Transubstantiation (as is well known) was
     not expressed or implied in any of the Liturgies used anywhere in
     the Church, down to this very period; on the contrary, the very
     Church of Rome preserved, as a witness against her, her ancient
     Liturgy in this respect uncorrupted. The Canon of the Mass, or the
     ancient, peculiar service of the Communion, is, as is well known,
     thus far wholly pure and catholic, although some other prayers,
     incidentally blended with it, are not always so.

     The revisers of our Liturgy, however, anxious to remove all occasion
     of stumbling, in the very first instance went further than this.
     They dropped all which spoke of any benefit of this commemorative
     sacrifice; they retained the act, as a duty, but omitted all mention
     of its privileges. Again, they retained the practice of the Church
     Universal, to "commend to the mercy of GOD all His servants which
     are departed hence from us, with the sign of faith, and now do rest
     in the sleep of peace;" but they transposed this prayer, placing it
     before the oblation, perhaps for fear that it should give any
     countenance to the Romish error, "that CHRIST was offered for the
     quick and dead;" and they confined the verbal act of the sacrifice
     to the single prayer which followed after the consecration. Then
     also they introduced the mention of another sacrifice, comprehended
     in that sacrifice, as the "sacrifice of ourselves, our souls and
     bodies,"--not to lower the character of that commemorative
     sacrifice, but still to remove men's wrong conceptions of it, as if
     the sacrifice were something quite independent of the faith and
     devotion of those who offered it, in like way as the communication
     of the Body and Blood of our LORD is indeed independent of any
     intention of the priest.

     The form of words which accompanied the oblation, was as follows.
     After the prayer "for the whole state of Christ's Church," there
     followed a prayer as well of consecration as of oblation, of which
     part was subsequently omitted, part retained as the prayer of the
     consecration, part placed after the actual communion. The prayer
     began, "O GOD, heavenly Father, which of Thy tender mercy," &c. to
     "His coming again," hear us, "O merciful Father, we beseech Thee,
     and with Thy Holy Spirit and Word vouchsafe to bl + ess and sanc +
     tify these Thy gifts, and creatures of bread and wine, that they may
     be unto us the Body and Blood of Thy most Dearly Beloved SON, JESUS
     CHRIST, who in the same night," &c. to "in remembrance of Me."
     "Wherefore, O LORD, and heavenly Father, according to the
     institution of Thy Dearly Beloved SON, our Saviour JESUS CHRIST, we
     Thy humble servants do celebrate, and make here before Thy Divine
     Majesty, with these Thy holy gifts, the memorial which Thy SON hath
     willed us to make; having in remembrance His blessed Passion, mighty
     Resurrection, and glorious Ascension, rendering unto Thee most
     hearty thanks, for the innumerable benefits procured unto us by the
     same, entirely desiring Thy fatherly goodness, mercifully to accept
     this our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving," &c. to "sacrifice
     unto Thee;" "humbly beseeching Thee, that whosoever shall be
     partakers of this holy Communion, may worthily receive the most
     precious Body and Blood of Thy Son JESUS CHRIST, and be filled with
     Thy grace and heavenly benediction, and made one body with Thy Son
     JESUS CHRIST, that He may dwell in them and they in Him. And
     although we be unworthy, through our manifold sins, to offer unto
     Thee any sacrifice; yet we beseech Thee to accept this our bounden
     duty and service, and command these our prayers and supplications by
     the ministry of Thy holy Angels to be brought up into Thy holy
     Tabernacle before the sight of Thy Divine Majesty; not weighing our
     merits, but," &c.

     In the subsequent part of the service, as an additional safeguard,
     is added (in a brief address now omitted,) a Confession, which bears
     the character of antiquity. "CHRIST our Paschal Lamb is offered up
     for us, once for all, when He bare our sins on His Body upon the
     Cross, for He is the only LAMB of GOD, that taketh away the sins of
     the world; wherefore, let us keep a joyful feast with the LORD."

     The remainder of the Service differed not from our present; save
     that possibly the doctrine of the connection of the actual
     participation of our LORD in the Communion, with the reception of
     the Holy Elements, was more distinctly enounced in the prayer, "We
     do not presume," &c.--in that they prayed that they might "drink His
     blood in these holy Mysteries;" and again, in the thanksgiving after
     the Communion (now in consequence of these changes universally
     omitted,) in like manner, "for that Thou hast vouchsafed to feed us
     [in these holy Mysteries] with the spiritual food," &c. "and hast
     assured us [duly receiving the same] of Thy favour and goodness
     towards us," instead of "for that Thou dost vouchsafe to feed us,
     which have duly received these holy Mysteries, with," &c.

     Such was the modified form in which the doctrine was expressed; so
     that one should rather question whether the revisers had not already
     gone further than they need, and if so, further than they ought, in
     altering the ancient liturgy of the Church. For, of course, it would
     be a maxim that, especially in high doctrines, which we do but dimly
     see, as little change should be made as possible, lest we
     inadvertently part with that, whose value we do not at the time
     appreciate. The false doctrine was that ordinary persuasion that "in
     the Mass, the Priest did offer CHRIST for the quick and dead." The
     danger to be apprehended, lest it should interfere with "that
     perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction made by the one
     oblation of CHRIST upon the cross, for all the sins of the whole
     world." Of this, in the revised liturgy, there was not the remotest
     trace. It would be difficult to imagine what ground of exception
     could be taken against what remained, unless one had known whence
     those exceptions came. There is not the slightest intimation that
     the English Church dreaded any practical evils from the revised
     form,--as indeed how should they, when every expression which could,
     in the remotest way, favour the Romish corruption, was removed? On
     the contrary, the Act which enforced it "gave offence (only) we are
     told, [Heylyn, Hist of the Ref. p. 66.] to the Romish party; not
     that "they could except against it, in regard either of the manner
     or matter of (which they acknowledged to be consonant to the ancient
     forms,) but because it was communicated to the people in the "Vulgar
     Tongue." The general feelings of the Lay portion of the Church
     might, in those days, be tolerably estimated by those expressed in
     the two Houses of Parliament; and these [ap. Strype, Eccl. Mem. of
     Edw. 6, b. 1. c. 11. p. 86. fol.] "gave to the king most hearty and
     lowly thanks for it, and for his godly travail, in collecting and
     gathering together the said Archbishop, Bishops, and learned men,
     and for the godly prayers, orders, rites and ceremonies in the said
     book; and considered the honour of GOD, and the great goodness
     which, by the grace of GOD, would ensue upon it; and finally,
     concluded the book such, that it would give occasion to every honest
     man most willingly to embrace it." It was also not only confirmed by
     the two Houses, but "the more material points were disputed and
     debated in the Convocation, by men of both parties, and might
     further have been discussed, so long as any Popish Divine had
     anything reasonably to say." [Dr. G. Abbot against Hill, p. 104. ap.
     Strype, ib. p. 87. "The religion--drawn out of the fountains of the
     word of GOD, and from the purest oracles of the primitive Church,
     was, for the ordinary exercise thereof, collected into the book of
     Common Prayer, by the pains and labour of many learned men, and of
     mature judgment." Id. Ib.]

     Indeed, persons of the most different views agree in praising the
     wonderful wisdom of these first revisers of our Common Prayer Book;
     and, at the time, it was unhesitatingly affirmed to have been done
     "by aid of the Holy Ghost;" without Whom so blessed a work could not
     have been accomplished. There seems, then, to have been good hope
     that all the Romanist Laity would have continued to conform to it,
     inasmuch as in the Upper House only four of the Laity protested
     against it. [Strype, ib. p. 86.]

     This hope, however, of retaining the Romanist Laity within our
     Communion, was soon dissipated. The feelings of the Church do not
     appear to have been altered. When some Bishops had been induced, by
     the representations of Calvin and the rest, to open the question
     about the "words used at the giving of the elements, and the
     different manner of administering the holy sacrament," the lower
     House of Convocation, to whom the matter was proposed, put off the
     question until the succeeding session, nor does it appear that they
     ever acceded to the plan. [Heylyn, p. 107.]

     The objections came entirely from without. When this, our genuine
     English Liturgy, was framed, one foreign reformer only, of any note,
     (P. Martyr) had arrived in England; à Lasco, whose influence was
     subsequently most pernicious, and Bucer, came not until the Liturgy
     was completed. But the kindness wherewith England has made itself
     the refuge of the oppressed, was in this case also abused.
     Immediately after the completion of the Liturgy, we find the poor
     Archbishop unhappily surrounded by foreigners, who had in their own
     countries rejected Episcopacy, some, the doctrines of the Sacraments
     also, and left their own countries because they went beyond the
     foreign reformation. Others were generally unsound.

     Of these, the highly-gifted B. Ochinus died an apostate to a low
     Socinianism; a Lasco, a Polish emigrant nobleman, carried even
     further than their author, the anti-sacramental doctrines of
     Calvin3. [See Scriptural views of Holy Baptism (Tracts) Note M. p.
     245 seq. The following account is from Strype, principally his
     "Cranmer," b. 2, c. 22.] Yet he was highly trusted by Cranmer, was,
     although a Preacher only, invested with a sort of Episcopal
     authority over the several congregations of foreigners, Germans,
     Italians, and French, and perhaps Spanish, settled in or near
     London; and so much wealth was, out of a dissolved Church, settled
     upon him, that he was enabled to become a patron to all foreigners
     who should resort thither. [He had become a preacher to a Protestant
     congregation at Embden, Strype, 1. c.] His having fled from his own
     country, his position in London, reputation for learning, and
     strictness of life, gave him considerable influence; and in those
     unsettled days, the existence of a regular form of doctrine,
     worship, and government different from that of the Church, was
     calculated in unstable minds to produce a like desire of novelty. A
     Lasco himself was of an active, meddling temper; he took upon
     himself to interfere in the question of episcopal habits, (which was
     indeed a question between the spirit of the English Church and
     Geneva,) and from the Arians in his own country also, ultimately
     from Geneva, had brought in the custom of sitting at the Holy
     Eucharist, and the antipathy to the scriptural and primitive name of
     "Altar." [It is characteristic that Peter Martyr, although he
     accepted a Canonry in our Church, boasts that he never would wear
     the surplice. Epist. ej. ap. Heylyn, p. 92.]

     With these and the like men Cranmer was surrounded; and paid much
     deference to them, as a man of no decision is wont to do to those
     who are bent upon carrying a point. It was probably a fruit of this
     influence, that there came out from the Council in 1550 an
     ill-omened letter, signed by seven laymen, but by one Bishop only
     (Ely) besides the Archbishop, commanding the altars to be taken
     down, and tables to be placed in their room. ["A Swiss Reformer,
     resident at Oxford, informed Bullinger, in Nov. 1548, that Cranmer
     had been brought to sounder views of the Lord's Supper by John à
     Lasco!" Jenkyns's pref. to Cranmer's Works, p. lxxix.] Some of the
     reasons assigned [Heylyn, p. 96, 97.] are the more remarkable, in
     that the good ground of Christian antiquity was necessarily
     abandoned, and arguments are drawn from the partial silence of Holy
     Scripture; in that "it is not to be found that any of the Apostles
     did ever use an altar in the ministration;"--the selfsame argument
     by which the name of the Blessed "Trinity" is proscribed by the
     Socinian, and the blessing of Infant-baptism by the Anabaptist. It
     was forgotten that as little is it said that they ever used a table;
     that in the first three centuries the name "table" but once occurs,
     that of altar, as sanctioned by Holy Scripture, is the ordinary
     title. [Johnson, Unbloody Sacrifice, p. 308.] The edict, however,
     was executed;" the people flew upon the spoil," jewels, hangings,
     plate, candlesticks, were transferred from the temple of GOD to the
     houses, tables, or persons of the rich; and sacrilege was an ill
     augury of what should follow.

     The change in doctrine was now actually introduced, and recommended
     by the authority of Bishop Hooper, who had unhappily, during Henry
     VIII's reign, taken refuge in Zurich, and become acquainted with
     Bullinger a friend of Zuingli. [Heylyn, p. 90. The interest which
     Calvin took in Hooper's success, is instructive. During the demur
     about the "habits," Calvin wrote to the Protector "to give him a
     helping hand." Ep. Calv. ap. Heylyn, p. 91] Of the change itself,
     the less need be said, since the whole doctrine of the Eucharist was
     then altered. The service indeed was rendered inconsistent; for some
     of the antient doctrine was retained, although all the alterations
     went one way, to introduce the Zuinglian view of a simple
     commemoration for the Catholic doctrine of actual communion. It
     suffices to characterize and condemn this change, that words, some
     whereof were ever used by the whole Church, "The Body of our LORD
     JESUS CHRIST, which was given for thee, preserve thy body and soul
     unto everlasting life," were expunged, and instead thereof was
     invented and substituted the mere exhortation, "Take and eat this,
     in remembrance," &c.

     But it is instructive to observe how this change of doctrine
     affected (as it must) the value felt for the Holy Eucharist, as
     appears incidentally in the two liturgies of Edward VI. In the
     first, we find it said,

     "In Cathedral churches or other places, where there is daily
     Communion, it shall be sufficient to read this exhortation, once in
     a month. And in parish churches, upon the week-days, it may be left
     unsaid. And if, upon the Sunday or holy day, the people be negligent
     to come to the Communion, then shall the Priest earnestly exhort his
     parishioners, to dispose themselves to the receiving of the holy
     Communion more diligently."

     And, "If in the sermon or homily, the people be not exhorted to the
     worthy receiving of the holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our
     Saviour CHRIST; then shall the curate give this exhortation to those
     that be minded to receive the same, "'Dearly beloved in the Lord, ye
     that mind, &c.'" and

     "When the holy Communion is celebrated on the week-day, then may be
     omitted the Gloria in excelsis, the creed, the homily, [The
     Communion was then thought of more moment than the sermon.] and the
     exhortation."

     Another regulation implied that it might very probably be celebrated
     every Wednesday and Friday, and other days; and it is provided that
     "the priest on the week-day shall forbear to celebrate the
     Communion, except he have some that will communicate with him;" and
     provision was made (as far as might be) "that the Minister, having
     always some to communicate with him, may accordingly celebrate so
     high and holy Mysteries with all the suffrages and due order
     appointed for the same."

     In the second book, all these notices and this urgent desire of
     frequent Communion disappear; we find only, "there shall follow this
     exhortation at certain times, when the curate shall see the people
     negligent to come to the holy Communion" [the 2d exhortation, now in
     use, only altered].

     Daily communion was altogether dropped; it is implied only that
     there may be communion on holy days; and that in Cathedral and
     Collegiate Churches, there should be weekly communion; but, on the
     other hand, it is provided that "there shall he no celebration of
     the Lord's supper," not as before, "unless there be some," but
     "except there be a good number to communicate with the priest,
     according to his discretion," (a regulation for which now has been
     substituted, "a convenient number,") as also another still retained,
     "if there be not above twenty persons in the parish of discretion to
     receive the Communion; yet there shall be no Communion, except four
     (or three at the least) communicate with the priest." They were more
     anxious to rescue the priest from communicating with a few, than the
     flock from rare communions or losing them well-nigh altogether.

     And thus the devout (as is ever the case in these changes) were
     sacrificed to the undevout; and we have followed out this
     reformation, thus brought about through the agency of foreign
     reformers, and have brought down our celebrations of the Communion
     from weekly to monthly, or quarterly, or three times in the year;
     (whereby those of our people who can receive it oftenest, receive it
     only so often as our Church, even in those bad times, thought
     necessary, at the very least, to retain the spiritual health of any
     member of CHRIST'S body, and the most cannot receive it even on all
     these rare occasions;) and we have dropped the Communions of Holy
     Days, and should oftentimes not think it worth while to administer
     it (in church) to three or four communicants, and have lost (for the
     most part) the very sense and feeling, that more frequent communion
     would be a blessing. It makes, in truth, a man's "eyes gush out with
     water," to see in these notices, how the glory of our church, the
     days of her youth, and her first love are departed: and to think
     what she might have been, had she stood in the old paths. "The
     virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a
     very grievous blow."

     On the accession of Q. Elizabeth, the worst alteration, that of the
     words used at the delivery of the holy elements, was modified, so as
     to restore the old doctrine of a real Communion, for those who were
     willing to receive it; and with regard to her doctrine of the
     Sacrifice, the restoration of the Communion table to the place which
     the altar had formerly occupied, shewed that the Church recognized
     the doctrine, which some of her heads had before shrunk from avowing
     in the presence of the foreign reformers, and their disciples.

     These restorations were, however, inadequate to replace men's minds
     in their former state; the confession of the true doctrine had been
     once half suppressed, and was now not more than half avowed: and it
     seems annexed as a penalty to all unfaithfulness in guarding the
     deposit committed to us, that we cannot replace things as they were.
     The snow which descends from Heaven, cannot, if once polluted,
     recover its former purity. The purity which God gave, He can
     restore; yet He does not so to any Church, for any half-efforts, nor
     unless it be "zealous and repent." (Rev. iii. 19.)

     Men's minds also had received a severe shock through the
     profanations which had been carried on in the name of this second
     reformation; in taking away the tares, they had uprooted the wheat
     also; in endeavouring, with a rude hand, to eradicate Romish
     misbelief, they went hard to introduce unbelief; they had
     effectually effaced the association between the altar and the Romish
     sacrifice, but they had loosened men's reverence altogether. "When
     their table was constituted, (was the well-merited mockery of a
     Romanist divine) they could never be contented with placing the
     same, now East, now North; now one way, now another: until it
     pleased GOD of His goodness to place it quite out of the Church:"
     "this difference and diversity, (says Heylyn very truly) "although
     in circumstance only, might draw contempt upon the Sacrament itself,
     and give great scandal unto many moderate and well-meaning men."
     [White, Bp. of Lincoln ap. Heylyn, p. 107. Heylyn quotes other
     mockery, which is very instructive as to the mischief which was done
     by these vacillations: "The like did Western (Prolocutor of
     Convocation, 1 Queen Mary) in a disputation held with Latimer,
     telling him, with reproach and contempt enough, that the Protestants
     having turned their table, were like a company of apes, that knew
     not which way to turn their tails; looking one day East, and another
     day West; one this way, and another that way, as their fancies led
     them. Thus, finally, one Miles Hubbard, in a book called 'The
     Display of Protestants,' doth report the business, 'How long were
     they learning to set their tables to minister the Communion upon?
     First, they placed it aloft, where the High Altar stood; then must
     it be removed from the wall, that one might go between; the
     ministers being in contention, whither part to turn their faces,
     either toward the West, the North, or South; some would stand
     Westward, some Northward, some Southward.'"] Then followed the
     scenes of plunder, each labouring to outdo the other; the king
     issuing a Commission to restrain the "plundering of the Churches,"
     and to recover what had been stolen, in order--to appropriate it to
     himself; and this Commission, with all intended expedition, was left
     behind in the race of sacrilege, and powerful private plunderers, or
     secret thieves, had got much of the treasure into their own hands,
     and could not be discovered, or would not disgorge it: "Insomuch
     that many private men's parlours were hung with altar cloths; their
     tables and beds covered with copes instead of carpets and coverlids;
     and many made carousing cups of the sacred chalices, as once
     Belshazzar celebrated his drunken feast in the sanctified vessels of
     the temple. It was a sorry house, and not worth the naming, which
     had not somewhat of this furniture in it, though it were only a fair
     large cushion made of a cope or altar cloth, to adorn their windows,
     or make their chairs appear to have somewhat in them of a chair of
     state. Yet how contemptible were these trappings in comparison of
     those vast sums of money, which were made of jewels, plate, and
     cloth of tyssue, either conveyed beyond the seas, or sold at home,
     and good lands purchased with the money; nothing the more blessed to
     the posterity of them that bought them, for being purchased with the
     consecrated treasures of so many temples."--"Thou that abhorrest
     idols, dost THOU commit sacrilege?" [Heylyn, p. 134.]

     One would gladly have turned from these sickening scenes, whereby
     and by the like, religion was, for the time, made "a gainful
     occupation," (1 Tim. vi. 5) and GOD'S holy name was blasphemed; bad
     men supplanting one another, and Bishops scarcely lifting up one
     warning voice against the sacrilege, but submitting to enforce it;
     (so that the days of Q. Mary come as a relief, wherein those of our
     reformation suffered, not sinned) but that through the profaneness
     which these acts entailed, they must have had much effect in
     changing religious doctrine, and preventing its restoration.
     [Ridley, although we have no doubt unwillingly, as Bishop of London,
     enforced the mandate addressed to him, for pulling down the altars,
     which was accompanied with so much profaneness and sacrilege.
     (Heylyn, p. 90, seq.) Day, Bp. of Chichester, was deposed for not
     pulling down the altars in his diocese. (Strype, Cranmer, b. 2, c.
     20.) A specimen of what then passed in men's minds is the report of
     the times (whether true or mistaken, matters not) "what Cheke told
     him (P. Martyr) did not a little refresh him, viz. That if they
     themselves (the Revisers of the Liturgy) would not change what ought
     to be changed, the king would do it himself; and when they came to a
     Parliament, the king would interpose His Majesty's own authority."
     Strype, Cranmer, b. 2, c. 18.]

     [Ridley (it appears from his Life, p. 325) issued an injunction for
     the setting up of Tables in the Churches throughout his Diocese, and
     taking down of Altars, before the order in council, and probably
     obtained that order in consequence of the "great opposition and
     censure" this injunction met with, as "contrary to the present order
     of Common Prayer, and the King's proceedings." It is stated also in
     the "Letter from the Council," (as far as this may be taken as any
     authority, and not rather as asserting what they wished,) that "the
     Altars within the more part of the Churches were" already "taken
     down." It appears too that Ridley, though using the common-place
     ultra-Protestant statements, persuaded himself that he was acting in
     conformity to "primitive practice." He argued that "Christ
     instituted His last Supper at a Table and not upon an Altar. Nor did
     either the Apostles or the Primitive Church, as we read of, ever use
     an Altar in the Ministration of the Communion. Therefore a Table, as
     more agreeing with Christ's institution and primitive practice, is
     rather to be used than an Altar." The fact stated is indeed wholly
     untrue, arising, as it appears, from the confusion of the titles
     qusiasthrion and bwmoV. (See Mede and Johnson, &c.) On which ground
     the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Ely "urged against Day,
     Bishop of Chichester, before the Council," (when he refused to
     comply with its order,) "that 'twas clear by Origen against Celsus,
     that the Christians had no Altars when this Father lived." Though
     "they owned at the same time that the Lord's Table was called an
     Altar by ancient writers." (Collier.) Origen, and other early
     Christians, allowed that they had no Altars whereon to offer bloody
     Sacrifices, as the Jews and Heathens; but continually, and indeed
     uniformly, spoke among themselves of their having an Altar and a
     Sacrifice, as the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Ely
     admitted. It may be recollected also, in excuse, that the Catholic
     doctrine of the "Communion" was obscured, or nearly effaced, by the
     corrupt practice of Masses without Communion, and Ridley may have
     thought the Altars, as they then existed, were an impediment to its
     restoration, and hoped that the new "God's board" might also be
     considered as an "Altar," (though not in the Romish sense,) as, in
     the true Catholic view, the Altar is also the Table of the Lord. By
     taking an active part, however, with the more violent, though
     smaller, ultra-Protestant party, Ridley unhappily gave much occasion
     for immediate profaneness, and for the ultimate suspension of
     doctrine, which he still held. So narrow is the path of Catholic
     Truth, and so much danger is there in disturbing any truth, which
     men hold, or the way in which they hold it, or any rites or forms,
     in connection wherewith it has been handed down, as also in using
     such a wayward and ungoverned instrument as popular feeling, in
     things holy.]

     After these scenes of rapid legislation and confusion, decree
     following decree, spoliation upon spoliation, liturgy upon liturgy,
     (men's minds unsettled by the frequent changes, by the consultations
     with men of a different reformation, and by the state's violent
     interference and lawless deeds) a large body of our clergy fled
     abroad, mistrusted by the Lutherans on account of their
     consultations with à Lasco, and settling in the birth-place of the
     unsoundest part of the reformation, Zurich, Geneva, and other cities
     connected with them.

     Here such as were left (Ridley, the great upholder of Catholic
     truth, having received his martyr's crown) divided into two parties;
     only, as is ordinarily the case, evil principles are more rapidly
     developed than good, and so we find what was subsequently the
     Puritan party most developed, and engaged in turbulent, ambitious,
     schismatic measures. They also had the Zuingli-Calvinist reformation
     close at hand, to which they joined themselves without scruple, and
     so they were already arrived at the first stage of that Reformation,
     opposed to the Church, but not as yet opposed to the Scriptures; the
     other was gradually recovering from the influences, under which it
     had been brought during the reign of Edward VI; but we find this
     difference, that, while the principles of the Puritans or
     Nonconformists were already developed, that of the genius of the
     English Church did not unfold itself altogether, until some years
     afterwards, in the seventeenth century, and then was again cast out.
     At the accession of Queen Elizabeth, they either did not see their
     way clearly (as was natural) or "the sons of Zeruiah were too hard
     for them;" the body of the English Church, not having been infected
     with foreign notions, was yet sound, and desired no foreign
     inventions; but when an innovating party is decided, and the sound
     party engaged on the defensive only, the innovators will ever have
     the advantage, and the quiet body of the Church is sacrificed.
     Concessions, involving the sacrifice of principle, are made, if only
     to avoid the imputation of obstinacy or stiffness in refusing. As an
     instance, some idea there was of restoring (as the Queen herself
     wished) the genuine English service book (Edward VI's first book):
     how this was prevented, we know not; the Church generally desired
     it: perhaps the hope of conciliating those who afterwards overturned
     our Church and nation, prevailed; mediating measures were adopted;
     and the Church lost the distinct and tranquil enunciation of
     doctrine, which was the best and only antidote to further evil.

     The amalgamating measures of Queen Elizabeth's divines produced just
     their natural effect, viz. an amalgamation of doctrine; of which,
     however, unhappily, the lower doctrine naturally dragged down the
     higher (since men will always in the end subside into the lower of
     two views proposed to them), and was, from its own nature, the more
     conspicuous.

     Should this sketch to any appear distressing, let him rather
     contemplate the immense fermentation, which was likely to arise in
     the endeavour to separate off the impurities of the Church of Rome;
     the influence which, in any such troubled times, bad men and bad
     passions must naturally obtain; and instead of wondering that the
     lees did not settle down until the next century, rather let him
     thank GOD (and he has abundant reason to thank Him) that, while He
     allowed them to float up and down in the vast ferment, He did not
     yet permit them to spoil the "good wine," but has "kept it until
     now." Even our Articles, as well as our Liturgy and Catechism
     (blessed be His Holy Name), were preserved free from the errors into
     which the foreign Reformers fell, and expressed the truth fully on
     all points necessary to salvation, and, in the case in question,
     though maimed, and not with the simple unreservedness of primitive
     days, still, sufficiently to preserve the agreement with the
     primitive Church. Besides, she not only did not exclude, but
     directed her true sons to, the teaching of the Church Catholic; she
     did not form a system of faith, which should exclude whatever lay
     beyond it, but only secured (as far as she could) certain prominent
     points, on which error had existed. But these, as a particular
     church, she laid down only in dependence upon, and subordination to,
     not to supersede the Church Catholic.

     Cranmer himself shared, in a great degree, the difficulty which men
     of those days must have had, in arriving at any definite or
     ascertained results at all: one who has been even compelled to part
     with a portion of his belief, has shaken the hold of the remainder:
     and even though the needle should be endued with a power, not its
     own, to fix at last on the centre where it should rest, yet, should
     it have been necessary once violently to shake it, it will not be
     until after much vehement vibration to the right and to the left,
     that it will at last tremblingly fix itself. It is not in the midst
     of conflict, while men are struggling for their footing and for
     life, that we are to expect a calm survey of the nature of the
     ground whereon they stand. All the Reformers (as was to be expected)
     vacillated, English and foreign (save, perhaps, Ridley, who was most
     imbued with the doctrines of the early Church, and had therein a
     firm resting place); and they who ventured to systematize most, as
     Calvin, went most astray; others, as Luther, in whatever proportion
     they did so. Their province was, to clear the building of its
     untempered mortar; it was to be the task of others to point the
     edges, which, in this rough handling, were of necessity injured, and
     to restore the fair harmony and finish of the goodly building. It is
     difficult, at any time, to oppose even an error broadly, without
     impairing some neighbouring truth out of which it was corrupted, or
     to which it is akin; this has been miserably evidenced again and
     again in individual controversy with heretics; the insulated
     defender of truth against heresy, himself steps on the other side
     beyond the Catholic verities, and becomes a heretic: every error,
     almost, in these latter divided times, is the depository of some
     kindred truth, and rough censures of what is untrue fail not to
     include what is true also; thus, in refuting men who depreciated the
     ordained sacraments, men, in their turn, came to depreciate or deny
     unquestionable (although mis-stated) Divine agency, and explain
     GOD'S miraculous workings in the conversion of a single soul, or the
     refreshing of His Church, by mere secondary causes: on the other
     hand, in correcting false notions of the Sacraments, they lost the
     true; in refuting Transsubstantiation, they fell short of the truth
     of the real mystical, spiritual presence of CHRIST in the Eucharist;
     the mind, intent upon the one side of removing injurious error,
     misses or forgets to establish, or does not discriminate, the
     positive truth. The Divines of the sixteenth and seventeenth
     centuries had different offices; in the sixteenth, we are to look
     for strong broad statements of truths, which had been obscured by
     Popery, but often without the modifications which they require and
     receive from other portions of the Gospel; in the seventeenth, we
     have the calmer, deeper statements of men, to whom God had given
     peace from the first conflict, yet suffered not their arms to rust,
     having "left" certain of "the nations to prove Israel by them, even
     as many of Israel as had not known the wars of Canaan" (Judges iii.
     1). Yet their office was to maintain, not to win, and so was a
     calmer duty; and they, however exercised by troubles, still breathed
     freely amid the "arva serena," which their fathers had won with
     their own blood. They had not to rise and take possession of the
     land, while

          "blood and fire ran in mingled stream," [Christian Year.]

     but "to keep the watch of the LORD by His holy temple and by the
     altar, every man with his weapon in his hand." (2 Chron. xxiii.)
     There is then no occasion to institute any comparison between the
     relative value of these several "vessels meet for the Master's use"
     in the House of GOD; between those who here first laboured, and
     those who, when these were at rest, entered into their labours. Each
     had their several offices, and were severally qualified for them;
     and they only risk disparaging the Reformers of the sixteenth
     century who would look to them for that which was not their office,
     viz. a well-proportioned and equable exhibition of the several parts
     of the Catholic faith, which was, in the appointed order of things,
     rather reserved for the seventeenth.

     It was, then, natural that Cranmer should vacillate, and that, the
     more as to the doctrine of the Eucharist, since he had arrived at
     the Catholic views, through the aid of Ridley, and contrary perhaps
     to his own bias. We blame him then not for this, rather should one
     abstain from rudely blaming those, who vacillated most, and even for
     a while, or altogether, returned to Rome. It was not necessarily for
     interest that men so vacillated; the excesses of many foreign
     Protestants must needs have startled many of the gentler sort, who
     yet wished to be freed from the grosser corruptions of Rome, as they
     do at this day: and if Cranmer, pledged as he was, could recant, and
     retracted not, while there was yet hope, one need not impute worse
     motives than undue fear of man to others. GOD, for His own name's
     sake, rescued His servant Cranmer, and gave him the crown of
     martyrdom; Jewel's recantation was blotted out only by bitter tears,
     and a life of fasting and humiliation: why then ascribe sordid
     motives to others, who, halting between two opinions, were
     dissatisfied perhaps both with the corruptions of Rome and those of
     the Reformation under Edward VI., and so took part with neither, but
     held a middle course, leaning first on the one side, then on the
     other? Such persons are not to be hastily blamed: unless indeed they
     put themselves in the office of leaders of the LORD'S host, for
     which they are not fitted; to the people, it was wont to be
     proclaimed in the wars of the Lord, "What man is fearful and faint
     hearted? let him go and return unto his house!" (Deut. xx. 8.)
     Stirring times must be times of fear.

     What, however, is to be blamed in Cranmer, is that one, from his own
     yieldingness unfitted for the task, should have undertaken so mighty
     a work as that of uniting the discordant elements of Protestantism
     in one Episcopal body. A splendid conception truly; but not to be
     encompassed by such an instrument! No great principles put forward;
     private and discordant opinions not repressed by an appeal to the
     agreement of Catholic antiquity, which had been the Anglican
     touchstone in Romish controversy; the peculiar advantages of the
     Anglican reformation abandoned; and instead thereof, a mere attempt
     at comprehension by the use of vague and indistinct terms, "which
     might be taken in a larger acceptation," but which, as Melanchthon
     saw, were but a source of increased contention to posterity.
     [Cranmer wished to unite the reformations of England, Germany,
     France, Geneva, and Zurich, i. e. the Fathers, Luther, Beza, Calvin,
     and Zuingli, in one. Melanchthon approved Cranmer's plan generally,
     "to publish a true and clear confession of the whole body of
     Christian doctrine, according to the judgment of learned men, whose
     names should be subscribed thereto. He thought this confession
     should be much of the nature of their confession at Augsburg; only
     that some few points in controversy might be in plainer words
     delivered, than was in that" (Ep. 66. L. 1. ap. Strype Cranmer, b 3.
     c. 24). This last admission is the more remarkable, in that it was
     the policy of his followers in Germany to render that Confession
     more ambiguous, so that it might comprehend persons yet more at
     variance with one another, instead of guiding them in one way. They
     went on, veiling differences of opinion under ambiguity of
     expression, until it proved their destruction. As people came to
     look upon Articles as a test, instead of a guide, they first
     sacrificed their primary use as "a confession of faith," and then
     dreaded their effects, for the very purpose to which they had turned
     them, and wished to relax them and make them more indefinite (thus
     destroying their use in teaching), for fear that, as tests, they
     should be too restricted. P. Martyr agreed with Melanchthon, but on
     the opposite, the Zuinglian, side; so that here, for this plan of
     union, there were already two opposed parties, wishing their own
     views to be fully and precisely expressed. This was impossible; but
     Bucer and Cranmer took a line equally impracticable, to conciliate
     parties by "using more dark and ambiguous forms of speech, that
     might be taken in a larger acceptation" (Strype, ib. p. 408). This
     was in 1548. Edward VIth's Articles (1552) which seem to have been
     carried through by the Archbishop in connection with the State, in
     conjunction perhaps with some selected Commission, but which were
     never submitted to the Church at large (Strype's Cranmer, 11, 27,
     34. Heylyn, p. 121)--these Articles are a fruit of this policy, and
     have two faces, one to be presented to those abroad, who could not
     as yet come up to the high doctrine; the other to be followed out at
     home, with reference to the teaching of the Church Catholic.
     Unhappily, but as was natural, they have been too often followed out
     into Zuinglianism, which they were intended to bring over to the
     Church. (On this negotiation with Melanchthon and Calvin, see
     Strype's Cranmer, b. 3, c. 24 and 25. Of Calvin's strong
     interference with our reformation, Heylyn speaks, p. 80, 107.)]
     Cranmer thus aggravated the difficulties of his own waveringness;
     and entailed upon himself trials, which God had not annexed to his
     office, fell into a snare and brought the elements of confusion into
     our Church. As also he began the design, not in unison with the
     Church, but in concert with foreigners or the state alone, so it
     seems to have continued it single-handed; the body of the clergy do
     not appear even to have been consulted about it; the other
     Commissioners were (although nothing is known certainly) very
     probably joined in this office of revision, but the majority
     unquestionably misliked it: as the scheme of comprehension was
     Cranmer's only, so the responsibility of veiling or lowering the
     doctrine is only his. And again, in the articles of Edward VI, of
     which he acknowledged himself the writer, and which were composed
     about the same time, there is, in those relating to the Sacraments,
     the like tendency to Zuinglianism, and the like use of ambiguous or
     inadequate expressions.

     Cranmer's views on the Sacrifice of the Eucharist must, of course,
     have been lowered by his intimacy with reformers, who had imbibed
     the Zuinglian errors. Yet even in the book, which betrays much
     Zuinglian language and illustration, and contains passages scarcely
     reconcileable with any sound doctrine on the Sacraments, (his
     "Defence of the true and Catholic doctrine of the Sacrament of the
     Body and Blood of our Saviour CHRIST, 1550") on the doctrine of the
     Sacrifice, he directs himself against statements either wholly
     Romish and erroneous, or which could most obviously be understood in
     a Romish sense, as though the priest sacrificed CHRIST, or the
     sacrifice benefited those who partook not of it, or as if there
     could be priest or sacrifice distinct from the priesthood or
     sacrifice of CHRIST, or (and that mainly) as if the sacrifice could
     be applied by the priest to whom he willed; on the other hand, there
     occur passages, which express so far at least the true doctrine,
     that the author could hardly have needed any further alteration of
     the Liturgy for his own sake.

     It is remarkable in this and many other instances how the respect
     for the old Fathers, which was characteristic of our Anglican
     church, upheld those, who had otherwise, in all likelihood, lapsed
     into Ultra-Protestantism. On the principles of our Church, they
     could not but defer to the authority of the "old primitive and
     apostolick Church," and so were checked, even after they had half
     adopted views at variance with them. An Ultra-Protestant would
     consistently reject the doctrine of the sacrifice, (as he would the
     rite of Infant Baptism) because there is no explicit authority for
     it in Holy Scripture, no statement of it totidem verbis; the
     Anglican Divine must receive it, as the doctrine of the Church
     Catholic, coinciding with hints of Holy Scripture. It is just in
     this way, through reference to the Fathers, that Cranmer retains his
     statement of the doctrine. "Therefore when the old fathers called
     the mass or supper of the Lord, a sacrifice, they meant that it was
     a sacrifice of lauds and thanksgiving, and so as well the people as
     the priest do sacrifice, or else that it was a remembrance
     [memorial] of the very true sacrifice propitiatory of Christ; but
     they meant in no wise that it is a very true sacrifice for sin, and
     applicable by the priest [at his pleasure] to the quick and dead.
     For the priest may well minister CHRIST'S words and sacraments to
     all men both good and bad, but he can apply the benefit of CHRIST'S
     passion to no man, being of age and discretion, but only to such as
     do, by their own faith, apply it to themselves," &c. [Defence of the
     Catholic Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.
     B. v. c. 16. t. 2. p. 461. ed. Jenkyns.]

     This was but two years before the unhappy change of the service in
     compliance with the Zuinglian view; and after this time it is not
     even supposed that Cranmer's views were further changed; and yet
     even thus late Cranmer thus speaks of the first service-book;
     "Thanks be to the eternal GOD, the manner of the Holy Communion,
     which is now set forth within this realm, is agreeable with the
     institution of Christ, with St. Paul, and the old primitive and
     Apostolic Church, with the right faith of the sacrifice of CHRIST
     upon the cross for our redemption, and with the true "doctrine of
     our salvation, justification, and remission of all our sins by that
     only sacrifice." [Ib. c. ult. p. 463.]

     Cranmer's views then were unchanged, even while with a false scheme
     of comprehension, he suppressed such as were too high for the
     foreign reformers; it was partial suppression, not falsification,
     which the English Church suffered. Even the Articles, although they
     naturally suffered most from this policy of Cranmer (in that they
     were to be the media of comprehension) and retain in parts the
     character so impressed upon them, still have sufficient indications
     of the true doctrine, and are upheld by the liturgy, which, as being
     mostly antient, could be less affected by the expedients of the
     times.

     In the liturgy, the most serious alterations affected, not the
     doctrine of the sacrifice, but the privileges of the communion,
     although, in order to understand the spirit in which they were made,
     it has been necessary to speak of the whole subject. For the
     abolition of words, which had expressed the doctrine of the whole
     Church, "The Body of our Lord JESUS CHRIST," &c. and the
     substitution of a lower formula, expressing only modern notions,
     went nigh to an apostacy and betrayal of the trust reposed in us as
     a Church.

     The suppressions in the article of the "sacrifice" were not entire;
     only it must be borne in mind, that much had been already
     suppressed, other parts expressed, according to Cranmer's policy,
     with perhaps a studied ambiguity, so that the land-marks of true
     doctrine were both diminished and obscured.

     The actual omissions were, 1st, That of the direction of the Rubric,
     that "the minister should take so much Bread and Wine, as shall
     suffice for the persons appointed to receive the Holy Communion,
     laying the Bread upon the corporas, or else in the paten, or in some
     other comely thing, prepared for that purpose: and putting the Wine
     into the chalice or else into some fair or convenient cup, prepared
     for that use (if the chalice will not serve), putting thereto a
     little pure and clean water; and setting both the bread and wine
     upon the Altar." This was the act of oblation. The very
     circumstantiality of these directions betokens men's reverence. The
     reformed liturgy gives directions how "the devotion (i. e. in their
     sense, alms) of the people should be collected, and that the due and
     accustomed offering should be paid to the Curate on offering days,"
     but leaves the bread and wine to be placed on the Altar any how, (as
     too many do now,) studiously omitting all mention of it. In the
     prayer for the Church militant, it is there inserted for the first
     time "to accept our alms" as if to exclude any other oblation. 2dly,
     The omission, throughout, of the word "Altar." This title is, in our
     first reformation, used as unhesitatingly as any other, and has its
     appropriate place: that, whereon the "commemorative sacrifice" is
     offered, is an "Altar" in respect of that sacrifice; but, in respect
     to those who communicate, it is "GOD'S table" or God's board, in
     that God invites us to feast on that sacrifice, to a heavenly feast
     at a table which He prepares for us in the wilderness; and
     accordingly, wherever, in our own reformation, the words "Lord's
     table" were used, it was in reference to our "coming thither;" "we
     do not presume to come to this Thy table," &c. but the bread and
     wine were said to be "set upon the Altar:" twice only it is said,
     "the priest standing at GOD'S board," the most frequent name is the
     "Altar." [It is used five times.] 3dly, All the beginning of the
     form of oblation was omitted, viz. "Wherefore, O Lord and heavenly
     Father, according to the institution of Thy dearly beloved Son our
     Saviour JESUS CHRIST, we, Thy humble servants, do celebrate and make
     here before Thy Divine Majesty, with these Thy holy gifts, the
     memorial which thy SON hath willed us to make; having in remembrance
     His blessed Passion, mighty Resurrection, and glorious Ascension,
     rendering unto Thee most hearty thanks for the innumerable benefits
     promised unto us by the same." The remainder, "entirely desiring,"
     &c. was placed (mutatis mutandis) after the delivery of the
     elements, and consequently when their presence could no longer
     sanction in any mind the idea of the actual offering up of CHRIST.

     Of these alterations, Bucer's criticism extends only to the words,
     "And command these our prayers and supplications, by the ministry of
     Thy holy Angels, to be brought up into Thy holy Tabernacle before
     the sight of Thy Divine Majesty, not weighing our merits," &c. On
     which he says, "It is clear enough that the authors of the book
     wished here somewhat to defer to the language received of old,
     wherein frequent mention is made of oblations and sacrifices."--"We
     know to what the Papists have distorted these words; so on that
     account only, they are to be avoided rather than imitated." [Opp.
     Anglic. p. 473.]

     Here, then, as in other parts of these criticisms by Bucer, we have
     the general principle avowed, (which Hooker so blessedly withstood,)
     that whatever has been abused by the Church of Rome should be
     avoided. It is not a little remarkable, that the very passage of the
     Roman Liturgy from which this prayer is taken, is an actual
     difficulty to the Romanists. [See Assem. Cod. Liturg. t. 4. p. 164.
     n. 4.] In the original the words are "jube haec preferri." The
     difficulty to the Romanist is, "What is meant by these things;" for,
     since this prayer is subsequent to the consecration, according to
     their error, the bread and wine must be then the essential Body and
     Blood of CHRIST; yet, "how shall the Body of CHRIST be conveyed to
     heaven, since it is always there!" asks St. Thomas. Yet if that
     which is on the altar, be not then the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     Transsubstantiation is overthrown. The Romanists, then, fell on the
     gloss, which the revisers of the Prayer Book adopted, that under
     "haec" were meant "prayers and supplications." But this, though less
     distinctly opposed to the Romish doctrine, than if the plain words
     of the antient Liturgy had been retained, still in no degree
     countenanced it. The consideration, however, of the objection of
     Bucer and his fellows, was part of Cranmer's plan; and so, whatever
     this criticism applied to, was altered.

     Once more, then, it must be observed, that there was no change of
     doctrine as to the Christian sacrifice, involved in the alterations
     and omissions made in Edward the Sixth's second book, but only a
     suppression and timidity as to their statement. This is expressly
     stated in the name of the English Church, in the Preamble to the Act
     of Parliament, which confirmed the altered form. It was there set
     forth, that, 1st, "There was nothing contained in the said first
     book, but what was agreeable to the Word of GOD, and the primitive
     Church, very comfortable to all good people, desiring to live in
     Christian conversation, and most profitable to the estate of this
     realm." 2dly. "That such doubts as had been raised, in the use and
     exercise thereof, proceeded rather from the curiosity of the
     minister and mistakers, than of any other worthy cause." [Ap.
     Heylin, p. 107, 8.]

     There is no speech here, about what moderns have been so fond of
     upholding, viz. the gradualness of the reformation; how the light
     burst not at once upon men, but was gradually restored to them; or
     rather, that they (for so it is spoken of) saw more clearly into the
     genius of Christianity, or into the errors of the faith in which
     they had been educated; and so that our first reformation was not
     enough reformed;--the very theory upon which Rationalism justified
     itself. Doubtless, persons who made their own insight into Holy
     Scripture the rule of their faith, would be exposed to this
     temptation of gradually unravelling the articles of their belief,
     dropping them one by one, until they had brought them down to what
     they thought a scriptural standard. For such persons, having no
     definite rule to go by, but their own frail judgment, must be
     exposed to the constant unsteadiness and waveringness to which
     private judgment must necessarily be subject. Such, blessed be GOD!
     was not the case with our Anglican Church. For, having seized hold
     of a fixed standard for scriptural interpretation and for doctrine,
     in this agreement of Catholic antiquity, she had no longer need to
     toss up and down in the fluctuations of human opinion, but was at
     once arrived in her haven. Felices nimium, sua si bona norint!
     Thrice happy, had she never, by compromise or foreign alliances,
     risked the blessings which the LORD her GOD had given her above all
     people!

     These and other changes, then, although happily without effect, were
     intended to unite us with bodies, from which the miserable history
     of the last eighty years more especially, has shewn it to be our
     privilege to be separate,--the foreign Protestants, with whom and
     whose theology we have never had any large commerce, without
     injuring our own, overlooking how the peculiarity of our reformation
     corresponded with the place assigned to us by GOD'S Providence, as
     an island-people, and both with GOD'S blessing; "This people shall
     dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations."

     This character of the change, whereof Cranmer was the instrument and
     furtherer, has much influence on the subsequent history of the
     doctrine. For when a change is introduced by one individual, or by a
     few, not in compliance with, but rather against the feelings of the
     body of the Church, it will work but slowly through the body.
     People, for a time, will continue their old habits of thought, and
     their doctrines and devotions, under the new form, as long, at
     least, as any witnesses of the old doctrine remain; as "Israel
     served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the
     elders that outlived Joshua," (Josh. xxiv. 31,) until perhaps that
     generation or the next have passed away; and then, perhaps, the
     tradition having nothing or but little outward to lean to, becomes
     gradually weaker, and at last lurks only here and there, in the
     caves of the earth, which are less exposed to the variations of the
     external atmosphere. They "hid themselves in caves, and in thickets,
     and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits," (1 Sam. xiii. 6,)
     where the Philistines, who overspread the open land, could not reach
     them.

     Thus, even after the alterations now introduced, as far as the old
     prayers and rites remained, they who had been accustomed to them
     before, would attach the same meaning to them now as then. Even
     Edward the Sixth's second service book would be a very different
     book, and bear very different meanings, in the hands and hearts of
     those who had been accustomed to the ancient worship, and to one who
     should take it up now, with ultra-Protestant notions. For instance,
     although all directions about placing the bread and wine upon the
     altar, or the act of oblation, were now omitted, they who had been
     accustomed so to regard it, would not cease at once to do as they
     had been wont; they would lay the elements upon the place appointed,
     with the same reverence as before; they would not at once (at least
     the right-minded among them) leave it to sextons or clerks; and,
     placing them there, they would do it with the same feelings as
     before, mentally offering them to Almighty GOD, on whose altar and
     before whom they placed them, and from whom they looked again to
     receive them. So again, a king's edict ordering the altars to be
     pulled down, and tables to be placed in their room, and their goodly
     decorations and vessels of silver and gold to be melted down or
     turned to common use, would not prevent those of constant mind from
     looking on the new board, (since it was still GOD'S board, and in
     GOD'S house,) and the single chalice which they were allowed to
     retain, as the altar of their GOD and its furniture. It was but as
     the "single ewe lamb" left, but still on that account, at first,
     prized the more. They would look on the lessened glories of this
     house with a reverent and respectful sorrow. 3. Then also, in the
     prayer of consecration, the preamble, which implied the sacrifice,
     still remained; for (as it was said) Cranmer's object was not to
     efface the doctrine, but to remove captious offence; this, then, was
     left as now; our LORD (it was said in prayer to GOD) "did institute
     and in His holy Gospel command us to continue a perpetual memory of
     that His precious Death, until His coming again." What followed upon
     this preface was now omitted; but they who had been accustomed to
     the antient form must have supplied it, viz. that we did as we were
     enjoined; as indeed even now, those who have well nigh lost the
     Church's doctrine, must, of course, (even if half unconsciously)
     mentally supply something of this kind; since we cannot rehearse our
     LORD'S direction "to make this memorial of Him," and not do what He
     bade us. Then also, for a time, the word "memory" would help to
     perpetuate the doctrine, as being the received word,--not, as many
     now use it, for "our own remembrance of His death," but--for the
     "making a public memorial or commemoration," which the Church, by
     the Priest, is directed to make: "Do this for a memorial of ME."
     Still more, at the time, the recent omission of the latter part of
     the prayer of consecration, manifestly could not affect the sense of
     the former which was retained; although when deprived of the light
     thrown upon it by the explicit statement in the latter part, the
     force of the preamble might gradually be obscured. 4. The same may
     be said with regard to the remaining indication of the doctrine of
     the sacrifice, that portion, namely, of the prayer of consecration,
     which has been transposed and placed after the actual communion: the
     sense must remain the same, although its meaning is less visible, on
     account of its being disconnected from the actual visible elements,
     (except so far as a portion of the consecrated elements still
     remains upon the altar) whence it is recorded, that Bishop Overall
     used it before the participation, as it was at first. And perhaps
     his so doing implies that it had always been so done in that portion
     of the Church, and the rubric not received in that Church as yet.
     However, whether before or after, the same prayer must have the same
     meaning; and so it still remained a portion of the oblation or
     sacrifice to GOD. It is also, probably, a remnant of the antient
     tradition, that the prayer of oblation, thus transposed, is even now
     universally ued, although the ancient thanksgiving after the
     Communion, "Almighty and ever-living GOD, we most heartily thank
     Thee," &c. is thus lost; our second reformation having only given us
     the choice which of the two we should use, not permitting both. In
     this state things remained during the reign of Queen Elizabeth: the
     revisers of the Service being then contented with the most essential
     restoration, that of the words accompanying the delivery of the
     Bread and Wine,--"The Body of our LORD JESUS CHRIST," &c. The
     doctrine of the Commemorative Sacrifice was committed rather to the
     faithfulness of individual Ministers, than to the explicit teaching
     of the Church. A decided step towards the recovery of the avowal of
     this truth, was gained after the Hampton Court Conference, at the
     beginning of the reign of James I. For then, there being no hope of
     gaining the Puritans, the Church avowed more fully some of her
     doctrines, in the Appendix to the Catechism on the Sacraments. Here,
     namely, was introduced, for this express purpose, the question, "Why
     was the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper ordained?" A person who
     should examine this Catechism with modern notions, would be
     surprised at the occurrence of this question at all, and especially
     at this place, in the Catechism. For the Catechism, he would
     observe, proceeds regularly, stating the number of the Sacraments,
     the meaning of the word, the parts therein, (first, the outward,
     then the inward,) then the requisites for partakers; and that this
     order is observed as to each Sacrament. Whence then is it, that
     before the mention of these two parts of the LORD'S Supper, and the
     requisites thereto, there is intercalated, as it were, this
     question? The benefits of our own actual communion are mentioned
     afterwards, as in the case of Baptism, in a distinct answer, viz.
     "the strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the Body and Blood
     of CHRIST." They who confound the public act of the holy Eucharist
     with its benefits to the souls of individual believers,--the
     Sacrifice with the Communion,--must needs think this question out of
     place; and so, by their very perplexity, shew that the construction
     which they put upon the words is wrong. Besides this, the opinion of
     the writer of this part of our Catechism, Bishop Overall, is well
     known. The meaning of the answer, "For a continual remembrance" (i.
     e. continually to make a memorial, dyayuvijirie) "of the Sacrifice
     of the Death of CHRIST, and of the benefits which we receive
     thereby," was then obvious. It was herein declared that the holy
     Eucharist, besides being a sacrament, was for the continual setting
     forth of the Sacrifice of the Death of CHRIST; or, in the language
     of the old Church, "a sacrifice commemorative of the Sacrifice." The
     Catechism and the prayer of Consecration throw mutual light upon
     each other, and belong to the same system; and Convocation, by
     sanctioning this part of the Catechism, restored to our Church the
     formal recognition of the doctrine of the Eucharistic Sacrifice.

     After the close of the great rebellion, this recognition was again
     brought into the Liturgy itself, although with a gentle hand. The
     Savoy Conference had shown the hopelessness of gaining the
     Ultra-Protestant party by any concession which could be made. The
     Church, therefore, seemed the freer to act with reference only to
     herself. Accordingly a rubric, which had remained expunged since the
     adoption of Edward the Sixth's second bookj was restored; and it was
     enjoined that "when there is a communion, the Priest shall then" (i.
     e. after he has placed the alms upon the holy table) "place upon the
     Table so much Bread and Wine as he shall think convenient." Thus the
     antient act of the irpoixpapa or oblation was formally directed to
     be made. And to mark the meaning of the act the rather, then, for
     the first time, after the words "to receive these our alms" was
     added, "and oblations," in the same order as each had been presented
     on the altar; first, "the alms," then "the oblations." And these are
     distinguished from each other in the marginal rubric, which says,
     "if there be no alms or oblations," &c. i. e. if there be neither
     collections for the poor, nor elements offered to ALMIGHTY GOD (for
     the collections were made each Lord's day, adhering so far to the
     Apostolic custom even when there was no Communion, and consequently
     no oblations or offerings). Moreover, the word oblation is the
     received word for this peculiar offering or sacrifice to ALMIGHTY
     GOD.

     This was the last restoration, and such as our branch of the
     Anglican Church was then fixed, it still in theory remains. The
     chain of witnesses was kept up in the Church; and we at this day
     have sufficient evidence both to maintain the character of our whole
     Church, as not having altogether in this respect departed from the
     primitive model, and for our own guidance in following that model in
     this most aweful part of our devotions. Two other changes, however,
     ought to be mentioned, which took place in other branches of the
     Anglican Church, the Scotch and American; the one as having been
     designed ultimately to influence our own Church, had the miserable
     violence of the times permitted, and doubtless having tacitly done
     so; that of the American (as a daughter Church) indicating the then
     state of doctrine among us. The revisers of the Scotch Liturgy (for
     they were Scottish Divines, and it may be called a revision, since
     the first Reformers of Scotland adopted the English Liturgy [Preface
     to Scotch Common Prayer-book. 1637.]) went back in most things to
     that their first Liturgy, and so restored the doctrine of the
     Communion and Sacrifice according to our genuine English
     Reformation. The invocation of the Blessed Trinity to sanctify the
     elements, was restored, verbatim, out of Edward the Sixth's Liturgy,
     as was the subsequent prayer, now called distinctly the "memorial or
     prayer of oblation;" except that the words, "and sacrifice," were
     added after "a perpetual memory of that His precious death," and
     those "command these our prayers and supplications, by the ministry
     of Thy holy Angels," &c. were omitted. The prayer of oblation was of
     course restored to its original place before the Communion, whereby
     the thanksgiving after the Communion came again into use. The
     antient words used at the delivery of the Elements were also
     restored, to the exclusion of the later addition of the Zuinglian
     school. Other lesser alterations were made tending to the same end.
     Sentences from Holy Scripture were introduced into the offertory,
     having reference to oblations made to GOD under the old law, and to
     the sacrifice of Abel (referred to in some antient liturgies); the
     Presbyter was directed to "offer up and place the bread and wine
     prepared for the sacrament upon the LORD'S table;" the table itself
     was (besides "a carpet and fine white linen cloth") to have "other
     decent furniture meet for the high mysteries there to be
     celebrated," and the Collect for the inspiration of GOD'S Holy
     Spirit was said to be "for due preparation;" things slight in
     themselves, but still tending to inspire more reverence into men's
     minds, or to obtain it from GOD.

     We find, accordingly, that both the Puritan party and the Church in
     England, had their eyes turned to this restored service-book,
     although it was to Scotland that it was restored. The feelings of
     the Puritans may be judged of from the title of a work written by a
     Scotchman, but published in England, wherein the reformed Liturgy
     was paralleled with the Mass-book, and it was contended that no
     abomination of the Romish mass could be refused by those who
     embraced it. [The title is "A parallel or brief comparison of the
     Liturgy with the Mass-Book, the Breviary, the Ceremonial, and other
     Romish Rituals. Wherein is clearly and shortly demonstrated, not
     only that the Liturgy is taken for the most part word by word out of
     these Anti-Christian writs; but also that not one of the most
     abominable passages of the Mass can in reason be refused by any who
     cordially embrace the Liturgy as now it stands and is commented by
     the prime of our Clergy. All made good from the testimonies of the
     most famous and learned Liturgic writers both Romish and English."
     By R. B. K. [Robert Bailie, a well-known controversialist of the
     day.] London. 1641. The work is done with care and pains. "Had not
     that Hydra of the Scottish Liturgy," say the authors of the
     [English] "Common Prayer-Book unmasked," "lost all the heads and had
     the brains dashed against the stones, they made no question but that
     all the power of head and tail should have room enough to domineer
     in England. But, blessed be GOD, who brake the head of that young
     Dragon in our neighbour nation, and we hope will by you [the
     Parliament] crush out all the blood of the old one here [the English
     Liturgy], who was the mother of that, and the Mass-book the mother
     of both." p. 3.] The writer was one of those who held that "the far
     most part, if not simply all, the godly of the Isle, are longing
     with great expectation, and greater desires to see that instrument
     (the English Liturgy), after all the evil they have suffered by it,
     to be broken in pieces," and to whom it sufficed for its
     condemnation that any of the sentences, yea, that the very prayer of
     our LORD, should occupy the same position as in the antient, though
     corrupted, Liturgy of Rome. [Preface to Parallel, p. 7.] These are
     not the excesses of an individual, but the characteristics of a
     body, and of a portion of the age. And so, in like way, one may look
     upon the Scotch Liturgy as expressing the sentiments of the Church
     in that age, although not as yet ventured upon the nation which
     shortly after fell into hands which persecuted the Church, and
     proscribed the Liturgy. It was in truth the English Liturgy which
     was thus attacked under the name of the Scotch. It is meantime a
     singular confession, which herein occurs (such as is now made for
     the baptismal service), that it was only by "a benign interpretation
     that many passages could be drawn to a Protestant [an
     ultra-Protestant] sense." The Scotch Liturgy fixed that sense; and
     it was a decided gain for primitive doctrine, that that sense was
     somewhere, even though for one branch only of the Anglican Church,
     now authoritatively determined. The sense of the English Church was
     carried out, where it might be; and so her sons might the more take
     courage that that exposition was the right one. The Church in
     Scotland, although soon cast out, and in later times hunted up and
     down on the mountains, was still a standing memorial of the meaning
     of that in England, and had its influence even in times when one
     should have little expected it, as in those of Bishop Horsley. The
     Liturgy "drawn up by Bishop Taylor for the English Royalists, when
     Parliament forbade the use of that provided by the Church," that of
     the Non-Jurors, and finally that of our daughter-Church in America,
     may be regarded as the result of the same spirit, which produced
     this courageous, although ill-received avowal of the truth; and this
     facilitated doubtless the partial restoration, which, though less
     fully expressed, still fixed the meaning of the English Liturgy.

     The effects of the restoration in the American Liturgy are mostly
     perhaps yet future; but no fearless avowal of truth by any Church
     can be without its effect on that Church, and others related to it.
     For the time, the parent has delivered over to her daughter, to
     bring out into open day, the treasure which she was obliged as yet
     to keep half-concealed. The American Liturgy embodied, it may be
     concluded, the doctrine of the whole Anglican Church (had she been
     at liberty to express it) in her form of oblation taken from the
     then Scotch Liturgy. "We Thy humble servants do celebrate and make
     here, before Thy Divine Majesty, with these Thy holy gifts, which we
     now offer before Thee, the memorial Thy Son hath commanded us to
     make, having in remembrance," &c.

     A doctrine, however, left so long to tradition and sustained by mere
     hints in the service itself, could not but lose ground in the mass
     of the Church, especially in the remarkable circumstances of our
     Church, placed as the single guardian of Catholic truth of the West,
     and so deriving no support from without, but the contrary; and it
     may be, that it lost much in the very period which preceded its
     formal restoration, the unhappy confusion of the Rebellion, in which
     so much besides of instructive traditionary rite perished; as, on
     the other hand, no formal restoration can be of any avail, if the
     vividness of the belief be waxing fainter. The violent convulsion of
     1688, and the subsequent ingratitude of the State, casting out some
     of our best bishops, who had most resisted Popish tyranny, and 400
     of our Clergy, introduced a new character into the Church. During
     the following age, the doctrine of the Eucharistic sacrifice mostly
     found refuge among the Non-Jurors and our brethren of the Scotch
     Church. Bad however as were the times which followed for the English
     Church, in which she had to contend "pro aris et focis," for the
     holiest truths of the faith, and was corrupted from high places,
     lest she should be too powerful, and those who would defend her,
     again lost sight of the source of her great strength, and grasped to
     the right hand and to the left, again to foreign help, to the
     Calvinistic or Arminian divines of Holland, Witsius, or Grotius, or
     Episcopius--they could not probably have been so much affected by
     external circumstances, had not the evil times of the Great
     Rebellion, while they purified the few, injured the many. So far,
     however, from looking to any fuller restoration of doctrine of any
     sort, in the track of the Restorers of the 17th century, it was by
     the great mercy of GOD that they who stood in the breach, preserved
     any doctrine at all.

     The history of the doctrine of the "Commemorative Sacrifice" is
     however in this way a warning. Satisfactory as is the "chain of
     witnesses" in the Church, still it must be admitted, that the number
     of those who retained this doctrine, over the whole face of the
     Church, was very possibly by no means so great as in the case of
     doctrines more definitely announced.

     The chain of witnesses for the doctrine of the "Eucharistic
     sacrifice" is as large and venerable as that e. g. for "baptismal
     regeneration." [See Catena, No. 2--Tracts for the Times, No. 76]
     Still it is certain that it had not such deep root as those
     doctrines more prominently expressed in our Liturgy; as one may
     judge from the relative degree in which the two doctrines are
     apparently held in this day. They both had the same opponents--those
     educated in the Zuingli-Calvinist school, but the one has been
     uniformly the recognized doctrine of our Church, and held, until
     these latter days, by almost all her members, and is still probably
     the prevailing belief; and they who hold it not, are necessarily to
     a degree uncomfortable about their departure from the plain meaning
     of the Church services, and are obliged to feel about for excuses to
     themselves for so doing; and the very contradictoriness of their
     explanations, and their necessary unsatisfactoriness, opens the way
     of return to the more candid of them, whenever Catholic truth is set
     in its fulness before them. The other is held probably by far more
     than we deem, but still out of sight as it were, in the secret
     sanctuary of men's hearts, and is not handed down in any very
     distinct and authoritative way. People are under no uneasiness for
     not holding it; it is enough for them that it is not sufficiently
     explained, for them without pains to understand it; and so those who
     will not be at any pains, think they may the more readily dispense
     with thinking about it, or deny its existence. It is as a stranger
     and wayfarer in the Church, which was once its home, and brings with
     it indeed the blessing of receiving strangers, "whereby some have
     entertained angels unawares." The mere holding of a doctrine may
     suffice for the existence of a Church, but not for the well-being,
     whether of a Church or an individual, unless, when occasion
     requires, it be avowed distinctly and courageously. Suppression of
     the truth may become equivalent to, and in a favoured Church,
     involve the penalty of disavowal or apostasy. Had e. g, the
     proposals in the last century to remove the Athanasian Creed been
     acceded to, our Church might now very probably have become Sabellian
     or Socinian. While then we gather up thankfully the "fragments which
     remain," and praise GOD that He so restrained the minds of the
     Bishops and Pastors of His flock, that while abandoning the public
     expression of this doctrine, they still hid, as it were in the
     temple, this good deposit, where they who seek might find it, the
     history of this doctrine may be a warning to us. Had, for instance,
     as was proposed, those parts of the Baptismal service, which most
     distinctly confess the doctrine of Baptismal regeneration, been, on
     some plea of charity, erased, we may, in the fate of the one
     doctrine, read what would have been that of the other--cherished by
     the few, who trod faithfully in the old paths, declaimed against by
     the more vehement, and forgotten by the many. With regard to the
     writers, whose belief on this subject has been preserved, not a
     little perplexity may be caused to a superficial observer by the
     ambiguity of the language, and the variety of senses in which the
     terms are used. Thus, the words "sacrifice," "proper sacrifice,"
     "real and true sacrifice," and even "propitiatory or expiatory
     sacrifice," will be severally used in a good or a bad sense by the
     several writers, the one understanding thereby the Romish error, the
     other, the Catholic truth; and so, meaning the same thing, they will
     yet maintain or censure, as it may be, the same words. Thus the
     writer of one of our Homilies uses the simple word "sacrifice" in
     the Popish sense, and employs that of "the memory" for what
     antiently was designated by "sacrifice." He says in popular
     language, alluding throughout to Romish errors, "we must then take
     heed lest of the memory, it be made a sacrifice; lest of a communion
     it be made a "private eating; lest of two parts we have but one;
     lest applying it for the dead, we lose the fruit that be alive."
     [Homily concerning the Sacrament, pt. 1.] And yet a French writer
     quotes this very homily, as an instance in which the writers of our
     Church maintain the old Catholic doctrine of the sacrifice. And
     rightly; since this author separates "the memory," or commemoration,
     from the "Communion," and so means thereby something distinct from
     this; then his "memory" is the anamnhsiV of antiquity. Again, the
     same French writer observes, that "Jewell, Bishop of Salisbury, is,
     of the first writers of the Reformation, one of the most opposed to
     the [Roman] Catholics, and who has spoken as much and as loudly as
     any one, both against the mass and the sacrifice. [Courayer, Défense
     de la Dissert, sur la Validité des Ordinations Anglaises, L. 4, c.
     6. He quotes a free translation, "which brings out the meaning of
     the passage, "cavendum, ne sacrificium commemorationis convertat in
     sacrificium proprium et materiale."] But when he explains himself,
     he admits all which we [the Gallican Church?] admit ourselves. He
     throughout holds a mystical offering and sacrifice of CHRIST. 'As2
     CHRIST was slain at the Table, so was He sacrificed at the Table.
     But He was not slain at the Table verily and indeed, but only in a
     mystery: therefore he was not sacrificed at the Table really and
     indeed, but only in a mystery.' [Reply to Harding, Art. 17. div. 6.
     p. 417. Bishop Jewell is here answering Harding's proof of the real,
     substantial, sacrifice of CHRIST in the Eucharist, drawn from His
     own sacrifice of Himself at His Supper. The preceding words in
     Bishop Jewell are, "We deny not but it may well be said, Christ at
     His last supper offered up Himself unto His Father; albeit, not
     really and indeed, but, according to M. Harding's own distinction,
     in a figure or in a mystery; in such sort, as we say, CHRIST was
     offered in the sacrifices of the old law: and as St. John says, The
     Lamb was slain from the beginning of the world. As CHRIST was
     slain," &c. The meaning is the same, for as that first "offering of
     Himself to His Father" is understood, so will be the oblation of the
     Eucharist.] 'The sacrifice [after the order of Melchisedek] which is
     the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, is only JESUS
     CHRIST the Son of GOD upon the Cross. And the ministration of the
     holy Mysteries, in a phrase or manner of speech, is also the same
     sacrifice, because it layeth forth the death and blood of CHRIST so
     plainly and so evidently before our eyes.' [Ib. div. 10. p. 422.]
     'We offer4 up CHRIST, i. e. an example, a commemoration, a
     remembrance of the Death of CHRIST. [ib. div. 12, p. 424. This is
     Bishop Jewell's comment on the passage of St. Chrysostom in Ep. ad
     Hebr. Hom. 17. adduced by Harding.] This kind of sacrifice was never
     denied. [Bishop Jewell, to the words, "This kind of sacrifice was
     never denied," subjoins, "but M. Harding's real sacrifice was never
     yet proved."] What then does he deny? That JESUS CHRIST was really
     sacrificed, that he offers anew His own life, and again sheds His
     own blood, as Harding very ill expresses himself, [Ap. Jewell, 146
     [1. c. p. 417.]] that 'CHRIST sacrificed Himself at two sundry
     times, and that He twice really shed His blood, first at the Table,
     and afterwards upon the Cross.' This it was which Jewell combated,
     this the doctrine which he attributed to the [Roman] Catholics, and
     which the inaccuracy of Harding gave him occasion to attack. In
     truth, all his answers to the arguments and authorities adduced by
     his opponent, come to this; viz, that they do not prove that JESUS
     CHRIST was really sacrificed, and that consequently there is no
     sacrifice (doubtless in the sense in which he supposed the [Roman]
     Catholics to hold it). M. Harding's real sacrifice was never yet
     proved.' "

     "It is thus that he answers the passage of St. Cyprian, that of the
     supposed Areopagite, those of St. Irenaeus and St. Ambrose and
     others; which Harding had paraded in his work. ' The place of St.
     Cyprian [P. 149 [422.]] [as it] not once toucheth the real
     sacrificing of CHRIST unto His Father,' &c.--'Here Dionysius [P. 147
     [419. Bishop Jewell had just before said, "Dionysius hath no token
     or inkling of any sacrificing of the Son of GOD unto His Father. But
     clearly and in most plain wise, he sheweth the difference that is
     between the sacrifice of the Cross, and the sacrifice of the Holy
     Communion." Such a sacrifice then Bishop Jewell believed.]] calleth
     not the ministration of the holy Mysteries the sacrificing of CHRIST
     unto His Father, [as M. Harding would force us to believe, but a
     figurative sacrifice, that is, a figure or a sign of that great
     sacrifice]'--'That Irenaeus [P. 148 [424. Bishop Jewell begins the
     paragraph, "Here, at last, M. Harding has found out the name of a
     sacrifice, that was not denied him. But the sacrifice, that he hath
     so long sought for, and hath so assuredly promised to find, hitherto
     he hath not found. For Irenaeus not once nameth the Mass, nor this
     real oblation of the Son of GOD unto His Father."]] meant not any
     such real sacrifice of the Son of GOD, nor may not in any wise so be
     taken, it is evident by the plain words that follow, touching the
     same.'--'Even so, St. Ambrose saith, CHRIST is offered here in the
     earth (not really and indeed, as M. Harding saith, but) in like sort
     and sense as St. John saith, 'The Lamb was slain from the beginning
     of the world, that is, not substantially or in real manner, but in
     signification in mystery and in a figure.' Read through all that
     this author says "on the subject, and you will find that it comes
     back to these two points, 1st, That JESUS CHRIST does not really
     offer Himself in the Eucharist. 2d, That there is no 'proper
     sacrifice [The term of the Council of Trent] where there is no real
     immolation. On the first of these, which is that which Jewell
     attacks, we are agreed. The second comes to a mere question of
     names, i. e. whether one ought to give the name of "proper
     sacrifice" to an action wherein there is no real immolation. All
     antiquity decides in favour of the [Roman] Catholic Church. But of
     what use to the acknowledgment of the doctrine is a dispute about
     the word sacrifice, which these authors will only give to a real and
     actual immolation, when they confess that the death of JESUS CHRIST
     is represented in the Eucharist, that a continual memorial is there
     made of Him, and that there is therein a mystical oblation of His
     sacrifice, which applies its benefits to us. 'We offer up CHRIST, i.
     e. an example, a commemoration, a remembrance of the death of
     CHRIST.' It is not then our doctrine which he attacks, but an
     imaginary sacrifice which we do not admit, and which yet is the only
     one that he imputes to us. 'Therefore this new article of faith, of
     the real sacrificing and shedding of CHRIST'S Blood at the Table,
     neither being true in itself, nor hitherto by M. Harding, nor any
     way proved--to say, that any mortal man hath power and authority,
     really and indeed to sacrifice the Son of GOD, it is a manifest and
     wicked blasphemy." [P. 144 [p. 414,5.]]

     With Courayer's endeavours to extricate himself and his Church from
     the decrees of the Council of Trent, which fixed this language, we
     have nothing to do: certainly, the language of the Council on the
     Sacrifice, is in itself capable of a good interpretation, were it
     not that terms employed in it must be explained with reference to
     that Church's acknowledged doctrines of Transsubstantiation and
     Purgatory. And THE DOCTRINE OF THE SACRIFICE CANNOT BE THE SAME,
     WHERE TRANSSUBSTANTIATION is HELD AND WHERE IT IS NOT. This long
     extract, however, may be of much use in setting vividly before the
     mind, not merely the opinions of Bishop Jewell, but whereon the
     controversy really turned, viz. on the doctrine of
     Transsubstantiation. And it is the difficulty of fixing language,
     with regard to this or any point, which creates the difficulty; if
     e. g. by "true and proper sacrifice" the Tridentine decree means an
     actual immolation of the real and substantial Body and Blood of
     CHRIST," an Anglican must reject it; if, on the other hand, it could
     have meant only "a real oblation, commemorative of the One Sacrifice
     of our LORD, and pleading and applying its merits," the phrase in
     itself would have nothing objectionable: in a word, if "true and
     proper" means "physical, corporeal, substantial," i. e. implies
     "Transsubstantiation," we reject it; if it were opposed only to any
     ultra-Protestant notion of "figurative" (as opposed to "true"),
     "unreal," "in a figure of speech," and the like, it may have a good
     sense, and serve to uphold sound doctrine.

     In like manner, Cranmer, although he did not come up to the old
     Catholic Fathers in his statement of the truth, yet addressed his
     mind to the word "propitiatory," in itself objectionable, as
     probably conveying popularly the notion of an intrinsic merit and
     value in propitiating the Father. "The greatest blasphemy and injury
     that can be against CHRIST, and yet universally used through the
     Popish kingdom, is this, that the Priests make their mass a service
     propitiatory, to remit the sins as well of themselves as of others,
     both quick and dead, to whom they list to apply the same. Thus,
     under pretence of holiness, the papistical priests have taken upon
     them to be CHRIST'S successors, and to make such an oblation and
     sacrifice as never creature made but CHRIST alone, neither He made
     the same any more times than once, and that was by His death upon
     the Cross." [Defence, &c. b. 5. c. 1. t. 2. p. 447. ed. Jenkyns.]
     Yet, as we saw above, he held in some sense the doctrine, and in one
     place, even in a later work, he parallels [Defence &c. b. 5. c. 5.
     p. 451.] the sacraments with the sacrifices of the old Law, which
     implies altogether the high view, and is the language of the
     Fathers. "The true reconciliation and forgiveness of sin before GOD
     neither the fathers of the old Law, nor we yet have, but only in the
     sacrifice of CHRIST, made in the mount of Calvary. And the
     sacrifices of the old Law mere prognostications and figures of the
     same then to come, as our sacraments be figures and demonstrations
     of the same now passed." He contends throughout against the Romish
     sacrifice, and though (as happens to people in controversy,
     especially when under the influence of the class to whom he
     listened) he even appears to lower the true view for fear of
     approximating to the Romish error, still it is apparent to the
     attentive, that even in his controversy he has regard to this only.
     Thus in answer to Gardiner, who quoted the phrase, aqutwV quesqai,
     as applied to the sacrifice of the Eucharist, he says, "In saying
     that CHRIST is sacrificed of the priest not like a sacrifice, or
     after the manner of a sacrifice, the Council in these words
     signified a difference between the sacrifice of the priest and the
     sacrifice of CHRIST, Which upon the Cross offered Himself to be
     sacrificed after the manner of a very sacrifice, that is to say,
     unto death, for the sins of the world. CHRIST made a bloody
     sacrifice, which took away sin; the priests with the Church make a
     commemoration thereof with lauds and thanksgiving, offering also
     themselves obedient to GOD unto death. And yet this our sacrifice
     taketh not away "our sins, nor is not accepted but by His
     sacrifice." Wherein Cranmer expresses himself as strongly as need be
     wished, especially in that he distinguishes the "sacrifice" as a
     "memorial," from the "oblation of ourselves." [Answer, &c. b. 5. t.
     3. p. 534.] And again, upon the very word "propitiatory." "You speak
     according to the Papists, that the priests in their masses make a
     sacrifice propitiatory. [Ibid. p. 544.] I call a sacrifice
     propitiatory, according to the Scripture, such a sacrifice as
     pacifieth GOD'S indignation against us, obtaining mercy and
     forgiveness of all our sins, and is our ransom and redemption from
     everlasting damnation. And, on the other side, I call a sacrifice
     'gratificatory,' or the sacrifice of the Church, such a sacrifice as
     doth not reconcile us to GOD, but is made of them that be
     reconciled, to testify their duties, and to show themselves thankful
     unto Him. And these sacrifices in Scripture be not called
     propitiatory, but sacrifices of justice [righteousness], of laud,
     praise, and thanksgiving. But you confound the words, and call one
     by another's name, calling that propitiatory which the Scripture
     calleth but of justice, laud, and thanking. And all is nothing else
     but to defend your propitiatory sacrifice of the priests in their
     masses, whereby they may remit sin, and redeem souls out of
     purgatory."

     In like manner, Ridley, in answering the Romish corruption of the
     doctrine, sets himself entirely to oppose such statements of the
     doctrine as would any way interfere with the one sacrifice of the
     Cross, or ascribe to the commemorative sacrifice any intrinsic
     merit, and objects to the word "propitiable," only if it involved
     that meaning. The proposition which he opposed was: "In the mass is
     the lively sacrifice of the Church, propitiable and available for
     the sins as well of quick as of the dead." "I answer," he says,
     "that being taken in such sense as the words seem to import, it is
     not only erroneous, but withal so much to the derogation and
     defacing of the Death and Passion of CHRIST, that I judge it may and
     ought most worthily to be counted wicked and blasphemous against the
     most precious blood of our Saviour CHRIST. Concerning the Romish
     Mass which is used at this day, or the lively sacrifice thereof
     propitiatory and available for the sins of the quick and the dead,
     the Holy Scripture hath not so much as one syllable.--Touching these
     words, 'the lively Sacrifice of CHRIST,' there is doubt whether they
     are to be understood figuratively and sacramentally for the
     Sacrament of the lively Sacrifice (after which sort we deny it not
     to be in the Lord's Supper), or properly and without any figure; of
     the which manner there was but one only sacrifice, and that once
     offered, namely, on the Cross. There is also a doubt in the word
     'propitiable,' whether it signify here that which taketh away sin,
     or that which may be made available for the taking away of sin; that
     is to say, whether it is to be taken in the active or in the passive
     signification. Now the falseness of the Proposition, after the
     meaning of the Schoolmen and the Romish Church, and impiety in that
     sense, which the words seem to import, is this; that they, leaning
     to the foundation of their fond Transubstantiation, would make the
     quick and lively body of CHRIST'S flesh (united and knit to the
     Divinity) to lie hid under the accidents and outward show of Bread
     and Wine. Which is very false, as I have said before; and they,
     building upon this foundation, do hold that the same body is offered
     unto GOD, by the priest in his daily massings, to put away the sins
     of the quick and the dead; whereas by the Apostle to the Hebrews it
     is evident that there is but one Oblation, and one true and lively
     Sacrifice of the Church offered upon the Altar of the Cross, which
     was, is, and shall be for ever, the propitiation for the sins of the
     whole world, and where there is remission of the same, there is,
     saith the Apostle, no more offering for sin.--In the Mass the
     Passion of CHRIST is not in verity, but in a mystery representing
     the same; yea even there when the Lord's Supper is duly ministered.
     But where CHRIST suffereth not, there is He not offered in verity;
     for the Apostle saith, Not that He might offer up Himself oftentimes
     (for then must He have suffered oftentimes since the beginning of
     the world). Now when CHRIST is not offered, there is no propitiatory
     sacrifice. Ergo. In the Mass there is no Propitiatory Sacrifice. For
     CHRIST, &c. Heb. ix. 28.--I know that all these places of the
     Scripture are avoided by two manner of subtle shifts; the one is, by
     the distinction of the bloody and unbloody Sacrifice; as though our
     unbloody Sacrifice of the Church were any other than the Sacrifice
     of Praise and Thanksgiving, than a commemoration, a showing forth,
     and a Sacramental Representation of that one only bloody Sacrifice,
     offered up once for all. The other is, by depraving and wresting the
     sayings of the ancient Fathers unto such a strange kind of sense, as
     the Fathers themselves indeed never meant. For what the meaning of
     the Fathers was, is evident by that which St. Augustine writeth in
     his Epistle to Boniface, and in the 83rd Chapter of his Ninth Book
     against Faustus the Manichee, besides many other places; likewise by
     Eusebius Emissenus, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Fulgentius, Bertram, and
     others who do wholly concord and agree together in this unity in the
     LORD, that the Redemption, once made in Verity for the Salvation of
     Man, continued in full effect for ever, and worketh without ceasing
     unto the end of the world; that the Sacrifice once offered cannot be
     consumed; that the LORD'S Death and Passion is as effectual, the
     virtue of that Blood once shed, as fresh at this day, for the
     washing away of sins, as it was, even the same day that it flowed
     out of the blessed side of our SAVIOUR: and finally, that the whole
     substance of our Sacrifice, which is frequented of the Church in the
     Lord's Supper, consisteth in Prayers, Praise, and giving of Thanks,
     and in remembering, and in showing forth of that Sacrifice once
     offered upon the Altar of the Cross; that the same might continually
     be had in reverence by Mystery, which once only and no more, was
     offered for the Price of our Redemption." [Answer to the three
     propositions proposed to him in the disputation at Oxford, April 12,
     1554. Prop. 3]

     The doctrine itself the Romanists certainly did confound, but the
     word "propitiatory" was afterwards adopted in no other sense than
     Cranmer above calls "gratificatory" (a word as foreign to Scripture
     as "propitiatory") sc. "such a sacrifice as doth not reconcile us to
     GOD, but is made of them as be reconciled." And they adopted it as
     expressing more accurately that we approach GOD herein, not simply
     with something of our own, our "prayers and thanksgivings," but with
     something altogether out of ourselves, and which "He has provided"
     for us, even the memorials of the Blessed Death and Passion of His
     SON. So that a learned man [Waterland, Doctrine of the Eucharist, c.
     xii. t. 7, p. 344, 5. Ed. Van Mildert.], not from his own habits of
     mind or those of his day disposed to any high doctrine of the
     Sacrifice, yet says (on this very word) speaking of a moderate and
     learned Lutheran Divine, "He allows that the antients, by oblation
     and sacrifice meant more than prayer, and that it is even ludicrous
     to pretend the contrary. He acknowledges that they speak of an
     oblation of Bread and Wine, and that the Eucharist is a sacrifice of
     praise, and propitiatory also in a sober qualified sense." "In
     short, he seems," adds Waterland, "almost to yield up every thing
     which Dr. Grabe had contended for, except only the point of a proper
     or material sacrifice; and he looked upon that as resolving at
     length into a kind of logomachy, a difference in words or names
     arising chiefly from the difficulty of determining what a
     'sacrifice' properly means, and from the almost insuperable
     perplexities among learned men, about the ascertaining any precise
     definition of it." "I am persuaded," he lastly sums up, "there is a
     good deal of truth in what that learned gentleman has said, and that
     a great part of the debate, so warmly carried on a few years ago,
     was more about names than things." [Pfaffius, Diss. de Oblatione
     Vet. Eucliaristica, Irenjei Fragm. Anecdot. subjecta, p. 211. He
     says, "The Council of Trent maintains that the sacrifice of the
     Eucharist is propitiatory, and that this is to be believed under
     pain of anathema, which yet is not said in the Service, which does
     not call the Holy Supper a 'sacrifice,' much less 'a propitiatory'
     one. Still the Tridentine Fathers, while they call the sacrifice of
     the Mass 'propitiatory,' distinguish it from the sacrifice of the
     Body of CHRIST upon the Cross. For through the sacrifice of the
     Cross, propitiation was so perfectly obtained for man, that nothing
     can be added to the price of our redemption, as being infinite (Heb.
     ix. 11, seq. x. 1, seq. 1 John i. 2). If then the propitiation has
     been acquired by the sacrifice of the Cross, it is not acquired or
     obtained afresh by the Eucharistic sacrifice, unless you take
     obtained in the sense of applied. Whence it appears, how ambiguous
     that word 'propitiatory' is, in that it may be taken as well for the
     'acquiring and obtaining' as for the 'applying' of the one and the
     same thing, and so opens the door to numberless strifes of words.
     For if you say that the Eucharist applies to the faithful the
     propitiation made by the sacrifice of the Cross, no Protestant will
     dispute this. But if you believe that the devotion of the Eucharist
     acquires and obtains propitiation, you may be saying what is perhaps
     at variance from the opinion of the Romish Church. For the Council
     of Trent (sess. 6. c. 1.) calls the Mass 'a peculiar sacrifice,
     whereby CHRIST in the Last Supper presented to God the Father His
     own Body and Blood under the forms of bread and wine, and whereby
     that bloody sacrifice finished upon the Cross is represented, and
     its salutary efficacy is applied to the remission of our daily
     trespasses.' But if this be their meaning, they seem to have
     anathematized the Protestants, on account of an ambiguous term,
     which these do not admit. For these hold the substance while they
     reject the word."]

     So now we have, in these few instances, the words "sacrifice,"
     "proper," or "propitiatory sacrifice," taken in a good or bad sense,
     or the question looked upon as a mere question of words; so
     necessary is it to regard, not what words a person uses, but in what
     sense he uses them, else even the same person might be looked upon
     as a Papist and an Ultra-Protestant, which were absurd. In our
     perplexity on this subject, we may be the more thankful that GOD
     guided the Church Catholic to fix the language on the most essential
     articles of faith.

     There is yet another opinion, which must be mentioned, as being a
     modification or a portion of the old doctrine, and bearing witness
     to that, for which it has been substituted. This is what has, since
     Cudworth's time, been commonly received, viz. that the Eucharist is
     "a feast upon a sacrifice." This, like so many other modern
     theories, takes up one half of the ancient doctrine, and then
     appears as new. It has, however, been valuable, as keeping up a
     portion of the truth among such as would not, perhaps, have received
     the whole. But the "feast upon a sacrifice" implies, first, the
     offering of a sacrifice; and so, as Archdeacon Daubeny has well
     said, "The Episcopal Church in Scotland keeps close to the original
     pattern of the primitive Church; and with the Church of
     England,--considering the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper to be a
     feast upon a sacrifice, to constitute it such, makes that which is
     feasted upon first a sacrifice, by having it offered up by a
     priest." [Quoted in the Brit. Mag. Sept. 1834, p. 288.]

     In conclusion, one word of caution. It is not without some natural
     sense of shrinking, that one casts thus upon the troubled waters of
     our rude days, the testimonies to a doctrine which is not meant for
     "doubtful disputations," but for reverence and devotion. The choice,
     however, is not with us: the ardent longing, which GOD has in so
     many minds awakened, to know and practise the faith of the Church,
     such as it was in the days when she kept her first love, is a
     warning which may not be passed unheeded; and they who know that
     Church's way have a duty laid upon them to declare it. Yet, since
     this doctrine especially has been cast into the shade, it seems to
     us a blessed circumstance that we were led by events, (which, since
     they are not of our own arranging, are commonly GOD'S ordering and
     direction,) to set forth this doctrine in this way. For we trust
     that they who are apt to look upon these subjects with a sort of
     jealous impatience, because differing from the system in which they
     have been educated, and what they think the religion of the Bible,
     will, (at least some of them,) be restrained from giving vent to
     that impatience, by the presence of so many witnesses, some of whom,
     even they have been accustomed to respect; and so the injury which
     they might do to their own spirit or to the Church, by such profane
     opposition to the truth, may be avoided. On the other hand, we would
     warn those who may be tempted over hastily to take up, with all the
     interest of novelty, an old doctrine, which, in its extent, may to
     them appear to be new, that they too must restrain themselves. These
     are not subjects for discussion, for speculation, for display of
     recently acquired knowledge; they are high, mysterious, awful
     Christian privileges, to be felt, reverenced, embraced, realized,
     acted. Let them not speak of them until they have practised them,
     but rather pray GOD to deepen their own sense of them. They will
     then speak of them, if they speak at all, more chastenedly and in
     the ear,--not in mixed society or in the market-place; and, we may
     trust, not so as to injure themselves or others, or make the
     mysteries of GOD a common thing. What St. Augustine saith of GOD, is
     true also of all His mysteries:--"The soul may more readily attain
     to speak of Him than to see Him, and she will so much the less speak
     of Him, the more purely she is enabled to see Him." [Serm. 117,
     sect. 7.] "What do we?" says he again; "shall we be silent?" Would
     we might! For it might be that through silence something might be
     conceived worthy of that which is unutterable." [Cont. Ep. Manich.
     c. 19.] To further these ends, to obviate the embarrassment which
     may naturally result to individuals, from feeling themselves in
     possession of a doctrine greater than they have hitherto had, or
     than, from the contrariety of their previous habits, they can
     readily associate with an action, outwardly so simple as that of
     placing upon the altar the elements of bread and wine,--as also for
     the sake of the blessing of the prayers themselves, we subjoin a
     form wherewith the oblation was of old accompanied. This the priest
     may say silently, (for the Church places no restraint upon silent
     prayer,) while he is reverently placing the bread and wine upon the
     altar, as directed. [The Apostolic Bishop Wilson gives this
     direction after the prayer of consecration: "Say secretly, 'Most
     merciful GOD, the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, look graciously
     upon the gifts now lying before Thee, and send down Thy Holy Spirit
     on this sacrifice, that He may make this bread and this wine the
     Body and Blood of Thy CHRIST, that all they who partake of them may
     be confirmed in godliness,--may receive remission of their
     sins,--may be delivered from the devil and his wiles,--may be filled
     with the Holy Ghost,--may be worthy of Thy CHRIST, and obtain
     everlasting life;--Thou, O LORD ALMIGHTY, being reconciled unto
     them, through the same JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen."--Introd. to the
     Lord's Supper, Works t. i. p. 61. 4to. 1781, quoted in part in Brit.
     Mag. 1. c p. 408.] The prayer is in substance that which St.
     Irenaeus doubtless derived, through St. Polycarp, from the blessed
     St. John, and was probably in use in this Church, before, for the
     first time, it suffered from foreign influence, then that of Rome.
     Clergymen, whether they place (as they are bidden) or even remove
     from one part of the altar to another, the Bread and Wine, which is
     to be made so mysteriously holy, cannot but offer some prayer, or at
     least think thoughts which are prayers. It is here only proposed as
     a form, which may be used by such as desire it; others may be found
     elsewhere, or have been already given. [See Tract, No. 63--"The
     Antiquity of the existing Liturgies," whence (p. 15.) the following
     passages from the Gallican Liturgy are transcribed. They occur in
     Brett's Liturgies, p. 114. 120. Mabillon, p. 227, 228. 457. In an
     interesting paper in the British Mag. Sept. and Oct. 1834, p. 402,
     sqq. portions of thirteen ancient forms are given, and those of our
     own Liturgy, as used in England, Scotland, and America.]

     In the old Gallican Liturgy, then, the prayers of oblation and
     invocation of the HOLY GHOST to sanctify the elements, which form
     part of every known Liturgy, are thus combined:--

     "We, O LORD, observing these Thy gifts and precepts, lay upon Thine
     Altar the sacrifices of Bread and Wine, beseeching the deep goodness
     of Thy mercy, that the Holy and Undivided Trinity may sanctify these
     Sacrifices, by the same SPIRIT through which uncorrupt virginity
     conceived Thee in the flesh; that when it has been received by us
     with fear and veneration, whatever dwells in us contrary to the good
     of the soul may die, and whatever dies, may never rise again."

     Or in the Christmas office of the same Liturgy.

     "We therefore, observing these His commandments, offer unto Thee the
     holy gift of our salvation, beseeching Thee that Thou wouldst
     vouchsafe to send THY HOLY SPIRIT upon these solemn mysteries, that
     they may become to us a true Eucharist, in the Name of THEE, and Thy
     SON, and of the HOLY SPIRIT, that they may confer eternal life and
     an everlasting kingdom on us who are going to eat and drink of them,
     in the transformation of the Body and Blood of our LORD JESUS
     CHRIST, Thine Only Begotten SON. Amen."

     OXFORD.
     Feast of All Saints.
     __________________________________________________________________

     In order to exhibit more clearly the character of Edward VIth's
     first book, which has been above commented upon, as well as a sort
     of introduction to the following list of witnesses, to whom it was a
     link, as it were, connecting them and their Church with the Fathers
     and the Primitive Catholic Church, it seemed advisable to give here,
     as a whole, the prayer of Consecration and Oblation as it stood in
     that book; and, to explain the mind of its principal revisers, there
     have been appended the official answers, given by them a little
     previously, to the question on the doctrine here contained. Only it
     must be remembered that the language, being that of the ancient
     Church, is not dependent for its interpretation on the views of its
     revisers; whether they saw what they delivered, more or less
     clearly, is an object of interest solely as relates to them; they
     transmitted to us not their own interpretations, or their own
     thoughts, nor cast our devotions into the model of their own minds,
     but, as far as they thought safe for their times, gave us the
     devotions of Primitive ages; and these must be obviously understood
     in the sense of those ages, i. e. of the Old Catholic Fathers, to
     whom also themselves appeal. They would not stamp their own image or
     superscription, lest they should seem more like forgers of a new
     religion, than refiners of corruptions. In like manner, it will be
     observed, they who come after depend not upon them, but derive their
     doctrine mainly from Catholic Antiquity, the common stay of both.

     "O GOD, heavenly Father, which of Thy tender mercy didst give Thine
     Only Son JESUS CHRIST to suffer death upon the cross for our
     redemption, who made there (by his one oblation once offered) a
     full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction,
     for the sins of the whole world, and did institute, and in His holy
     gospel command us to celebrate a perpetual memory of that His
     precious death, until His coming again; hear us, O merciful Father,
     we beseech Thee; and with Thy Holy Spirit and Word vouchsafe to bl +
     ess and sanc + tify these Thy gifts and creatures of bread and wine,
     that they may be unto us the Body and Blood of Thy most dearly
     beloved Son JESUS CHRIST. Who in the same night that He was
     betrayed, took bread, and, when brake it, and gave it to His
     disciples, saying,

     'Take, eat, this is My Body, which is given for you. Do this in
     remembrance of Me.' Likewise, after supper, He took the cup, and,
     when He had given thanks, He
     gave it to them saying, 'Drink ye all of this, for this is My Blood
     of the New Testament, which is shed for you, and for many, for
     remission of sins. Do this as oft as you shall drink it, in
     remembrance of me.'

     "These words before rehearsed are to be said, turning still to the
     Altar, without any elevation or shewing the Sacrament to the people.

     "Wherefore, O Lord and heavenly Father, according to the institution
     of Thy dearly beloved Son our Saviour JESUS CHRIST, we, Thy humble
     servants, do celebrate and make here, before Thy divine Majesty,
     with these Thy holy gifts, the memorial which Thy Son hath willed us
     to make, having in remembrance His blessed passion, mighty
     resurrection, and glorious ascension; rendering unto Thee most
     hearty thanks for the innumerable benefits procured unto us by the
     same; entirely desiring Thy fatherly goodness mercifully to accept
     this our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; most humbly
     beseeching Thee to grant, that by the merits and death of Thy dear
     Son JESUS CHRIST, and through faith in His blood, we and all Thy
     whole Church may obtain remission of our sins and all other benefits
     of His passion. And here we offer and present unto Thee, O Lord,
     ourselves, our souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and
     lively sacrifice unto Thee, humbly beseeching Thee that whosoever
     shall be partakers of this holy communion may worthily receive the
     most precious Body and Blood of Thy Son Jesus Christ, and be
     fulfilled with Thy grace and heavenly benediction, and made one body
     with Thy Son JESUS CHRIST, that He may dwell in them, and they in
     Him. And although we be unworthy (through our manifold sins) to
     offer unto Thee any sacrifice, yet we beseech Thee to accept this
     our bounden duty and service, and command these our prayers and
     supplications, by the ministry of Thy holy Angels to be brought up
     into Thy holy tabernacle, before the sight of Thy divine Majesty,
     not weighing our merits, but pardoning our offences, through CHRIST
     our LORD; by whom, and with whom, in the unity of the Holy Ghost,
     all honour and glory be unto Thee, O Father Almighty, world without
     end. Amen."

                                QUESTION III.
          What is the Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ in the Mass?

                                  Answers.

                           CANTUARIEN. (Cranmer.)

     The Oblation and Sacrifice of CHRIST in the Mass is not so called,
     because CHRIST indeed is there offered and sacrificed by the priest
     and the people, (for that was done but once by Himself upon the
     Cross,) but it is so called, because it is a Memory and
     Representation of that very true Sacrifice and Immolation which
     before was made upon the Cross.

                              ROFFEN. (Ridley.)

     The Representation and Commemoration of CHRIST'S Death and Passion,
     said and done in the Mass is called the Sacrifice, Oblation, or
     Immolation of CHRIST; Non rei veritate, (as learned men do write)
     sed significandi mysterio.

                           List of Authors cited.

   1. Jewell.
   2. Bilson.
   3. Hooker.
   4. Overall.
   5. Field.
   6. Buckeridge.
   7. Morton.
   8. Andrews.
   9. Mason.
   10. White.
   11. Laud.
   12. Hall.
   13. Montagu.
   14. Forbes.
   15. Mede.
   16. Duppa.
   17. Compilers of the Scotch Prayer Book.
   18. Nicholson.
   19. Bramhall.
   20. Cosin.
   21. Heylyn.
   22. Sparrow.
   23. Ferne.
   24. Hammond.
   25. Barlow.
   26. Thorndike.
   27. Taylor.
   28. Brevint.
   29. Sancroft.
   30. Scrivener.
   31. Fell. 32. Patrick.
   33. Towerson.
   34. Bull.
   35. Stillingfleet.
   36. Smith.
   37. Beveridge.
   38. Hooper.
   39. Dodwell.
   40. Hickes.
   41. Comber.
   42. Collier.
   43. Nelson.
   44. Wake.
   45. Johnson.
   46. Wilson.
   47. Sherlock.
   48. Grabe.
   49. Leslie.
   50. Brett.
   51. Bennet.
   52. Potter.
   53. Hughes.
   54. Laurence.
   55. Law.
   56. Wheatly.
   57. Ridley.
   58. Compilers of the American Prayer Book.
   59. Jones.
   60. Horsley.
   61. Daubeny.
   62. Jolly.
   63. Philpotts.

     The above list, although enlarged beyond what was thought necessary
     in the other catenae, is by no means intended to comprise all who
     might be adduced. On the contrary, such are omitted (although of
     repute in their generation,) as belonged to the one or other school,
     e.g. that of Archbishop Land, and so were hardly independent
     witnesses. There is also a set of writers who, perhaps, can scarcely
     be brought under one head, who appear to have held implicitly the
     doctrine of the Eucharistic Sacrifice, although the circumstances of
     the age in which they lived, or their own habits of mind, may have
     prevented their declaring it so explicitly as to enable one to place
     them in the primary list of witnesses. Of some (as Archbishop
     Sharpe, Bishop Cleaver, Dr. John Scott, Felling, and others,) the
     language seemed almost definite enough to entitle them to be ranked
     in that list; yet it seemed best to omit them, in order to avoid all
     appearance of anxiety to press their words beyond their true
     meaning, or to make our Anglican Church look more primitive than she
     has really been. The real point of difference between the primitive
     Church and modern views, is whether there be in this oblation a
     mystery or no; and this, doubtless, many have believed, who, from
     the unfavourable circumstances of their times, had scarcely
     developed that belief even to themselves. All however, even those
     who held the doctrine in its lowest degree, are witnesses thus far,
     that they who held it most deeply would not have held it thus
     deeply, or have been formed in that depth, in a Church which had not
     held the doctrine, or so referred her sons to primitive antiquity,
     and they whose tenure of it seems almost questionable, obviously
     would not have held it at all. A mere Protestant body could not have
     given rise even to the lowest statements of this last set. The
     doctrine must exist; otherwise they would never have been compelled
     to receive it into their mind, in whatever degree they did entertain
     it. Their having to weigh it, prove it, even their labouring to
     adjust it to their own minds, in as far as they did not conform
     their own minds to it, is a fact arid a testimony, independent of
     the conclusions, often very undecided, floating between the higher
     and the lower view of the doctrine, to which they ultimately
     arrived. It bears witness to the real substantial existence of the
     doctrine, offering and proposing itself and seeking entrance, even
     though, by many, it may, at last, have been inadequately admitted.

              JEWELL, BISHOP.--Defence of the Apology. Part II.

     But you Protestants (ye say) have no external Sacrifice, and
     therefore ye have no Church at all. It pitieth me, M. Harding, to
     see the vanity of your dealing. Have we no external Sacrifice, say
     you? I beseech you, what Sacrifice did Christ or His Apostles ever
     command that we have refused? Leave your misty clouds, and
     generalities of words, and speak it plainly; that ye may seem to say
     some truth.

     We have the Sacrifice of Prayer, the Sacrifice of Alms deeds, the
     Sacrifice of Praise, the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and the
     Sacrifice of the Death of CHRIST. We are taught to present our own
     bodies, as a pure, and a holy, and a well pleasing Sacrifice unto
     GOD, and to offer up unto Him the burning oblation of our lips.
     These (saith St. Paul) are the Sacrifices wherewith God is pleased.
     These be the Sacrifices of the Church of GOD. Whosoever hath these,
     we cannot say he is void of Sacrifice. Howbeit, if we speak of a
     Sacrifice propitiatory for the satisfaction of sins, we have none
     other but only CHRIST JESUS, the Son of GOD upon His Cross. "He is
     that sacrificed Lamb of GOD, that hath taken away the sins of the
     world."

     You will say, ye offer not up Christ really unto GOD His Father. No,
     M. Harding, neither we nor you can so offer Him: nor did CHRIST ever
     give you commission to make such Sacrifice. And this is it,
     wherewith you so foully beguile the simple. CHRIST offereth and
     presenteth us unto His Father. "For by Him we have access to the
     throne of grace." But no creature is able to offer Him. CHRIST JESUS
     upon His cross was a Priest for ever, according to the order of
     Melchisedeck. "As for our part," St. Augustine saith, "Christ hath
     given us to celebrate in His Church, an image or token of that
     Sacrifice for the remembrance of His Passion." Again he saith,
     "After CHRIST'S ascension into heaven, the Flesh and Blood of this
     Sacrifice is continued by a Sacrament of remembrance." Eusebius
     saith, "We burn a Sacrifice unto GOD, the remembrance of that great
     Sacrifice upon the cross, and CHRIST commanded us to offer up a
     remembrance of His death, instead of a Sacrifice." It were an
     infinite labour to report all that may be said. To be short, St.
     Hierome saith, turning himself unto CHRIST: "Then shalt Thou, O
     CHRIST, receive Sacrifice, either when Thou offerest up Thyself for
     us unto Thy Father," (which was only upon the cross,) "or else, when
     Thou receivest of us praises and thanksgiving."

     All these things are true, M. Harding: you cannot deny them. . . .
     GOD'S name be blessed for ever, we want neither Church nor
     Priesthood, nor any kind of Sacrifice, that CHRIST hath left unto
     His faithful.--pp. 13d, 1.

     St. Cyprian saith, "We offer our LORD'S cup mixed with wine." But he
     saith not as you say, "We offer up the Son of GOD substantially and
     really unto His Father." Take away only that blasphemy wherewith you
     have deceived the world: and then talk of mingling the cup, and of
     the Sacrifice, while ye list. St. Cyprian saith, "We offer the
     LORD'S cup," meaning thereby, the wine contained in the cup. So
     likewise St. Augustine saith: "The Church offereth up the Sacrifice
     of bread and wine." If there be any darkness in this manner of
     speech, both St. Cyprian and St. Augustine have plainly expounded
     their meaning. St. Cyprian, in the same Epistle before alleged,
     saith thus: "The cup is offered in remembrance of CHRIST: by the
     wine CHRIST'S Blood is shewed, or signified: therefore wine is used,
     that by wine we may understand the LORD'S Blood: water only without
     wine, cannot express the Blood of CHRIST: in the water we understand
     the people: in the wine CHRIST'S Blood is represented: in all our
     Sacrifices, we work the memory of CHRIST'S passion: the Sacrifice
     that we offer, is the Passion of our LORD." Thus much St. Cyprian in
     the same epistle. St. Augustine saith, "In this Sacrifice is a
     Thanksgiving, and a remembrance of the Flesh of CHRIST, that He hath
     offered for us, and of the Blood of CHRIST that He shed for us."
     Thus saith St. Cyprian: thus saith St. Augustine: thus say the old
     godly learned fathers of the Church of Christ.--p. 140.

                    ID.--Replie unto M. Harding's Answer.

     But M. Harding saith: "The Sacrifice of the Church is not
     thanksgiving, as our new masters teach us." Certainly our Sacrifice
     is the very Body of CHRIST, and that for ever, according to the
     order of Melchizedeck, evermore standing in GOD'S presence, and
     evermore obtaining pardon for us: not offered up by us, but offering
     us up unto GOD the Father. For the same, it is our part to offer
     unto GOD our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. And this is the
     doctrine, not only of them whom it liketh M. Harding to call new
     masters, but also of the oldest and most Catholic Doctors of the
     Church. And to allege one instead of many, St. Augustine hereof
     writeth thus: "In these fleshly Sacrifices (of the Jews) there was a
     figure of the Flesh, that CHRIST afterward would offer: but in this
     Sacrifice of the Church, there is a thanksgiving, and a remembrance
     of that Flesh, which CHRIST Hath already offered for us." If M.
     Harding will happily refuse St. Augustine, as mistrusted for one of
     these new masters, yet he may not well refuse his own Mass Book.
     There he himself even at his Mass is taught to say: "We that do
     offer up to Thee this Sacrifice of praise."--p. 267.

     True it is, the ministration of the holy Communion is oftentimes of
     the old learned fathers called a Sacrifice: not for that they
     thought the Priest had authority to sacrifice the Son of God, but
     for that therein we offer up unto God thanks and praises for that
     great Sacrifice once made upon the cross. So saith St. Augustine:
     "In this Sacrifice is a thanksgiving, and a remembrance of the flesh
     of Christ, which He hath offered for us." So Nazianzenus calleth the
     holy Communion, "A Figure of that great mystery of the death of
     CHRIST." This it is that Eusebius calleth, "The Sacrifice of the
     LORD'S table:" which also he calleth: "The Sacrifice of
     praise."--pp. 415, 6.

     Chrysostom showeth in what sense other ancient fathers used this
     word, Sacrifice, and also utterly overthroweth M. Harding's whole
     purpose touching the same. For, as he saith, "we offer up the same
     Sacrifice that CHRIST offered," so in most plain wise, and by sundry
     words, he removed] all doubt, and declareth in what sort and meaning
     we offer it. He saith not, as M. Harding saith, "We offer up the Son
     of GOD unto His Father, and that verily and indeed:" but
     contrariwise thus he saith, "We offer indeed, but in remembrance of
     His death This Sacrifice is an example of that Sacrifice. This that
     we do, is done in remembrance of that, that was done. We offer up
     the same that CHRIST offered: or rather we work the remembrance of
     that Sacrifice." Thus we offer up Christ, that is to say, an
     example, a commemoration, a remembrance of the death of CHRIST. This
     kind of Sacrifice was never denied: but M. Harding's real Sacrifice
     was never yet proved.--pp. 424.

                BILSON, BISHOP.--Of Subjection and Rebellion.

     Philander (Romanist). All the fathers with one consent stand on our
     side for the Sacrifice.

     Theophilus (Anglican). You be now where you would be; and where the
     Fathers seem to fit your feet. But if your Sacrifice be convinced to
     be nothing less than Catholic or consequent to the Prophets',
     Apostles', or Fathers' doctrine, what say you then to your vanity in
     alleging, if not impiety, in abusing so many Fathers and Scriptures
     to prop up your follies? . . . Let it therefore first appear what
     they teach touching the Sacrifice of the LORD'S table, and what we
     admit: and then it will soon be seen which of us twain hath departed
     from them. The Fathers with one consent call not your private Mass,
     that they never knew, but the LORD'S Supper a Sacrifice, which we
     both willingly grant and openly teach: so their text, not your gloze
     may prevail. For there, besides the Sacrifice of praise and
     thanksgiving, which we must then offer to GOD for our redemption and
     other His graces bestowed on us in CHRIST His Son: besides the
     dedication of our souls and bodies to be a reasonable, quick, and
     holy Sacrifice to serve and please Him: besides the contributions
     and alms there given in the Primitive Church for the relief of the
     poor and other good uses: a Sacrifice no doubt very acceptable to
     God: I say besides these three sundry sorts of offerings incident to
     the LORD'S table, the very Supper itself is a public memorial of
     that great and dreadful Sacrifice, I mean, of the death and
     blood-shedding of our SAVIOUR. . . . The visible Sacrifice of bread
     and wine, representing the LORD'S death, St. Augustine enforceth in
     these words: . .. (vid. sup. Jewell). With him agreeth Irenaeus:
     "Christ, willing his disciples to offer unto GOD the firstfruits of
     His creatures, . . . took the creature of bread and gave thanks,
     saying, This is my body. And likewise He confessed the cup which is
     a creature amongst us, to be His Blood, teaching the new oblation of
     the New Testament, which the Church, receiving from the Apostles,
     offereth to God throughout the world." . . .

     This oblation of bread and wine for a thanksgiving to GOD, and a
     memorial of His Son's death, was so confessed and undoubted a truth
     in the Church of CHRIST, till your Schoolmen began to wrest both
     Scriptures and Fathers to serve their quiddities, that not only the
     Liturgies under the names of Clemens, Basil, and Chrysostom do
     mention it: ("We offer to Thee our KING and GOD this bread and this
     cup, according to Thy Son's institution: tua ex tuis offerimus tibi,
     Domine, we offer Thee, O LORD, these Thy gifts of Thine own
     creatures") . . .; but also the very Missals used in your own
     Churches at this day do confirm the same. These be the words of your
     own Offertory: "Receive, Holy Father, GOD Everlasting, this
     undefiled Host; which I, Thine unworthy servant, offer to Thee my
     KING and true GOD. . . . We offer to Thee, O LORD, this cup of
     salvation, in-treating Thy goodness that it may be taken up into Thy
     sight, as a sweet smell for the saving of us and the whole world.
     Receive, blessed Trinity, this oblation, which we offer to Thee, in
     remembrance of the passion, resurrection, and ascension of CHRIST
     JESUS our LORD. We humbly beseech Thee, most merciful Father,
     through JESUS CHRIST Thy Son our LORD, that Thou accept and bless
     these gifts, these presents, these holy undefiled Sacrifices, which
     we offer to Thee first for Thy Church, holy and Catholic," &c. . . .

     Certainly you speak these words long before you repeat CHRIST'S
     institution. . . . What then offer you in this place? CHRIST, or the
     creatures of bread and wine? By your own doctrine CHRIST is not
     present, neither any change made till these words, "This is my
     body," "this is my blood," be pronounced: ergo, before consecration,
     the creatures of bread and wine keep their proper and earthly
     substance, when notwithstanding yourselves offer them to GOD in your
     masses for the remission of your sins, redemption of your souls, and
     to profit the quick and the dead by that oblation. You teach the
     people that nothing is offered by the priest to GOD the Father for
     remission of sins, but CHRIST His Son: your mass, where this should
     be done, convinceth that you sacrifice not CHRIST, but the creatures
     of bread and wine. Be you not more than blind which see not that the
     prayers which you daily frequent refute that Sacrifice which you
     falsely pretend?

     PHIL. As though the ancient Fathers did not also say that CHRIST
     himself is daily offered in the Church.

     THEOPH. Not in the substance, which is your error, but in
     signification, which is their doctrine and ours. Take their
     interpretation with their words, and they make nothing for your
     local and external offering of CHRIST. "Was not CHRIST," saith
     Austin, "once sacrificed in Himself? and yet in a Sacrament is He
     offered for the benefit of the people, not every Paschal feast only,
     but every day." . . . Mark well the words of Cyprian, "The passion
     of the LORD is the Sacrifice which we offer:"--of Ambrose, "Our High
     Priest is He that offered (on the cross) a Sacrifice to cleanse us;
     the very same we offer now; which being then offered cannot be
     consumed, this sacrifice is a sampler of that, we offer that very
     Sacrifice for ever:"--of Eusebius, "CHRIST after all things (ended),
     offered a wonderful oblation, and most excellent Sacrifice (on the
     cross) for the salvation of us all, and gave us a memory thereof
     instead of a Sacrifice. We therefore offer the remembrance of that
     great Sacrifice in the mysteries which He delivered us:"--of
     Chrysostom, "Bringing these mysteries we stop the mouths of those
     that ask, how we prove that CHRIST was sacrificed (on the cross).
     For if JESUS were not slain, whose sign and token is this
     sacrifice?"--of Austin, "We sacrifice to God in that only manner in
     which He commanded we should offer to Him at the revealing of the
     New Testament: the flesh and blood of this Sacrifice was yielded in
     very truth when CHRIST was put to death: after His ascension it is
     now solemnized by a sacrament of memory."--pp. 687--691.

     In this very sense CHRIST is offered daily. Chrysostom: "Do we not
     offer every day? we do: but a memorial of His death. We do not offer
     another sacrifice, but ever the same or rather we continue the
     remembrance of that Sacrifice." Ambrose: . . . "It is a memorial of
     our redemption." Eusebius: "CHRIST offered a wonderful sacrifice for
     the salvation of us all, and we have received a memorial of that
     most sacred oblation to be performed at the LORD'S table according
     to the rule of the New Testament." Augustine: "CHRIST is our High
     Priest after the order of Melchisedec, which yielded Himself a slain
     sacrifice for our sins, and gave us a similitude and image of that
     oblation to be celebrated for a remembrance of His passion, insomuch
     that we may see that, which Melchisedec offered to God, now
     sacrificed in the Church of CHRIST throughout the world.". . .
     Theophylact: "Do we then offer unbloody sacrifices? No doubt we do,
     by being a remembrance of the LORD'S death. He was once offered, and
     yet we offer Him always, or rather we celebrate the memorial of that
     oblation, when He sacrificed Himself (on the cross)."

     Receive this addition which they make; and we grant you that
     oblation, which they teach. "CHRIST is offered, or rather a memorial
     of His death and oblation is celebrated." This later correction doth
     expound and interpret their former assertion. You can require no
     plainer, nor sounder doctrine. . . . They did offer an "unbloody
     sacrifice, not of flesh but of spirit and mind," "the selfsame which
     Melchisedec did" two thousand years before CHRIST took flesh, and
     therefore not the flesh of CHRIST: "a figurative sacrifice," to wit,
     "signs, samples, similitudes, and memorials of His death and
     bloodshedding." So that "CHRIST is offered daily but mystically,"
     not covered with qualities and quantities of bread and wine; for
     those be neither mysteries nor resemblances to the death of CHRIST:
     but by the bread which is broken, by the wine which is drunk, in
     substance, creatures; in signification, sacraments; the LORD'S death
     is figured, and proposed to the communicants, and they, for their
     parts, no less people than priests, do present CHRIST hanging on the
     cross to GOD the Father, with a lively faith, inward devotion, and
     humble prayer, as a most sufficient and everlasting Sacrifice for
     the full remission of their sins, and assured fruition of His
     mercies. Other actual and propitiatory Sacrifice than this the
     Church of CHRIST never had, never taught.

     You believe not me. Well, what if your own fellows and friends teach
     the same? What if the Master of your Sentences, what if the glosser
     of your Decrees, what if the ringleader of your Schoolmen, make with
     us in this question, and evince that, for twelve hundred years after
     CHRIST, your Sacrifice was not known to the world: will you give the
     people leave to bethink themselves better, before they call you or
     account you Catholics? Then hear what they say: Peter Lombard, in
     his 4th Book and 12th Distinction, "I demand whether that which the
     priest doth be properly called a Sacrifice or an oblation, and
     whether CHRIST be daily offered, or else were offered only once. To
     this our answer is brief: that which is offered and consecrated by
     the priest is called a Sacrifice and oblation, because it is a
     memory and representation of the true Sacrifice and holy oblation
     made on the altar of the cross. Also CHRIST died once on the cross,
     and there was He offered Himself, but He is offered daily in a
     sacrament, because in the sacrament there is a remembrance of that
     which was done once." Now what this meaneth, CHRIST is offered in a
     sacrament, we need no fairer interpretation than that which your own
     gloss often repeateth; "CHRIST is offered in a sacrament;" that is,
     His offering is represented, and a memory of His passion celebrated.
     "It is the same oblation which He made;" that is, a representation
     of the same passion. "CHRIST is offered every day mystically;" that
     is, the oblation which CHRIST made for us is represented in the
     sacrament of His Body and Blood.

     With this concurreth Thomas of Aquine. "Because the celebration of
     this sacrament is a certain image of CHRIST'S passion, it may
     conveniently be called the sacrificing of CHRIST. The celebration of
     this sacrament is termed the immolating of CHRIST in two respects;
     first for that, as Austin saith, resemblances are wont to be called
     by the names of those things whose resemblances they are; next, for
     that by this sacrament we be made partakers of the fruit of the
     LORD'S Passion." Here find you no real, local, nor external offering
     of CHRIST to GOD His Father by the priest for the sins of the
     people; which is your opinion at this day; you find that the
     celebration of the LORD'S Supper may be called an oblation; first,
     for that it is a representation of CHRIST'S death, and sacraments
     have the names of the things which they signify; next, because the
     merits and fruits of CHRIST'S Passion are by the power of His
     Spirit, divided and bestowed on the faithful receivers of these
     mysteries.--pp. 692--694.

     PHIL. You grant the Eucharist to be a Sacrifice, which your fellows
     will be angry with you for.

     THEOPH. Neither they, nor I, ever denied the Eucharist to be a
     Sacrifice. The very name informeth it to be "the Sacrifice of praise
     and thanksgiving," which is the true and lively Sacrifice of the New
     Testament.--p. 699.

     PHIL. Why then refuse you the Fathers expressing their opinion of
     this Sacrifice?

     THEOPH. Nay, why do you abuse their words, to support your errors:
     and wheresoever you find the names of Sacrifice and oblation in them
     referred to the LORD'S Supper, why allege you the places with such
     confidence as if the Fathers were at your commandment: to mean
     nothing but your real sacrificing the Son of GOD under the forms of
     bread and wine?

     PHIL. What other meaning could they have?

     THEOPH. I have already showed you by their own writings what other
     meaning they had.--p. 700.

     HOOKER, PRESBYTER AND DOCTOR.--Ecclesiastical Polity, book v. § 67.

     The disciples, when CHRIST appeared to them in a far more strange
     and miraculous manner, moved no questions, but rejoiced greatly in
     what they saw...... If then the presence of CHRIST with them did so
     much move, judge what their thoughts and affections were at the time
     of this new presentation of CHRIST, not before their eyes, but
     within their souls. They had learned before that His flesh and blood
     are the true cause of eternal life; that this they are not by the
     bare force of their own substance, but through the dignity and worth
     of His person, which offered them up by way of Sacrifice for the
     life of the whole world, and doth make them still effectual
     thereunto: finally, that to us they are life in particular, by being
     particularly received. Thus much they knew, although as yet they
     understood not perfectly to what effect or issue the same would
     come, till at the length being assembled for no other cause which
     they would imagine but to have eaten the Passover only, that Moses
     appointed, when they saw their LORD and MASTER, with hands and eyes
     lifted up to heaven, first bless and consecrate, for the endless
     good of all generations till the world's end, the chosen elements of
     bread and wine; which elements, made for ever the instruments of
     life by virtue of His Divine benediction, they being the first that
     were commanded to receive from Him, the first which were warranted
     by His promise, that not only unto them at the present time, but to
     whomsoever they and their successors after them did duly administer
     the same, those mysteries should serve as conducts of life, and
     conveyances of His Body and Blood unto them; was it possible they
     should hear that voice, Take, eat, this is My body: drink ye all of
     this, this is My blood; possible, that doing what was required, and
     believing what was promised, the same should have present effect in
     them, and not fill them with a kind of fearful admiration at the
     heaven which they saw in themselves? . . . These things considered,
     how should a virtuously disposed mind better resolve with itself
     than thus?..... they are things wonderful which he feeleth, great
     which he seeth, and unheard of which he uttereth, whose soul is
     possessed of this Paschal Lamb, and made joyful in the strength of
     this new wine: this bread hath in it more than the substance which
     our eyes behold; this cup, hallowed with solemn benediction,
     availeth to the endless life and welfare both of soul and body; in
     that it serveth as well for a medicine to heal our infirmities and
     purge our sins, as for a sacrifice of thanksgiving. . . .

                              OVERALL, BISHOP.
    ["MS. Notes written in an interleaved Common Prayer Book, printed in
      the year 1619, supposed to be made from the Collections of Bishop
     Overall, by a friend or chaplain of his."--Additional Notes on the
                  Common Prayer in Nicholls's Commentary.]

     "Sufficient Sacrifice--of that His precious Blood."] This word
     refers to the Sacrifice mentioned before, for we still continue and
     commemorate that Sacrifice which CHRIST once made upon the Cross:
     and this Sacrifice which the Church makes, as a Sacrifice is taken
     pro mactatione et occisione victimae, is only Commemorative and
     Sacramental; for in that sense CHRIST only offered it really upon
     the Cross by His own death: and so likewise, as it is taken for a
     visible Sacrifice, CHRIST only offered it; for here it is invisible:
     but as it is taken for a sufficient Sacrifice to take away the sins
     of the world, so indeed it was offered upon the Cross, as having
     power in itself to abolish all sin whatsoever; but it does not
     abolish any man's sins for all that, unless it be applied.

     And the ways to apply it are divers, by Faith, by good Works, by the
     unbloody offering up of the same Sacrifice, by the receiving of His
     most precious Body and Blood.

     For if we compare the Eucharist with the Sacrifice once made upon
     the Cross, with reference to the killing or destroying of the
     Sacrifice, or with reference to the visibility of it, in that sense
     we call it only a Commemorative Sacrifice, as the Fathers do. Chrys.
     Hom. contr. Jud. part 2. Sentent. lib. 4. dist. 12. But if we
     compare the Eucharist with CHRIST'S Sacrifice made once upon the
     Cross, as concerning the effect of it, we say that that was a
     sufficient Sacrifice; but withal that it is a true, real, and
     Efficient Sacrifice, and both of them propitiatory for the sins of
     the whole world. And therefore in the Oblation following, we pray
     that it may prevail so with GOD, as that we and all the whole Church
     of CHRIST (which consists of more than those that are upon the
     earth) may receive the benefit of it. Neither do we call this
     Sacrifice of the Eucharist an Efficient Sacrifice, as if that upon
     the Cross wanted efficacy; but because the force and virtue of that
     Sacrifice would not be profitable unto us, unless it were applied
     and brought into effect by this Eucharistical Sacrifice, and other
     the holy Sacraments, and means appointed by GOD for that end: but we
     call it propitiatory both this and that, because they have both
     force and virtue in them to appease GOD'S wrath against this sinful
     world.--Read Mald. de Sac. p. 323. Therefore this is no new
     Sacrifice, but the same which was once offered, and which is every
     day offered to GOD by CHRIST in heaven, and continueth here still on
     earth, by a mystical representation of it in the Eucharist. And the
     Church intends not to have any new propitiation, or new remission of
     sins obtained, but to make that effectual, and in act applied unto
     us, which was once obtained by the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the
     Cross. Neither is the Sacrifice of the Cross, as it was once offered
     up there, modo cruento, so much remembered in the Eucharist, though
     it be commemorated, as regard is had to the perpetual and daily
     offering of it by CHRIST now in Heaven in His everlasting
     Priesthood, and thereupon was, and should be still the juge
     Sacrificium observed here on earth as it is in Heaven, the reason
     which the ancient Fathers had for their daily Sacrifice. S.
     Chrysost. in 10 Heb. . . S. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 20. .
     .--p. 40.

     "O LORD and heavenly FATHER."] In King Edward's first Service-book,
     this Prayer was set before the delivery of the Sacrament to the
     people, and followed immediately after the Consecration; and
     certainly, it was the better and more natural order of the two;
     neither do I know whether it were the printer's negligence, or no,
     thus to displace it: for the Consecration of the Sacrament being
     ever the first, it was always the use in all Liturgies, to have the
     Oblation follow (which is this), and then the Participation which
     goes before, and after all the Thanksgiving, which is here set
     before the Gloria in Excelsis; in regard whereof, I have always
     observed my lord avid master Dr. Overall, to use this Oblation in
     its right place, when be had consecrated the Sacrament to make an
     offering of it (as being the true public Sacrifice of the Church)
     unto GOD, that by the merits of CHRIST'S death, which was now
     commemorated, all the Church of GOD might receive mercy, &c. as in
     this Prayer; and when that was done, he did communicate the people,
     and so end with the Thanksgiving following hereafter. If men would
     consider the nature of this Sacrament, how it is the Christian's
     Sacrifice also, they could not choose but use it so too; for as it
     stands here it is out of its place. We ought first to send up CHRIST
     unto GOD, and then He will send Him down unto us.

     "This our Sacrifice of praise," &c.] So the ancient Fathers were
     wont to call this Sacrifice, Sacrificium laudis et gratiarum
     actionis; not exclusively, as if it were no other Sacrifice but
     that; for they railed it also, Sacrificium commemorationis, and
     Sacrificium Spiritus, and Sacrificium obsequii, &c.; and which is
     more, Sacrificium verum et propitiatorium: all other ways but this
     the Eucharist, or any other Sacrifice we make, are improperly, and
     secundum quondam similitudinem, called Sacrifices. The true and
     proper nature of a Sacrifice is, to be an oblation of some real and
     sensible thing made only to GOD, for the acknowledging of man's
     subjection to GOD, and of His supreme dominion over man, made by a
     lawful minister, and performed by certain mysterious rites and
     ceremonies, which CHRIST and His Church have ordained. . . .
     Therefore as there never was, nor could be any religion without a
     GOD; so there never was, nor could be any without a Sacrifice, being
     one of the chiefest acts whereby we profess our religion to Him that
     we serve.....

     Therefore because the chief end of every Sacrifice was to
     acknowledge GOD'S majesty and dominion over the world; hence it is,
     that every act almost which did but show that, was called in
     Scripture a Sacrifice in analogy to the other. As 1. &c. . . Now the
     Eucharist, though by way of analogy it may be called a Sacrifice
     many of these ways, yet the true and real nature of it in the
     Offertory, is to acknowledge GOD'S Majesty and our misery, and to
     appease His wrath towards us, to get blessings from Him, to make
     CHRIST'S bloody Sacrifice effectual unto us. . .

     The people may offer it up all the improper ways, none but the
     Priest can offer it as a proper Sacrifice.

     So that though it may analogically be called a Sacrifice most of the
     seven ways, yet formally and truly it may be called a Sacrifice
     also, in the very natural signification of a Sacrifice, for aught I
     know any harm should come out: not in strictness and rigour of
     speech, for so was there never a Sacrifice, nor never shall be any,
     but CHRIST'S alone.--See the Exposition of the place in Malachi apud
     Maldon. de Euch. p. 326. and of Psal. 110. Tu es Sacerdos, &c. both
     which the ancient Fathers with one consent understand of the
     Sacrifice of the Eucharist, and the Priests of the Gospel.

     "That by the merits and death of Thy Son JESUS CHRIST, and through
     faith in His blood, we and all Thy whole Church," &c.] This is a
     plain Oblation of CHRIST'S death once offered, and a representative
     Sacrifice of it, for the sins, and for the benefit of the whole
     world, of the whole Church; that both those which are here on earth,
     and those that rest in the sleep of peace, being departed in the
     faith of CHRIST, may find the effect and virtue of it. And if the
     authority of the ancient Church may prevail with us, as it ought to
     do, there is nothing more manifest than that it always taught as
     much: and it is no absurdity to say, here is an oblation made for
     all, when it is not only commemorated to have been once offered, but
     solemn prayers are here also added, and a request made, that it may
     be effectual to all. S. Chrys. 18 Matt ... Hom. 72 in Joh. . . . And
     in this sense it is not only an Eucharistical, but a Propitiatory
     Sacrifice: and to prove it a Sacrifice propitiatory, always so
     acknowledged by the ancient Church, there can be no better argument
     than that it was offered up, not only for the living but for the
     dead, and for those that were absent, for them that travelled, for
     Jews, for heretics, &c. who could have no other benefit of it, but
     as it was a propitiatory Sacrifice: and that thus they did offer it,
     read a whole army of Fathers, apud Mald. de Sac. p. 342. Nos autem
     ita comparati sumus, ut cum tam multis et magnis authoribus errare
     malimus quam cum Puritanis verum dicere. Not that it makes any
     propitiation as that of the Cross did, but only that it obtains and
     brings into act that propitiation which was once made by CHRIST; and
     so we may speak of prayer, for that is propitiatory too. Why should
     we then make any controversy about this? . . .--pp. 49, 50.

     "Upon the Holidays, if there be no Communion, shall be said all that
     is appointed at the Communion until," &c.] By all that follows it
     appears, that the mind of the Church of England was and is to have a
     Communion and Commemorative Sacrifice of CHRIST'S death, every day
     that the people will but come to it, and make up a sufficient
     number.

     "And there shall be no Celebration, &c. except there be a great
     number."] This was made against the Solitariae Missae, that the
     Papists are now-a-days content withal. It was an abuse springing up
     about Charlemain's time (it seems) to have the Priest communicate
     and say mass, though there were none to celebrate with him.
     Therefore the Council of Nice then made a Canon against it. Nullus
     Presbyter solus Missam cantare valet recte, ut nobis videtur.
     Quomodo enim dicet, Dominus vobiscum? &c. They say yet, ut nobis
     videtur; fain would they have had the abuse amended, and yet the
     Communion not neglected for all that. They knew not well whether
     they should forbid it absolutely and simply, if there were no
     company; as indeed better were it to endure the absence of the
     people, than for the Minister to neglect the usual and daily
     Sacrifice of the Church, by which all people, whether they be there
     or no, reap so much benefit.

     And this was the opinion of my lord and master Dr. Overall,--p. 53.

           FIELD, PRESBYTER.--Of the Church. Appendix to Book iii.

     Amongst all the Sacraments of this Church, that is the principal,
     saith Durandus, that is celebrated upon the table of the most holy
     Altar.....These mysteries, and this holy Sacrament Christ then
     instituted, when He made His new and last testament, disposing to
     His heirs a kingdom, as His Father had disposed to Him, that upon
     His table they might eat and drink in His kingdom, that which the
     Church hath consecrated, for as they were at supper, JESUS took
     bread, &c. . . .The Apostles, following this institution, began to
     celebrate these mysteries for the same end that Christ had
     expressed, keeping the same form in words, and using the same matter
     of bread and wine that He did, as the Apostle witnesseth to the
     Corinthians, when he saith, What I have received of the LORD I have
     delivered unto you, Who the same night, &c. . .and added to the form
     of words used by CHRIST, the LORD'S Prayer. And St. Peter is said,
     in this sort, to have celebrated first of all in the East parts.
     Wherefore, in the beginnings of the Church, these mysteries were
     celebrated in another sort than since they have been.....And it is
     not to be doubted, but that the ancient forms as different from the
     latter, were more pure and sincere than they that are now used.--pp.
     188, 9.

     . . . For otherwise the very form and words of the Liturgy condemn
     the abuse of private masses and half communion, and make nothing for
     that propitiatory sacrifice, whereof the Papists fable, which are
     those greatest mysteries of Romish religion, that they insist upon
     in their Mass.

     "Touching the first of these parts of Romish religion, which is that
     of their private masses, wherein the Priest receiveth alone without
     any communicants; making the people believe, that that which he doth
     is a propitiatory sacrifice, and that he can apply the benefit of it
     to whom he will, and that it is enough for them to be present, or to
     give something for the procuring of it; their error is clearly
     refuted by the form of prayers that are used in the
     Mass.....Whatsoever the neglect or abuses were, it is evident by the
     composition of the Canon, that the mystical action, in which the
     Canon was used, was public, and that there were always some present
     that offered the sacrifice of praise together with the Priest, and
     participated of the sacrament, as the words do plainly show.--pp.
     190--192.

     Wherefore, from this point of Romish religion..... let us come to
     the next, which is the propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the
     dead...... First, therefore, I will make it appear, that the Canon
     of the Mass importeth no such sacrifice: and, secondly, I will show
     at large, that neither before nor after Luther's appearing, the
     Church believed, or knew any such new real sacrificing of CHRIST, as
     is now imagined.

     Touching the Canon of the Mass, it is true that therein there is
     often mention of sacrifice and oblation: but Luther professeth, that
     the words may be understood in such a sense, as is not to be
     disliked. . . That the form of words used in the Canon are obscure
     in sundry parts of it, and hard to be understood even by the
     learned, Cassander confesseth ..... The obscurity that is in it
     groweth, as he rightly observeth, partly out of the disuse and
     discontinuing of certain old observations, to which the words of the
     Canon, composed long since, have a reference, and partly from the
     using of the word Sacrifice in divers and different senses, though
     all connected: and the sudden passing from the using of it in one
     sense, to the using of it in another. It is not unknown to them that
     are learned, that in the primitive Church the people were wont to
     offer bread and wine, and that out of that which they offered, a
     part was consecrated, to become unto them the sacrament of the
     LORD'S body and blood, and other parts converted to other good and
     holy uses. Respectively to this ancient custom are those prayers
     concerned, that are named Secretae; and the first part of the Canon,
     wherein we desire that GOD will accept those gifts, presents,
     offerings, and sacrifices which we bring unto Him, and that He will
     make them to become unto us the Body and Blood of His Son CHRIST,
     which only are that Sacrifice that procureth the remission of our
     sins, and our reconciliation and acceptation with GOD. So that to
     take away this obscurity, and that the words may have a true sense,
     the ancient custom must be brought back again, or at least it must
     be conceived that the elements of bread and wine, that are set upon
     the mystical table and are to be consecrated, are brought thither
     and offered in the name of the people, and that, as being their
     presents, they are symbols of that inward Sacrifice, whereby they
     dedicate and give themselves and all that they have unto GOD.
     Touching the second cause of the obscurity of the words of the
     Canon, which is the using of the word Sacrifice, and Offering in so
     manifold and different senses, and the sudden passing from the one
     of them to the other; we must observe, that by the name of
     Sacrifice, gift, or present, first, the oblation of the people is
     meant, that consisteth in bread and wine, brought and set upon the
     LORD'S table. In which, again, two things are to be considered, the
     outward action, and that which is signified thereby, to wit, the
     people dedicating of themselves, and all that they have, to GOD by
     faith and devotion, and offering to Him the Sacrifice of praise. In
     this sense is the word Sacrifice used, in the former part of the
     Canon, as I have already showed. In respect of this is that prayer
     poured out to GOD, that He will be mindful of His servants, that do
     offer unto Him this Sacrifice of praise, that is, these outward
     things, in acknowledgment that all is of Him, that they had perished
     if He had not sent His Son to redeem them; that unless they eat the
     flesh and drink the blood of CHRIST, they have no life; that He hath
     instituted holy sacraments of His Body and Blood, under the forms of
     bread and wine, in which He will not only represent, but exhibit the
     same unto all such as hunger and thirst after righteousness; and,
     therefore, they desire Him so to accept and sanctify these their
     oblations, of bread and wine, which in this sort they offer unto
     Him, that they may become unto them the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     that so, partaking in them, they may be made partakers of CHRIST,
     and all the benefits of redemption and salvation, that He hath
     wrought. Secondly, by the name of Sacrifice is understood, the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Body; wherein we must first consider the thing
     offered, and, secondly, the manner of offering. The thing that is
     offered is the Body of CHRIST, which is an eternal and perpetual
     propitiatory Sacrifice, in that it was once offered by death upon
     the cross, and hath an everlasting, never-failing force and
     efficacy. Touching the manner of offering CHRIST'S Body and Blood,
     we must consider that there is a double offering of a thing to GOD.
     First, so as men are wont to do that give something to GOD out of
     that they possess, professing that they will no longer be owners of
     it, but that it shall be His, and serve for such uses and
     employments as He shall convert it to. Secondly, a man may be said
     to offer a thing unto GOD, in that he bringeth it to His presence,
     setteth it before His eyes, and offereth it to His view, to incline
     Him to do something by the sight of it, and respect had to it. In
     this sort CHRIST offereth Himself and His Body once crucified daily
     in heaven: who intercedeth for us, not as giving it in the nature of
     a gift, or present, for He gave Himself to GOD once, to be holy unto
     Him for ever; not in the nature of a Sacrifice, for He died once for
     sin, and rose again, never to die any more; but in that He setteth
     it before the eyes of GOD His FATHER, representing it unto Him, and
     so offering it to His view, to obtain grace and mercy for us. And in
     this sort we also offer Him daily on the altar, in that,
     commemorating His death, and lively representing His bitter Passion,
     endured in His body upon the cross, we offer Him that was once
     crucified, and sacrificed for us on the cross, and all His
     sufferings, to the view and gracious consideration of the ALMIGHTY,
     earnestly desiring, and assuredly hoping, that He will incline to
     pity us, and show mercy unto us, for this His dearest Son's sake,
     who, in our nature for us, to satisfy His displeasure, and to
     procure us acceptation, endured such and so grievous things. This
     kind of offering, or sacrificing CHRIST commemoratively, is twofold,
     inward and outward. Outward, as the taking, breaking, and
     distributing this mystical bread, and pouring out the cup of
     blessing, which is the communion of the blood of CHRIST. The inward
     consisteth in the faith and devotion of the Church and people of
     GOD, so commemorating the Death and Passion of CHRIST, their
     crucified SAVIOUR, and representing and setting it before the eyes
     of the ALMIGHTY, that they fly unto it as their only stay and
     refuge, and beseech Him to be merciful unto them for His sake that
     endured all these things, to satisfy His wrath, and work their peace
     and good. And in this sense, and answerable hereunto that is, which
     we find in the Canon, where the Church desireth ALMIGHTY GOD to
     accept those oblations of bread and wine which she presenteth unto
     Him; and to make them to become unto the faithful communicants the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST, Who the night before He was betrayed took
     bread, &c. . . .And then proceedeth and speaketh unto ALMIGHTY GOD
     in this sort: Wherefore, O LORD, we Thy servants, and Thy holy
     people, mindful of that most blessed Passion of the same CHRIST Thy
     Son our LORD, as also of His resurrection from the dead and His
     glorious ascension into heaven, do offer to Thy divine Majesty, out
     of Thine own gifts consecrated, and by mystical blessing made unto
     us the Body and Blood of Thy Son CHRIST, a pure Sacrifice, a holy
     Sacrifice, and an undefiled Sacrifice; the holy bread of eternal
     life, and the cup of everlasting salvation;" that is, we offer to
     Thy view, and set before Thine eyes, the crucified body of CHRIST
     Thy Son, which is here present in mystery and Sacrament, and the
     Blood which He once shed for our sakes, which we know to be that
     pure, holy, undefiled, and eternal Sacrifice, wherewith only Thou
     art pleased; desiring Thee to be merciful unto us for the merit and
     worthiness thereof, and so to look upon the same Sacrifice, which
     representatively we offer to Thy view, as to accept it for a full
     discharge of us from our sins, and a perfect, propitiation; that so
     Thou mayest behold us with a pleased, cheerful, and gracious
     countenance. This is the meaning of that prayer in the Canon; supra
     quae propitio et sereno vultu respicere digneris, &c. as the best
     interpreters of the Canon do tell us. . . .

     There is nothing therefore found in the Canon of the Mass, rightly
     understood, that maketh anything for the new real offering of CHRIST
     to GOD His Father, as a propitiatory sacrifice to take away sins;
     neither did the Church of GOD at and before Luther's time, know or
     believe any such thing, though there were some in the midst of her,
     that so conceived of this mystery as the Romanists now do.--pp.
     203--206.

     This is the present doctrine of the Roman Church: but this was not
     the doctrine of the Church at the time of Luther's appearing: for
     the best and principal men then living, taught peremptorily that
     CHRIST is not newly offered any otherwise, than that He is offered
     to the view of GOD; nor any otherwise sacrificed, than in that His
     Sacrifice on the cross is commemorated and represented. "The things
     that are offered in the Sacrament are two, (saith the author of the
     Enchiridion of Christian Religion, published in the provincial
     Council of Cologne,) the true Body of CHRIST with all His merits,
     and His mystical Body, with all the gifts which it hath received of
     GOD. In that, therefore, the Church doth offer the true Body and
     Blood of CHRIST to GOD the FATHER, it is merely a representative
     Sacrifice, and all that is done is but the commemorating and
     representing of that Sacrifice which was once offered on the cross.
     But in that it dedicateth itself, which is the mystical body of
     CHRIST unto GOD, it is a true, but a spiritual Sacrifice, that is,
     an Eucharistical Sacrifice of praise, thanksgiving, and of obedience
     due unto GOD. CHRIST, therefore, is offered and sacrificed on the
     Altar, but sacramentally and mystically; in that in the Sacrament
     there is a commemoration and remembrance of that which was once
     done. . .." The most reverend Canons of the Metropolitan Church of
     Cologne agree with the author of the Enchiridion. . . .In the book
     proposed by Charles V., written by certain learned and godly men,
     much commended to him by men worthy to be credited, as opening a way
     for the composing of the controversies in religion, we shall find
     the same explication of this point, touching the Sacrifice that I
     have already delivered out of the former authors. . . .Hosius was of
     the same opinion with those before recited:. . .Michael, Bishop of
     Werspurge, a man learned, godly, and truly catholic. . .and with him
     agreeth another learned Bishop (Thomas Watson), sometime Bishop of
     Lincoln, in his Sermons upon the Seven Sacraments. . . .With these
     Gregorius Wicelius, a man much honoured by the Emperors Ferdinand
     and Maximilian, fully agreeth, defining the Mass to be a Sacrifice
     rememorative, and of praise and thanksgiving: and in another place
     he saith, the Mass is a commemoration of the passion of CHRIST
     celebrated in the public assembly of Christians, where many give
     thanks for the price of redemption. With these agreeth the Interim,
     published by Charles V. in the assembly of the States of the Empire,
     at Augusta, March 15th, 1548, and there accepted by the same States.
     But some man happily will say, here are many authorities alleged, to
     prove that sundry worthy Divines in the Roman Church, in Luther's
     time, denied the new real offering or sacrificing of CHRIST, and
     made the Sacrifice of the Altar to be only representative and
     commemorative, but before his time there were none found so to
     teach. Wherefore I will show the consent of the Church to have been
     clear for us, touching this point, before his time, and against the
     Tridentine doctrine now prevailing. . . . Wherefore that which
     Bellarmine hath, that Aquinas and the other Schoolmen, for the most
     part, do no otherwise say that the Sacrifice of the Mass is an
     immolation of CHRIST, but in that it is a representation of CHRIST'S
     immolation on the cross, or because it hath like effect with that
     true and real sacrificing of CHRIST that implied His death, is most
     true; his evasion is found too silly, and it is made clear and
     evident that the best and worthiest amongst the guides of GOD'S
     Church, before Luther's time, taught as we do, that the Sacrifice of
     the Altar is only the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and a
     mere representation and commemoration of the Sacrifice once offered
     on the cross, and, consequently, arc all put under the curse, and
     anathematized by the Tridentine Council. . . .

     Wherefore, to conclude this point, it appeareth by that which hath
     been said, that neither the Canon of the Mass, rightly understood,
     includeth in it any such points of Romish religion, as some imagine,
     but in sundry, yea, in all the capital differences, between us and
     them of the Roman faction, witnesseth for us, and against them; and
     that the Prelates and guides of the Church formerly made no such
     construction of it, as now is made. . . . For the Canon of the Mass,
     rightly understood, is found to contain nothing in it contrary to
     the rule of faith, and the profession of the Protestant Churches;
     and the construction that they now make of the word sacrifice, so
     often used in it, appeareth to be a mere perverting of the meaning
     of the Canon to a sinister sense, never intended by the authors of
     it, nor ever allowed by the best men in the Church. This Canon,
     notwithstanding, is found to have some passages, that, in the
     judgment of men rightly learned, cannot well have any true meaning,
     unless the old custom of offering bread and wine on the LORD'S
     table, out of which the Sacrament may be consecrated, be restored;
     so that those parts, that custom being discontinued, may well be
     omitted. Some other parts are obscure, and need explication, which
     being added or inserted, it will differ little or nothing from those
     forms of consecration of those holy mysteries, that now are in use
     in the Reformed Churches of England, and some other places,
     therefore brought in because in later ages many things were added to
     the Canon anciently in use, which the best and gravest in the Church
     thought fit to be taken away, and a new form of divine service to be
     composed. So that the Church that formerly was having no different
     judgment touching matters dogmatical, no liking of those abuses in
     practice, which some had brought in, and wishing things to be
     brought to such a course as Protestants now have brought them, it
     may well be said to have been a Protestant Church, in such sort as I
     have formerly shewed.--pp. 210--221.

     Yet let us see what it is that this grave censurer reprehendeth for
     first, as he saith ... we have no altar, we admit no sacrifice. . .
     . For answer whereunto, I say briefly, (for he deserveth no large
     answer) that we have altars in the same sort the Fathers had, though
     we have thrown down Popish altars: that we admit the Eucharist to be
     rightly named a Sacrifice, though we detest the blasphemous
     construction the Papists make of it.--p. 761.

    BUCKERIDGE, BISHOP.--Discourse concerning Kneeling at the Communion.
   [Subjoined to a Sermon preached before his Majesty at Whitehall, March
    22nd, 1617, touching prostration and kneeling in the worship of GOD.
                                   1618.]

     The first reason then is this: It is Pars cultus Dei, a part of
     divine worship; in which sense I understand not the worship of GOD
     in a large sense, for every act that concurreth in the worship of
     GOD; but in a move near and proper sense, as it doth exhibit and
     offer up somewhat to GOD. . .Now the Sacrament is a part of GOD'S
     worship. . . in which, as God offereth to us His Son in His Death
     and Passion, and the graces of the Holy Spirit, so we offer to Him
     ourselves.

     In Baptism ... we offer up ourselves and our children to be sons of
     GOD by grace. . . The like is done in the Eucharist ... we there
     give and offer up our whole selves a holy and living Sacrifice
     acceptable to GOD, which is our reasonable service of Him. . . In
     which respect the Fathers call this Sacrament Latreiam, divine
     worship.--"While we do show the death of the Only Begotten Son of
     GOD, that is, JESUS CHRIST, and His resurrection from the dead, and
     His assumption into heaven, we profess to perform the unbloody
     worship of GOD in the Church". . . so saith St. Cyril. And St.
     Augustine saith:--"We do owe to GOD that service, which in Greek is
     called divine worship, either in certain sacraments or in
     ourselves." Again, "The oblation of Sacrifice pertaineth ad cultum
     latreiae, to divine worship." And again; "Sacrifice is divine
     worship." And again; "Infants know not that which is set upon the
     altar, and performed in the celebration of piety:" where this
     Sacrament is called "piety."

     As, in the law, circumcision did consecrate and seal the seed of
     Abraham to GOD; and the Passover did prepare them to the sacrifice
     of GOD in the wilderness; yea, and this Passover is called Religio,
     Religion; "what is this service?" Exod. xii. 26. and Victima
     transitus Domini, ver. 27. "the Sacrifice of the LORD'S Passover."
     And Exod. xiii.10. Custodies hujusmodi cultum, "thou shall observe
     this ordinance, or form of worship:" so in the Gospel, Baptism doth
     regenerate and consecrate us to GOD; and the Eucharist doth offer us
     up in sacrifice to Him. And this Sacrament may better be called an
     act of religion or piety, and the Sacrifice of the LORD'S Passover,
     since that was typus agni Paschalis, a type of the Paschal lamb, and
     here are offered membra agni Paschalis, the members of the Paschal
     lamb.

     And this offering up of ourselves to Him, is indeed the true and
     daily Sacrifice of the Christian Church, which being the mystical
     body of CHRIST, cannot offer CHRIST'S natural Body, which CHRIST
     offered once for all upon the Cross; but offereth His mystical body,
     that is herself, by CHRIST her High Priest and Head, unto GOD, as
     St. Peter saith (1 Peter ii. 5.), of which I shall speak more in the
     next reason.--pp. 38--44.

     The second reason, it is Sacrificium, or congeries Sacrificiorum, a
     Sacrifice, or rather a collection and gathering together, a sum or
     epitome of all the Sacrifices of Christianity. And Sacrifice was
     ever to be offered with all humility of soul and body, and therefore
     with kneeling, the true gesture and representation of humility.

     I would not be mistaken, as if I spake in favour of any external
     daily Sacrifice of the Church, such as the Jews had in time of the
     law; for the one Sacrifice of CHRIST, once offered upon the Cross,
     hath made a full and perfect redemption, and needs no new Sacrifice,
     nor reiteration of the old to perfect it. ...

     The Church, according to CHRIST'S commandment, keeps the memory of
     this offering in this Sacrament: "Do this in remembrance of Me:" but
     she doth not reiterate the action, or take upon her to offer the
     body of CHRIST: ... In which respect I cannot sufficiently marvel at
     Bellarmine's subtilty, that will have this Sacrament to be an
     external proper Sacrifice, not only as the name Sacrifice doth
     signify rem sacrificatam, the thing sacrificed, that is, CHRIST
     crucified, which is there truly given and received; but also as it
     doth signify actionem sacrificii, or sacrificandi, the action of
     sacrifice: so that the action of CHRIST'S Sacrifice on the Cross,
     and of the Priest's in the Host, must be one and the same
     action.....

     And as absurd is his other conceit, that one and the same action
     should be res et repraesentatio rei, the thing and the
     representation of the thing. . . . Surely in this conceit Bellarmine
     is a plain sophister, and no logician; for he doth instance only in
     this particular of this Sacrament, that it is the representation of
     CHRIST'S Sacrifice upon the Cross, as CHRIST and all antiquity call
     it; and the very Sacrifice itself or action of the Sacrifice; . . so
     that, if the Sacrament be the representation of the true, proper,
     and external Sacrifice of the Church, then it cannot be the
     Sacrifice itself.

     And the truth is, that the Church hath ever offered true sacrifices,
     and that in this Sacrament; but, as St. Peter speaketh, they be
     hostiae spirituales, "spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable unto GOD, per
     Jesum Christum, by JESUS CHRIST:" so the Church offereth her daily
     spiritual Sacrifice, not Jesum, but per Jesum Christum, not JESUS
     CHRIST, (He only hath power to offer Himself,) but by JESUS CHRIST
     her High Priest, by whom they are presented unto, and accepted of
     GOD. But although his Sacrifice be not an external proper Sacrifice,
     as our adversaries would make it, yet it hath in it spiritual
     Sacrifices of divers sorts, all which require all humility of soul
     and body in the offerers. For to say nothing of the elements, that
     were in all times and ages brought by the people in sportulis, in
     little baskets, and so in a sort offered up to be consecrated for
     the uses of the congregation, which is now done by public charge;
     there are besides divers other spiritual Sacrifices in the whole
     action of the ministration of this Sacrament.

     First then, as the sacrifices of the law had a double respect;
     first, as they were offered up to GOD; secondly, as they were
     communicated and eaten by those men that offered them: so this
     Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper, which contains a commemoration of
     CHRIST'S one and only all-sufficient Sacrifice, consummated upon the
     Cross, and never more to be reiterated by any man, hath the same
     double respect in it; and therefore as it is represented to GOD by
     our consecration, so it may well be called Sacrificium
     repraesentativum, or commemorativum, a representative, or
     commemorative Sacrifice. And that is warranted in the words of our
     SAVIOUR. "Do this, in Mei commemorationem, in remembrance of Me, or
     of My death;" and so expounded by the Apostle, "so often as ye eat
     this bread, and drink this cup, annunciatis mortem Domini, ye show
     forth, or represent and commemorate the LORD'S death till He come."
     And as it is received by us, it may be called Sacrificium
     communicativum, a communicative Sacrifice, or the communication or
     application of that Sacrifice that was offered for us on the Cross,
     and that is most plain in the Apostle; "The cup of blessing which we
     bless, is it not the communion of the Blood of CHRIST? The bread
     which we break, is it not the communion of the Body of CHRIST?" So
     that though there be not idem Sacrificium, the same Sacrifice, as it
     denoteth the action of sacrificing or offering, which is here done
     only by way of representation, yet it is idem sacrificatum, the same
     thing sacrificed; CHRIST crucified, that is, represented to GOD, and
     communicated to us.

     And surely every one that doth desire to be heard, and therefore
     concludes his prayers with these words, per Jesum Christum, Dominum
     nostrum, "through JESUS CHRIST our LORD," doth represent and offer
     CHRIST crucified to GOD, and entreats remission and grace, through
     His Death and Passion. And CHRIST our High Priest that sitteth at
     the right hand of GOD, doth at that instant execute His office, and
     make intercession for us, by representing His wounds and scars to
     His FATHER. In Baptism, in like manner, when we do consecrate and
     dedicate ourselves to GOD'S service, we do as it were offer up
     CHRIST crucified by way of representation, as if we did explicate
     and unfold the Passion of CHRIST at that time, desiring to be
     accepted for His sake. And that made St. Augustine to say,--"at that
     time every one offereth the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Passion for his
     sins, when he is dedicated in the faith of that Passion:" and the
     manner he explicated) with quodam modo offert; "he offers in a
     sort," not properly but by way of representation and application. .
     . . But this Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, as a more
     ample and perfect image, doth more fully represent CHRIST'S Death,
     and by way of memorial offer it to GOD, as being instituted and
     commanded for a representation and commemoration thereof. And this
     is generally received of antiquity, and so allowed by the Romish
     sacrificers, though they proceed further without ground or reason.

     For why? St. Augustine said well, Ipse cui offert, qui offert,
     quique offertur: these be proper to CHRIST, to be the Godhead to
     whom He offereth, to be the Priest that offereth, and the Sacrifice
     that is offered up to GOD. ... As for Christians "they celebrate the
     memory of this Sacrifice, performed on the Cross, by the sacred
     oblation and participation of the Body and Blood of CHRIST? So
     CHRIST'S Sacrifice is the truth, and ours the representation of that
     truth." And in his twenty-third Epistle--"He was once offered in
     Himself, and yet in the Sacrament He is not only offered yearly at
     the solemnity of the Passover, but also every day." ....

     These and many other sentences of the Fathers made the Master of the
     Sentences to rest in this; that this Sacrament is a representation,
     or memory of that Sacrifice performed on the altar of the Cross; and
     further went not the divinity of his time. And Thomas, that lived
     long after him, knew no other doctrine. And he giveth only two
     reasons why it is called Immolatio Christi, the sacrificing or
     immolation of CHRIST. First, because it is Imago quondam passionis
     Christi. It is a certain image or representation of CHRIST'S passion
     . . . The second reason is, Quia participes efficimur fructus
     Dominicae passionis; because by this Sacrament we are made partakers
     of the fruit and benefit of CHRIST'S Passion, therefore it is called
     the Sacrifice of CHRIST; so Thomas goeth no further than
     representation and participation. I descend no further: for by this
     it is plain who are veteratores and novatores, the corrupters of
     antiquity, that removed the ancient bounds, and the authors of
     novelty, that not only speak old divinity novè in new words and
     forms, but also bring in nova, new and strange doctrines, and
     articles never heard of. That this Sacrament is the only proper
     external daily Sacrifice of the Church, without which the other two
     relatives cannot stand; viz. that there is no religion without
     priesthood, nor priesthood without Sacrifice; here it is manifest
     where the house began to run to decay, and where the enemy sowed
     tares: for, as Thomas saith, the Altar is the representation of
     CHRIST'S Cross, and the Priest bears the image of CHRIST our High
     Priest; and so his Sacrifice is but a representation of CHRIST'S
     Sacrifice, exemplum illius, as before. . . .--pp. 47--57.

     This was the received doctrine of the Fathers, and ancient School
     ... So then, it is manifest that this Sacrament is no proper
     external Sacrifice, but only commemorative, and communicative of the
     all-sufficient Sacrifice of CHRIST . . .

     This Sacrament is called a Sacrifice, because in it we offer and
     present unto GOD "ourselves, our souls and bodies, to be a living
     Sacrifice unto GOD, which is our reasonable service and worship of
     Him," as the Apostle calleth it ... And this, indeed, is the daily
     Sacrifice of the Church; fur CHRIST, the Head, offered Himself as
     the only propitiatory Sacrifice for sin; ..." Of which (His
     Sacrifice) He would have the daily Sacrifice of the Church to be a
     Sacrament," &c. (August. lib. x. De Civ. Dei, cap. 20.).. Again
     (cap. 19.)... But the clearest and fullest place is in the sixth
     chapter: . . "This is the Sacrifice of Christians; many are one body
     in CHRIST; which Sacrifice the Church doth frequent in the Sacrament
     of the Altar, known to the faithful, when it is demonstrated to her
     (the Church) that in that oblation which she offereth, herself (that
     is, the Church) is offered . . . And this place of St. Augustine may
     serve as an interpretation of the Fathers' authorities, that speak
     of the offering of the body of CHRIST, which are to be understood of
     the offering of His natural Body, by way of representation or
     commemoration, or else of His mystical body (the Church) which
     offereth herself as a daily Sacrifice to GOD.--pp. 57--63.

     I have been too long in setting down these places of St. Augustine,
     who is the most doctrinal among the ancient Fathers; and, therefore,
     I content myself with him, and some few more; only I add Eusebius,
     who joineth both these; that is, the commemorative Sacrifice, and
     the Sacrifice of ourselves together, with other Sacrifices,
     concurring in that action:--"We sacrifice after a new manner,
     according to the New Testament; a pure Sacrifice; .. . And now,
     also, we burn that prophetical sweet odour in every place, . . alias
     celebrantes memoriam, sometimes celebrating the memory of that great
     Sacrifice, according to those things which are delivered by Him . .
     and sometimes consecrating our whole selves to Him ... to His High
     Priest, even to the Word Himself." Here is both the commemorative
     Sacrifice, and the Sacrifice or offering of ourselves, our souls and
     bodies, besides the Sacrifice of prayer and praise, and contrition,
     which I am now to speak of, all joined in this one sentence of
     Eusebius.--pp. 65--7.

     To proceed then with this collection of Sacrifices in this one
     Sacrifice, the third is Sacrificium non pecoris trucidati, and as
     St. Augustine calleth it, The Sacrifice not of slain beasts, but of
     broken and contrite hearts, by repentance and sorrow for sin. . .
     .--p. 67.

     I proceed to the fourth, for I shall have occasion to speak of this
     again . . . and that is Sacrificium orationis et laudis, the
     Sacrifice of prayer and praise. . . .

     As for prayer ... I ever thought that our SAVIOUR, before He offered
     His all-sufficient Sacrifice on the Cross, did offer up
     supplications with strong cries and tears, and He was heard for His
     reverence. And His action being our institution, we should follow
     His steps, and offer our prayers and supplications with strong cries
     and tears before we did presume to present CHRIST sacrificed to His
     FATHER, or receive Him ourselves, or offer up the sacrifice of our
     souls and bodies, and the whole Church, which is the daily Sacrifice
     of the Church. I ever took it, that the Apostles knew best how this
     sacrament was to be received; . . . And in the 13th of the Acts, the
     Church at Antioch, before they sent out Paul and Barnabas, they
     ministered, fasted, and prayed: here is fasting and prayer, and it
     is likely it was not without the LORD'S Supper; for that which we
     read ministering, is translated by Erasmus to be sacrificing,
     Sacrificantibus illis, and sacrificing did surely imply the
     representation of CHRIST'S Sacrifice; and the word is
     leitourgountwn, "offering of divine worship:" and so there was then
     a Liturgy, and all Liturgies had this Sacrament in them: so prayer
     went through with this Sacrament . .--p. 72.

     I come to the fifth Sacrifice that I find in the LORD'S Supper, and
     that is Sacrificium Eleemosynarum, the Sacrifice of Alms. . .--p.
     78.

     This is then plain, that, in the ministration and receiving of the
     Sacrament, there are these five kinds of Sacrifices: 1. The
     Sacrifice commemorative to Godward, and communicative to us. 2, The
     Sacrifice of ourselves, our souls and bodies, in which the Church
     offers the mystical body of CHRIST, that is, itself, the Church, to
     GOD, by her High Priest, CHRIST, &c.--And in the offering of all
     these solemn Sacrifices, humility, both of soul and body, is
     necessarily required; and, therefore, this Sacrament ought to be
     received with kneeling.--p. 84.

     I come now to the reasons for sitting, for the authorities are for
     standing.--p. 214.

     The third reason is prearogativa mensae et convivarum: the
     prerogatives and liberties of a table and a guest ....

     But this man might have remembered, that the Eucharist is as well
     called Sacrificium, and Cultus Dei, as Coena: and then kneeling and
     prostration, and adoration, are more fitting gestures for
     sacrificers and worshippers, than sitting is for guests at the table
     of the LORD of all power and majesty.

     And, therefore, as in St. Paul there is mensa Domini, "the table of
     the Lord;" so there is habemus altare, "we have an altar," &c.; and
     the word altar, in the Fathers, is more common than the word table;
     so that, as the name of table may plead for sitting, so the name of
     altar enforceth worship, and Sacrifice, and that implied adoration
     and kneeling.--pp. 227--9.

     The fourth reason is, it is contra jus naturae, contrary to the law
     of nature, kneeling at a feast or banquet: therefore it is unlawful
     to kneel at the feast or Supper of the LORD.

     Here I would be glad to know where this law of nature is written, or
     to be found. If by the law of nature be understood the moral law, I
     find bowing down, or kneeling, commanded there in the worship of
     GOD. . . . And this Sacrament is a principal part of GOD'S worship.
     ... If he mean the law of nature, that is, the nature of the thing
     or action .... then kneeling is most agreeable to the nature of the
     action, or thing done, that is the Eucharist: for it is altogether
     an action of subjection, and humility, and therefore kneeling is
     most suitable to it. It is Cultus Dei, the worship of GOD, and a
     most eminent and principal part of it. It is a Sacrifice
     commemorative: it is a Sacrifice of ourselves, our souls and bodies:
     it is a Sacrifice of contrition offered by penitentiaries: a
     Sacrifice of prayer, offered by suppliants; and kneeling is most fit
     for Sacrifices: it is the Eucharist or Sacrifice of praise: and in
     the Revelation, where it is often said, that the elders did fall
     down and worship, there is seldom or never any prayer made for want,
     but honour, and glory, and praise for that which was received. So
     kneeling is most suitable to thanksgiving.--pp. 232, 3.

                   ID.--Funeral Sermon for Bishop Andrews.

     In the tenth verse (Heb. xiii.) the Apostle saith, "We have an
     altar," &c. . . Habemus altare. We have; that is, Christians . . .
     And yet it is commune altare, a common altar to all Christians. And
     so it is externum altare, not only a spiritual altar in the heart of
     every Christian; then St. Paul should have said habeo, or habet
     unusquisque: I have, and every Christian hath in private to himself:
     but "We have an altar," that is, all Christians have; and it must be
     external, else all Christians cannot have it.

     Our Head CHRIST offered His Sacrifice of Himself upon the Cross; and
     the Cross of CHRIST was the "altar" of our Head, where He offered
     the unicum, verum, et proprium Sacrificium, the only, true, proper
     Sacrifice, propitiatory for the sins of mankind; in which all other
     Sacrifices are accepted, and applicatory of this propitiation. . . .

     Now as CHRIST'S cross was His altar, where He offered Himself for
     us, so the Church hath an altar also, where it offereth itself: not
     Christum in capite, but Christum in membris; not CHRIST the Head
     properly (but only by commemoration), but CHRIST the members. For,
     CHRIST cannot be offered truly, and properly, no more but once upon
     the cross. . . .

     Therefore St. Paul proceeds in the 15th verse: "By Him, therefore,
     let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to GOD continually; that is,
     the fruit of our lips giving thanks to His name." "Let us offer up
     to GOD:" Christians then have an offering: and "let us offer up to
     GOD continually;" this is the ground of the daily Sacrifice of
     Christians, that answereth to the daily Sacrifice of the Jews. And
     this Sacrifice of praise and thanks may well be understood the
     Eucharist, in which we chiefly praise and thank GOD for this His
     chief and great blessing of our redemption.

     And this, and all other Sacrifices of the Church, external and
     spiritual, must be offered up and accepted per Ipsum, in, by, and
     through CHRIST. St. Paul saith not, Ipsum offeramus, let us offer
     Him (that is), CHRIST; but let us offer and sacrifice per Ipsum, by
     Him, in whom only we and our Sacrifices are accepted. . . .

     So, likewise, the Church, which is CHRIST'S mystical body, offers
     not CHRIST'S natural body , it hath no power to offer the natural
     body . . . And there is no such thing in Scripture, nor I presume
     can easily be shewed out of any of the probable and undoubted
     Fathers, but the Church offers corpus mysticum, CHRIST'S mystical
     body (that is, itself) to GOD in her daily Sacrifice.--pp. 1-3.

                  MORTON, BISHOP.--Catholic Appeal, ii. 7.

     May not all these sufficiently justify the objected exception? yes
     verily, especially seeing it is ... only a large extension of the
     text, to signify a Sacrifice in the Eucharist, although in a sense
     orthodoxal, and (if they shall permit us so to speak,) plainly
     protestantial, signifying, (according unto St. Augustine's
     exposition,) "the commemorative representation of the sacrifice of
     CHRIST'S body crucified upon the Cross." ... --p. 166.

     After the contention about the word Sacrifice, which, in respect of
     the superstitious apprehension of corruptive times, hath been judged
     dangerous and incommodious, we descend to the question of doctrine,
     concerning the true nature of a Sacrifice; which is by the
     Romanists, in their Council of Trent, propounded as a doctrine of
     faith, and is by them defined to be "the same Sacrifice, truly
     propitiatory, now offered by the ministry of the Priest, which was
     offered by CHRIST Himself on the cross:" "so fully the same (saith
     their Cardinal,) that as the substance of CHRIST, which is really in
     the Host, differeth not from the substance of His Body in heaven, so
     the immolation and sacrificing of Him in the forms of bread, and His
     sacrificing upon the cross, is the very same." But "Protestants,
     (saith the same, our greatest adversary) although they allow this to
     be a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and of divine worship to GOD, yet do
     they not esteem it to have the proper nature of a Sacrifice, but to
     be so called after a large and improper manner of speech:" in the
     which large acceptation Protestants may account it "propitiatory"
     also. So that the controversy is only concerning the proper and
     improper signification of terms, and compriseth two questions:
     first, whether the Eucharist be a true essential Sacrifice;
     secondly, whether it be properly propitiatory, and available in
     itself for remission of sins, or no. Both which, we wish, may be
     decided by the verdict of ancient Fathers, by the tenor of CHRIST'S
     institution, and by the principles of the Romish Church, and in
     every of these by the confessions of our learned adversaries.--pp.
     168, 9. As for the Protestants, they, in their divine and public
     service, do profess CHRIST the Son of GOD, to be the only true
     Priest of the New Testament; who, being GOD and man, was only able
     to work in Himself propitiation with GOD for man; and His Sacrifice
     once offered upon the cross, to be the all and only sufficient
     Sacrifice for the remission of sins; which, by an Eucharistical and
     thankful commemoration, (according unto the acknowledged tenor of
     ancient Liturgies, "for all the faithful, whether Martyrs,
     Patriarchs, Prophets, or Apostles," and all Saints) they present
     unto GOD, as an effectual propitiation both for the quick and the
     dead; by the which prayers they apply the same propitiatory
     Sacrifice unto the good of all that are capable:--but what? not the
     Body as it is glorified, but as then freshly bleeding on the cross;
     which doth, not by a casual or deceivable intention of the Priest,
     but according unto the faith of the believer, nor by a finite virtue
     of that sacrifice, but by an infinite, work a full remission, not
     only of venial, but also of mortal sins, according unto the tenor of
     holy writ ["If any"], excluding no penitent and sinner, and ["from
     all"] excepting no sin; and by the same virtue doth redeem us no',
     so much from temporal punishment, as from eternal:--building this
     their doctrine not upon uncertain conjectures, but as it becometh
     the heirs of truth, upon the written will of our testator JESUS: and
     finally defend the same not with the inconstancy of innumerable
     contradictions, but with the strength of an universal consent. All
     which do perfect this our appeal, and we conclude in the sentence of
     St. Augustine, "A Sacrifice (saith he, using the word in a large
     sense), when it is offered unto God, according to His inspiration
     and doctrine, it is true religion; but if it want that direction, it
     is a pestilent and contagious superstition."--pp. 188, 9.

   ANDREWS, BISHOP AND DOCTOR--Sermon of the worshipping of Imaginations.

     Imaginations touching the "breaking of bread:" . . . Concerning
     which, as the Church of Rome hath her imaginations: first, in that
     she many times celebrateth this mystery sine fractione, without any
     "breaking" at all. Whereas (as heretofore hath been shewed out of 1
     Cor. x. 18.), it is of the nature of an Eucharist or Peace-offering:
     which was never offered but it was eaten, that both these might be a
     representation of the memory of that Sacrifice, and together an
     application to each person by partaking it. And secondly, in that
     she hath indeed no "breaking of bread" at all...... As these are
     their imaginations, so we want not ours. For many among us fancy
     only a Sacrament in this action, and look strange at the mention of
     a Sacrifice: whereas, we not only use it as a nourishment spiritual
     (as that it is too), but a mean also to renew a covenant with GOD,
     by virtue of that Sacrifice, as the Psalmist speaketh, (Psalm 1. 5.)
     So our Saviour CHRIST in the institution telleth us, (Luke xxii.
     10.) And the Apostle, (Heb. xiii. 10.) And the old writers use no
     less the word "Sacrifice," than "Sacrament;" "altar," than "table;"
     "offer," than "eat;" but both indifferently, to shew there is
     both.--Sermons, Appendix, p. 35.

          ID.--Responsio ad Apologiam Card. Bellarmini, cap. viii.

     And this it is whereat they of our side do "marvel," not that
     whereat the Cardinal there feigneth that they marvel. For they
     "believe that the Eucharist was instituted by our LORD" for the
     commemoration of Him; even of His Sacrifice; or, if we may so speak,
     (si ita loqui liceat) for a commemorative Sacrifice: and not only
     for a "Sacrament," or "spiritual food." This, however, though they
     admit, yet they deny that these two uses, (thus instituted by the
     LORD at the same time and conjointly,) can be rent asunder by man,
     or be broken off the one from the other, either by reason of the
     negligence of the people, or the avarice of the priests. (They hold)
     that the Sacrifice which is there, is eucharistic: of which
     Sacrifice it is the law that he who offereth it partake of it: and
     partake of it by taking and eating (as our SAVIOUR commanded.) For
     "to partake impetrando" is a modern and novel kind of partaking:
     even much more than the private mass itself.

     And from what I have now said (concerning the commemoration there
     made of the Sacrifice, or the commemorative Sacrifice), it may be
     seen that that is all to no purpose which the Cardinal (without any
     occasion, however,) putteth in touching the "antiquity" of this
     word. For the King said nothing touching that word .... But do ye
     take away from the Mass your Transubstantiation, and there will not
     be long any controversy with us concerning the Sacrifice. That a
     memory is there made of the Sacrifice, we grant willingly. That your
     CHRIST made of bread is sacrificed there, we will never grant. The
     word "Sacrifice" the King knoweth is used by the Fathers, nor doth
     he "put it amongst novelties:" but that of your "Sacrifice in the
     Mass" he both "dareth" and doth so "put."--pp. 183, 4.

                  ID.--Sermons Of the Resurrection. No. 7.

     Thus CHRIST is a passover . . . But, above all, His death, His
     offering was it... there, our sins passed from us to Him. Then and
     there passed the destroyer over us ... Of which passing our sins to
     Him, and GOD'S wrath over us, this day, and the action of this day,
     is a memorial. ... "Therefore let us keep a feast."

     Eortazwmen, the word is one, but two ways it is turned. Some read
     Celebremus, some other Epulemur. But well: for first, it is kindly,
     when we keep a feast, we make a feast. But this, this feast is not
     celebrated sine hoc epulo. If CHRIST be a propitiatory sacrifice, a
     Peace-offering, I see not how we can avoid but the flesh of our
     peace-offering must be eaten in this feast by us, or else we
     evacuate the offering utterly, and lose the fruit of it: and was
     there a Passover heard of and the lamb not eaten? . . . No
     Celebremus without Epulemur in it.

     Celebremus and epulemur. There be, that refer celebremus to the day:
     epulemur to the action: and so it may, well: both day and action
     have interest in this text. . . .

     But the Fathers usually refer both to the action. Their reason:
     because (in truth) the Eucharist now, in the Gospel, is that the
     Passover was under the Law: the antitype answering to their type of
     the Paschal Lamb. It is plain, by the immediate passage of it from
     the one to the other: that no sooner done, than this began. Look how
     soon the Paschal Lamb eaten, presently the holy Eucharist
     instituted, to succeed in the place of it for ever. And yet more
     plain, that this very Scripture of my text was thought so pertinent,
     and so proper to this action, as it was always said or sung at it.
     And I know no cause, but it might be so still. Two things CHRIST
     there gave us in charge anamnhsiV (chap, xi. 25.) "remembering," and
     lhyiV (chap. xi. 29.) "receiving:" the same two, St. Paul (but, in
     other terms) kataggelia "shewing forth;" koinwnia "communicating."
     Of which, "remembering" and "showing forth" refer to celebremus;
     "receiving" and "communicating," to epulemur here. The first in
     remembrance of Him, CHRIST: what of Him? mortem Domini, His death,
     (saith St. Paul:) to "show forth the LORD'S death." Remember Him,
     that we will, and stay at home; think of Him there: nay, shew Him
     forth ye must. That we will, by a Sermon of Him: nay, it must be Hoc
     facite. It is not mental thinking, or verbal speaking: there must be
     actually somewhat done to celebrate this memory. That done to the
     holy symbols, that was done to Him, to His body, and His blood, in
     the Passover: break the one, pour out the other; to represent
     klwmenon, how His sacred Body was broken; and ekcunomenon, how His
     precious Blood was shed. And in corpus fractum, and sanguis fusus
     there is immolatus. This is it, in the Eucharist, that answereth to
     the Sacrifice in the Passover: the memorial, to the figure. To them
     it was, hoc facite in Mei praefigurationem, Do this in prefiguration
     of Me: to us it is, Do this, in commemoration of Me. To them,
     praenuntiare: to us, annuntiare: there is the difference. By the
     same rules that theirs was, by the same may ours be termed a
     Sacrifice. In rigour of speech, neither of them: for (to speak after
     the exact manner of Divinity) there is but one only Sacrifice, veri
     nominis, properly so called: that is, Christ's death. And that
     Sacrifice but once actually performed, at His death: but ever before
     represented, in figure, from the beginning; and ever since repeated,
     in memory, to the world's end. That only absolute; all else relative
     to it, representative of it, operative by it. The Lamb, but once
     actually slain, in the fulness of time: but virtually, was from the
     beginning, is, and shall be, to the end of the world. That, the
     centre, in which their lines and ours, their types and our antitypes
     do meet. While yet this offering was not, the hope of it was kept
     alive, by the prefiguration of it, in theirs. And after it is past,
     the memory of it still kept fresh in mind, by the commemoration of
     it, in ours. So it was the will of GOD; that so, there might be with
     them a continual foreshowing, and with us a continual showing forth
     the LORD'S death till He come again. Hence it is, that what names
     theirs carried, ours do the like, and the Fathers make no scruple at
     it; no more need we. The Apostle (in the tenth chapter) compareth
     this of ours to the immolata of the Heathen: and (to the Hebrews)
     Habemus aram, matcheth it with the sacrifice of the Jews. And we
     know the rule of comparisons: they must be ejusdem generis.

     Neither do we stay here, but proceed to the other [Epulemur]. For,
     there is another thing yet to be done, which doth present to us that
     which celebremus doth represent. From the Sacrament, is the applying
     the Sacrifice. The Sacrifice, in general, pro omnibus. The
     Sacrament, in particular, to each several receiver, pro singulis.
     Wherein, that is offered to us, that was offered for us; that which
     is common to all, made proper to each one, while each taketh his
     part of it; and made proper by a communion, and union, like that of
     meat and drink, which is most nearly and inwardly made ours, and is
     inseparable for ever. . . .

     Will ye mark one thing more: that epulemur doth here refer to
     immolatus. To CHRIST, not every way considered, but as when He was
     offered. CHRIST'S body that now is; true: but not CHRIST'S body as
     now it is, but as then it was, which was offered, rent, and slain,
     and sacrificed for us. Not as now He is glorified; for so, He is
     not, so He cannot be immolatus; for He is immortal, and impassible.
     But as then He was, when He suffered death (that is) passible and
     mortal. Then, in His passible estate, did He institute this of ours,
     to be a memorial of His passibile, and passio, both. And we are, in
     this action, not only carried up to CHRIST (sursum corda) but, we
     are also carried back to CHRIST; as He was at the very instant, and
     in the very act of His offering. So, and no otherwise, doth this
     text teach. So, and no otherwise, do we represent Him.--pp.
     451--454.

     Now then, this is our conclusion: come we must, and Itaque
     celebremus. . . . The Apostle binds us to do it: the time to do it,
     now. For, if this follow, CHRIST is offered, therefore we are to
     come to His feast: this will follow as strongly, CHRIST is now
     offered, therefore let us now come.....And indeed, if at any time we
     will do it, Quando Pascha, nisi in Pascha, what time is the Passover
     so proper as at the Feast of the Passover? . . . . When the day
     cometh, to remember what was done on the day; and so, what we to do,
     on that day. Pascha quod celebramus, to put us in mind of Pascha
     quod epulamur. For, tell me, will the Sacrifice commemorative, or
     the Sacrament communicative, ever fall more fit than when that was
     offered, which we are to commemorate, and to communicate withal.--p.
     457.

                       ID.--Answer to Cardinal Perron.

                         The Eucharist a Sacrifice.

     1. The Eucharist ever was, and by us is considered, both as a
     Sacrament and as a Sacrifice. 2. A Sacrifice is proper and appliable
     only to divine worship. 3. The Sacrifice of CHRIST'S death did
     succeed to the Sacrifices of the Old Testament. 4. The Sacrifice of
     CHRIST'S death is available for present, absent, living, dead (yea,
     for them that are yet unborn). 5. When we say the dead, we mean it
     is available for the Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors, and all
     (because we are all members of one body): these no man will deny.

     In a word, we hold with St. Augustine, in the very same chapter
     which, the Cardinal citeth, Quod hujus Sacrificii caro et sanguis,
     ante adventum CHRISTI, per victimas similitudinum promittebatur; in
     passione CHRISTI per ipsam veritatem reddebatur; post adventum
     CHRISTI, per Sacramentum memoriae celebratur.

                                   Altars.

     If we agree about the matter of Sacrifice, there will be no
     difference about the Altar. The holy Eucharist being considered as a
     Sacrifice (in the representation of the breaking the bread, and
     pouring forth the cup), the same is fitly called an Altar: which
     again is as fitly called a Table, the Eucharist being considered as
     a Sacrament, which is nothing else but a distribution and an
     application of the Sacrifice to the several receivers. The same St.
     Augustine that, in the place alleged, doth term it an altar, saith
     in another place, CHRISTUS quotidie pascit. Mensa Ipsius est illa in
     media constituta. Quid causa est, O audientes, ut mensam videatis,
     et ad epulas non accedatis? The same Nyssen, in the place cited,
     with one breath calleth it qusiasthrion, that is, an Altar; and iera
     trapeza, that is, the holy Table.

     Which is agreeable also to the Scriptures. For the Altar, in the Old
     Testament, is, by Malachi, called Mensa Domini (Mai. i. 7.) And of
     the Table, in the New Testament, by the Apostle it is said, Habemus
     Altare (Heb. xiii.). Which, of what matter it be, whether of stone,
     as Nyssen; or of wood, as Optatus, it skills not. So that the matter
     of altars makes no difference in the face of our Church.--pp. 6, 7.

                   ID.--MS. Notes upon the Common Prayer.
    [Additional Notes, in Nicholls's Commentary on the Common Prayer, p.
                                    40.]

     "After the Creed."] Lecta confessione Nicena, the Priest adores,
     then he removes the bason from the back of the Altar to the
     forepart. The Bishop ascends with treble adoration, and, lastly,
     kneels down at the Altar.

     Into his hands the Priest, from a by-standing table on the south
     side, reaches first the wafer-bread, in a canister close covered and
     lined with linen. 2dly. The wine in a barrel on a cradle with four
     feet. These the Bislidp offers in the name of the whole congregation
     upon the Altar.

                            ID.--Preces Privatae

     Qui sursum cum Patre sedes,
     Et invisibilis hic praesens nobiscum es,
     Veni ut sanctifices dona proposita,
     Pro quibus, et a quibus, et quibus de causis offeruntur.

     [From the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom. "Thou that sittest on high with
     the Father, and art here invisibly present with us, come Thou to
     sanctify the gifts lying before Thee, for whom, and by whom, and for
     what reason soever they are offered up."--Compare Hickes's Two
     Treatises, Prefatory Discourse, p. xl. (ed. 1711.) Second Collection
     of Controversial Letters, p. xxxix.]

      MASON, PRESBYTER.--Vindication of the Church of England. book v.

     ORTHODOX.--So often as we celebrate the Eucharist, so often do we
     offer CHRIST in a mystery, and sacrifice Him, by way of
     commemoration or representation.--p. 470.

     Our question is concerning the English Ministry, which you attack
     professedly, because it is not exercised in sacrificing. And this
     you contend for as necessary, by an argument drawn from the type of
     Melchizedeck; whom you endeavour to prove out of the Fathers, to
     have sacrificed bread and wine, and that too in figure of CHRIST'S
     celebrating the Eucharist; that from thence you might prove that
     CHRIST sacrificed at His last supper, and consequently enjoined the
     Ministers of the Gospel to do the same, because CHRIST commanded the
     Apostles and their successors to do the same as He did. Here I
     answer, that, though (some of) the Fathers might think that
     Melchizedeck did sacrifice, yet nevertheless they were not of your
     side. For the Sacrifice which ye contend for, is transubstantiated;
     which none of the Fathers knew any thing of. Wherefore, when the
     Fathers understood the Eucharist, according to CHRIST'S institution
     (that is, sacra-mentally, not transubstantially, and of a
     remembrance, representation, or commemoration, not of a Sacrifice
     properly so called, as will appear in its proper place) certainly
     they do by no means fortify your Sacrifice, but rather overthrow
     it.--p. 492.

     For, first, though the LORD'S Supper be called a Sacrifice, by St.
     Cyprian, as well as the rest of the Fathers, yet it is not so called
     properly, but only because it is a memorial and representation of
     that one Sacrifice which was made upon the altar of the Cross.--p.
     493.

     The representative was made in the Eucharist, the real upon the
     Cross. In the first celebration, the representative was before the
     real: in all the rest, the real is before the representative.
     Neither can you conclude, that there is a real Sacrifice properly in
     the Eucharist, because there was a representative one.--p. 531.

     PHILODOX. The true meaning of the Scriptures was well known to the
     ancient Fathers; who all, with one voice, acknowledged both Priest,
     Altar, Oblation, and Sacrifice.

     ORTHODOX. They do so indeed; but not such as you mean. For the
     Sacrifice which they defend in the Eucharist, is not properly
     propitiatory, nor properly a Sacrifice, but only a commemoration,
     and representation of the sovereign Sacrifice of the Cross. . . And
     whatsoever is a commemoration or representation of the Sacrifice of
     the Cross, is different from it (for nothing is a commemoration or
     representation of itself).--pp. 538, 9.

                      WHITE, BISHOP.--Reply to Fisher.

     And the Fathers term the holy Eucharist, an unbloody Sacrifice, not
     because CHRIST is properly, and in His substance offered therein,
     but because His bloody Sacrifice upon the Cross is, by this unbloody
     commemoration represented, called to remembrance, and applied.--Read
     the Sentences of Fathers placed in the margin. [St. Cyprian, cp. OS.
     Augustine, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact. (cf. sup. cit. pp.
     61-64. 66, 7.)] Read also Peter Lombard and the Enchiridion of
     Cologne.--pp. 463, 4.

    LAUD, ARCHBISHOP AND MARTYR.--Conference with Fisher. § 35. Punct. 3.

     And since here's mention happened of Sacrifice, my third instance
     shall be in the Sacrifice which is offered up to GOD, in that great
     and high mystery of our redemption by the death of CHRIST. For as
     CHRIST offered up Himself once for all, a full and all sufficient
     Sacrifice for the sin of the whole world. ["CHRIST by His own blood
     entered once into the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption
     for us." Heb. ix. 12. And this was done by way of Sacrifice. "By the
     offering of the body of JESUS CHRIST once made." Heb. x. 10. "CHRIST
     gave Himself for us, to be an offering, and a Sacrifice of a sweet
     smelling savour unto GOD." Eph. v. 2. Out of which place the School
     infers, Passionem Christi verum Sacrificium fuisse. Thom. p. 3, qu.
     48, art. 3. c. "CHRIST did suffer death upon the cross for our
     redemption, and made there by His one oblation of Himself once
     offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and
     satisfaction for the sins of the whole world." Eccles. Angl.? in
     Canone Consecrationis Eucharist.] So did He institute and command a
     memory of this Sacrifice in a Sacrament, even till His coming again.
     [And CHRIST "did institute, and in His holy Gospel command us to
     continue a perpetual memory of that His precious death, until His
     coming again." Eccles. Angl.? ibid.] For at, and in the Eucharist,
     we offer up to GOD three Sacrifices. One by the Priest only; that's
     the commemorative Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Death represented in bread
     broken, and wine poured out. ["Sacramentum hoc est Commemorativum
     Dominicae Passionis, quae fuit verum Sacrificium; et sic nominatur
     Sacrificium." Thom. p. 3, qu. 73, art. 4. c. "CHRIST being offered
     up once for all in His own proper person, is yet said to be offered
     up, &c., in the celebration of the Sacrament; because His oblation,
     once for ever made, is thereby represented." Lambert in Fox's
     Martyrology, Vol. ii. Edit. Lond. 1597, p. 1053, et postea. "'Tis a
     memorial, or representation thereof." Ibid. "The Master of the
     Sentences judged truly in this point, saying: That which is offered
     and consecrated of the priest, is called a Sacrifice and oblation,
     because it is a Memory and Representation of the true Sacrifice, and
     holy oblation made on the altar of the cross." Archbishop Cranmer,
     in his Answer to Bishop Gardiner, concerning the most holy
     Sacrament.--Lib. v. p. 377. And, again, "This shortly is the mind of
     Lombardus, that the thing which is done at GOD'S Board is a
     Sacrifice, and so is that also which was made upon the cross, but
     not after one manner of understanding, for this was the thing
     indeed, and that is the commemoration of the thing."--Ibid. So,
     likewise, Bishop Jewell acknowledgeth incruentum et rationabile
     Sacrificium, spoken of by Eusebius, de Demonstrat. Evang. lib. i.
     Jewell's Reply against Harding, Art. vii. Divis. 9. Again, "The
     ministration of the holy Communion is sometimes of the ancient
     Fathers called an unbloody Sacrifice, not in respect of any corporal
     or fleshly presence, that is imagined to be there without
     bloodshedding, but for that it representeth and reporteth to our
     minds that one and everlasting Sacrifice that CHRIST made in His
     Body upon the cross." This Bishop Jewell disliketh not, in his
     Answer to Harding. Art. xvii. Divis. 14. "Patres Coenam Dominicam
     duplici de causa vocarunt Sacrificium incruentum. Tum quod sit imago
     et solennis representatio illius Sacrificii quod Christus cum
     sanguinis effusione obtulit in cruce: tum quod sit etiam
     Eucharisticum Sacrificium, id est, Sacrificium laudis et gratiarum
     actionis, cum pro beneficiis omnibus, turn pro redemptione imprimis
     per Christi mortem peracta."--Zanch. in 2. Praecept. Decal. 1. iv.
     p. 459. And Dr. Fulke also acknowledges a sacrifice in the
     Eucharist. In S. Matt. xxvi. 26. "Non dissimulaverint Christiani in
     coena Domini, sive ut ipsi loquebantur, in Sacrificio Altaris
     peculiari quodam modo praasentem se venerari Deum Christianorum, sed
     quae esset forma ejus Sacrificii quod per symbola panis et uni
     peragitur, hoc Veteres pra se non ferebant."--Isa. Casaub. Exercit.
     16. ad Annal. Baron. § 43. p. 560.] Another by the Priest and the
     people, jointly; and that is the Sacrifice of praise and
     thanksgiving, for all the benefits and graces we received by the
     precious Death of CHRIST. [In the Liturgy of the Church of England,
     we pray to GOD, immediately after the reception of the Sacrament,
     that He would be pleased to accept this "our Sacrifice of praise and
     thanksgiving," &c. And Heb. xiii. 15. "The Sacrifice propitiatory
     was made by CHRIST Himself only, but the Sacrifice commemorative and
     gratulatory is made by the Priest and the people."--Archbishop
     Cranmer in his Answer to Bishop Gardiner, 1. v. p. 377.] The third,
     by every particular man for himself only; and that is the Sacrifice
     of every man's body, and soul, to serve Him in both, all the rest of
     his life, for this blessing thus bestowed on him. ["I beseech you,
     brethren, by the mercies of GOD, that you give up your bodies a
     living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto GOD." Rom. xii. 1. "We
     offer, and present unto Thee, O LORD, ourselves, our souls, and
     bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and living Sacrifice unto Thee,"
     &c. So the Church of England in the Prayer after the receiving of
     the blessed Sacrament.] Now thus far these dissenting Churches
     agree, that in the Eucharist there is a Sacrifice of duty, and a
     Sacrifice of praise, and a Sacrifice of commemoration of CHRIST.
     Therefore, according to the former rule, (and here in truth too) it
     is safest for a man to believe the commemorative, the praising, and
     the performing Sacrifice, and to offer them duly to GOD, and to
     leave the Church of Rome in this particular to her superstitions,
     that I may say no more.

                    ID.--MS. Introduction to the Liturgy.
   [From "An Introduction to the Liturgy of the Church of England, written
      by way of preface before Archbishop Laud's collection of various
      readings out of the several ancient Common Prayer Books, &c. . .
   Printed by a copy exactly compared with the original MS., in his Grace
      of Canterbury's library at Lambeth."--See Supplement to Nicholl's
    Commentary on the Book of Common Prayer, where reasons are given for
                 attributing these MS. notes to Abp. Laud.]

     It is objected by the Romanists, that to the very being of a Bishop,
     the order of Priesthood is essentially required, which they say is
     not to be found in the Church of England, neither in the one
     function of the power of sacrificing, nor in the other of
     absolution.

     To which is answered, that by the Book of Common Prayer and
     ordinations, they are called and made Presbyters, Priests, as
     appears thereby. And as touching the function of sacrificing,
     whereby, they say, a true and proper Sacrifice is to be made for the
     sins of the quick and the dead, and an oblation of the very Body and
     Blood of Christ;

     We say, that forasmuch as our Priests have authority to minister the
     Sacraments, and, consequently, the Eucharist, which is a
     representation of the Sacrifice of CHRIST; therefore they may be
     said to offer CHRIST in a mystery, and to sacrifice Him by way of
     commemoration.

     And our Church by the Articles of 1562, Art. xxxi. teacheth, that
     the offering of CHRIST once made is sufficient and perfect, and that
     there needs no other satisfaction for sins, and consequently
     condemns the Mass for the quick and the dead as blasphemous. And by
     the place of Acts xiii. 2, there cannot be anything thence inferred,
     to prove that their ministering at that time, may warrant the Popish
     massing, in these times, as now it is used.

                             ID.--Daily Office.

     O Thou that sittest on high with the Father, and art here invisibly
     present with us, &c. . . .

                   ID.--History of his Troubles and Trial.

     Now we are come to the arraignment of the [Scotch] Liturgy, and the
     Book of Common Prayer;.....for they say:--

     "1. This book inverteth the order of the Communion in the Book of
     England. . . .Of the divers secret reasons of this change we mention
     one only, enjoining the spiritual sacrifice and thanksgiving, which
     is in the book of England pertinently after the Communion, with the
     Prayer of Consecration, before the Communion; and that under the
     name of Memorial, or Oblation; for no other end, but that the
     Memorial and Sacrifice of praise mentioned in it, may be understood
     according to the Popish meaning: (Bellarm. de Missa, 1. "2, c. 21,)
     not the spiritual sacrifice, but of the oblation of the Body of the
     LORD." . . .

     As for the only reason given of this change, it is in my judgment a
     strange one. 'Tis, forsooth, for no other end (they say) but that
     the memorial and sacrifice of praise mentioned in it, may be
     understood according to the Popish meaning, not of the Spiritual
     Sacrifice, but of the Oblation of the Body of the LORD. Now,
     ignorance, and jealousy, whither will you? For the Sacrifice of
     praise and thanksgiving, no man doubts but that it is to be offered
     up. Nor doth any man of learning question it, that I know, but that,
     according to our SAVIOUR'S own command, we are to do whatsoever is
     done in this Office, as a memorial of His Body and Blood offered up,
     and shed for us. (Luke xxii.) Now 'tis one thing to offer up His
     Body, and another to offer up the memorial of His Body, with our
     praise and thanks for that infinite blessing; so that, were that
     change of order made for this end, (which is more than I know,) I do
     not yet see how any Popish meaning, so much feared, can be fastened
     upon it. And the words in that Prayer are plain, (as they are also
     in the Book of England,) that we offer and present unto GOD
     ourselves, our souls, and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and
     lively Sacrifice unto Him. What is there here that can be drawn to a
     Popish meaning, unless it be with the cords of these men's
     vanity?--pp. 109. 114--110.

     Yet the charge goes on--

     "4. The Book of England abolishes all that may import the oblation
     of an unbloody Sacrifice: but here we have, besides the preparatory
     oblation of the elements, which is neither to be found in the Book
     of England now, nor in King Edward's Book of old, the oblation of
     the body and the blood of CHRIST, which Bellarmine calls,
     Sacrificium laudis, quia Deus per illud magnopere laudatur. This
     also agrees well with their late doctrine."

     First, I think no man doubts, but that there is, and ought to be
     offered up to GOD, at the consecration and reception of this
     Sacrament, Sacrificium laudis, the Sacrifice of praise; and that
     this ought to be expressed in the Liturgy, for the instruction of
     the people. And these words, "We entirely desire Thy fatherly
     goodness, mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice of praise and
     thanksgiving," &c. are both in the Book of England, and in that
     which was prepared for Scotland. And if Bellarmine do call the
     oblation of the Body and the Blood of CHRIST a Sacrifice for praise,
     sure he doth well in it; (for so it is) if Bellarmine mean no more,
     by the oblation of the Body and the Blood of CHRIST, than a
     commemoration and a representation of that great Sacrifice offered
     up by CHRIST Himself: as Bishop Jewell very learnedly and fully
     acknowledges. But if Bellarmine go farther than this; and by the
     oblation of the body and the blood of CHRIST, mean, that the Priest
     offers up that which CHRIST Himself did, and not a commemoration of
     it only, he is erroneous in that, and can never make it good.--pp.
     123, 4.

           HALL, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--No Peace with Rome, § xix.

     The priestly office of CHRIST is not a little impeached by the daily
     oblation of the Missal Sacrifice, and the number of mediators. For
     the first: that in the sacred Supper there is a Sacrifice (in that
     sense wherein the Fathers spoke) none of us ever doubted; but that
     is there, either Latrieutical (as Bellarmine distinguishes it not
     ill) or Eucharistical: that is here (as Chrysostom speaks) a
     remembrance of a Sacrifice; that is, as Augustine interprets it, a
     memorial of CHRIST'S passion, celebrated in the Church; and from
     this sweet commemoration of our redemption there arises another.
     Sacrifice, the Sacrifice of praise; and from thence a true
     Peace-offering of the Christian soul: these three Sacrifices offer
     themselves to us here; but for any propitiatory Sacrifice, unless it
     be (as the gloss interprets it) representatively, I find none, none
     essential; none (as the Tridentines labour to persuade) true and
     proper; neither, indeed, can there be. For what? Doth the priest
     offer the same that CHRIST hath offered, or another? If another,
     then not propitiatory, for only CHRIST is our propitiation, if the
     same, then not an unbloody Sacrifice (for CHRIST'S Sacrifice was a
     bloody one): then, the natural being of CHRIST should again be
     destroyed; then, the blood of the Mediator (which I abhor to
     imagine) must be of a finite value and power: yea, CHRIST Himself
     did not sacrifice on the table, but on the cross; for if the
     Sacrifice, which He offered in His supper, were perfect, and fully
     propitiatory, what needed He to die afterward? Wherefore was His
     blood shed upon the cross, which by His transubstantiated blood (not
     yet shed) had formerly redeemed the world? But if it be unbloody,
     then it is not propitiatory; for without shedding of blood (saith
     the Apostle) is no remission.

        MOUNTAGU, BISHOP.--An Answer to a late Gagger of Protestants.

     For why? who can alter CHRIST'S institution? who dare change that
     which He hath ordained? Sacrificium verum et plenum tunc offert in
     Ecclesia Deo Patri, &c. ["He (the priest) doth then offer in the
     Church to GOD the Father a true and full Sacrifice, if he begin so
     to offer, even as he seeth CHRIST Himself did offer,"] saith St.
     Cyprian. "But," saith he again, and we know it is true, Constat, &c.
     ["It is acknowledged that the LORD offered the cup for the
     commemoration of the Passion. And because we make mention of His
     Passion at every Sacrifice, we ought to do nothing else than what He
     did."] Why? because otherwise we offer not the Sacrifice as we
     should. Nec, &c. ["Neither do we celebrate the LORD'S Sacrifice with
     a lawful hallowing, except our oblation and Sacrifice answer to the
     Passion:"] and that cannot be without pouring out of wine, that
     represented) the shedding of His blood. But your Church hath altered
     it; presumptuously done. Who gave your Church such authority? Hear
     St. Cyprian again: Quare, &c. ["Wherefore if CHRIST alone is to be
     heard, we ought not to attend to what any other before us hath
     thought should be done, but what He who is before all, even CHRIST,
     first did. For we ought not to follow the custom of men, but the
     truth of GOD. For if JESUS CHRIST, our LORD and GOD, be Himself the
     High Priest of GOD the Father, and first offered Himself a Sacrifice
     to the Father, and commanded that this should be done for the
     commemoration of Him, then verily that priest doth truly fulfil his
     office in CHRIST'S stead, who copieth that which CHRIST did; and
     doth then offer in the Church to GOD the Father a true and full
     Sacrifice, if he so begin to offer, even as he seeth CHRIST Himself
     did offer."] You do not this; therefore, in St. Cyprian's judgment,
     your Sacrifice is neither full nor true.--pp. 262, 3.

                           ID.--Appeale to Caesar.

     I hope you will not overthrow the Sacrifice. You well confess the
     blessed Sacrament of the altar, or communion table, whether you
     please, to be a Sacrifice. Not propitiatory, as they call it (I will
     use this word "call it," lest you challenge me upon Popery, for
     using "propitiatory") for the living and dead. Not an external,
     visible, true, and proper Sacrifice, but only representative,
     rememorative, and spiritual Sacrifice.--p. 287.

     FORBES (WILLIAM), BISHOP.-- [Consecrated First Bishop of Edinburgh]
                  Considerationes Modestae, lib. iii. c. 1.

     The Eucharistic bread is consecrated to GOD, inasmuch, as from being
     profane, or not sacred, it is made sacred: it is also specially
     dedicated to GOD, as is plain by the actions that are performed, and
     the words that are said concerning it. It cannot, therefore, be
     denied, but that it is specially offered to GOD: moreover, when
     offered to Him, there is the benediction, and there is the eating;
     yea, it is offered and blessed to this end, that it may be eaten.
     There is made, therefore, there, in a certain manner, a Sacrifice of
     bread, which is offered to GOD, and concerning which, by CHRIST'S
     institution, so many words of mystery are said, and sacred rites
     performed, as Casalius rightly observes, De Sacrificio Missae, lib.
     i. cap. 20.

     The holy Fathers, also, very often say that the very Body of CHRIST
     is offered, and sacrificed in the Eucharist, as is clear from almost
     innumerable passages, but not properly and really, with all the
     properties of a Sacrifice preserved, but by a commemoration and
     representation of that which was once accomplished in that one
     Sacrifice of the cross, whereby CHRIST, our High Priest, consummated
     all other Sacrifices; and by pious supplication, whereby the
     ministers of the Church, for the sake of the eternal Victim of that
     one Sacrifice, which sitteth in heaven at the right hand of the
     Father, and is present in the holy table in an unspeakable manner,
     humbly beseech GOD the Father that He would grant that the virtue
     and grace of this eternal Victim may be effectual and salutary to
     His Church, for all the necessities of body and soul--p. 451.

           MEDE, PRESBYTER.--The Christian Sacrifice. Mai. l. 11.
       [Compare Discourse "Of the name Altar," &c. pp. 383--392. Also
                        Discourse li. pp. 284--205.]

     "From the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same, My
     name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense
     shall be offered in My name, and a pure offering: for My name shall
     be great among the heathen, saith the LORD of Hosts."

     This place of Scripture, howsoever now in a manner silenced and
     forgotten, was once, and that in the oldest and purest time of the
     Church, a text of eminent note, and familiarly known to every
     Christian, being alleged by their pastors and teachers, as an
     express and undoubted prophecy of the Christian Sacrifice or solemn
     worship in the Eucharist, taught by our blessed SAVIOUR unto His
     disciples, to be observed of all that should believe in His name:
     and this so generally and grantedly, as could never have been, at
     least so early, unless they had learned thus to apply it by
     tradition from the Apostles. . . .

     For in the age immediately succeeding them, it being the second
     hundred of years after CHRIST, we find it alleged to this purpose by
     Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, the pillars of that age; the former of
     them flourishing within little more than thirty years after the
     death of St. John; and the latter, a disciple of Polycarp, St.
     John's scholar. In the age following, or third seculum, it is
     alleged by Tertullian, Zeno Veronensis, and Cyprian: in the fourth
     seculum, by Eusebius, Chrysostom, Hierome, and Augustine: and in the
     after ages, by whom not? Nor is it alleged by them as some singular
     opinion or private conceit of their own, but as the received
     tradition of the Church; whence in some Liturgies (as that of the
     Church of Alexandria, commonly called the Liturgy of St. Mark) it is
     inserted into the Hymn, or Preface, which begins, AlhqwV axion esti
     kai dikaion--"It is truly meet and right;" the conclusion of the
     hymn or laud there being, "Giving thanks we offer unto Thee, O LORD,
     this reasonable and unbloody service, even that which all nations
     from the rising of the sun to the going down of the same, offer unto
     Thee; for Thy Name shall be great among all nations; and in every
     place incense is offered unto Thy holy Name, and sacrifice and
     oblation."

     Thus you see the antiquity of tradition for the meaning and
     application of this prophecy.

     But for the Christian Sacrifice itself, whereunto it is applied,
     what the ancient Church understood thereby, what and wherein the
     nature of this Sacrifice consisted, is a point, though most needful
     to be known, yet beyond belief obscure, intricate, and perplexed.

     I will chalk out my discourse in this order.

     First, I shall premise, as the ground thereof, a definition of the
     Christian Sacrifice, as the ancient Church meant it.

     Secondly, explain the meaning of my text, by application thereto.

     Thirdly, prove each part of the definition I shall give, by the
     testimonies of the Fathers, Councils, and Liturgies of the first and
     best ages.--pp. 355, 6.

     To begin with the first, the definition of the Christian Sacrifice.
     Under which name first know, that the ancient Church understood not,
     as many suppose, the mere Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     but the whole sacred action or solemn service of the Church
     assembled, whereof this sacred mystery was then a prime and
     principal part, and, as it were, the pearl or jewel of that ring, no
     public service of the Church being without it. This observed and
     remembered, I define the Christian Sacrifice, ex mente antiquae
     Ecclesiae, according to the meaning of the ancient Church, in this
     manner;

     "An oblation of thanksgiving and prayer to GOD the Father, through
     JESUS CHRIST, and His Sacrifice commemorated in the creatures of
     bread and wine, wherewith GOD had been first agnized." So that this
     Sacrifice, as you see, hath a double object or matter: first, praise
     and prayer, which you may call Sacrificium quod; secondly, the
     commemoration of CHRIST'S Sacrifice upon the Cross, which is
     Sacrificium quo, the Sacrifice whereby the other is accepted. For
     all the prayers, thanksgivings, and devotions of a Christian, are
     tendered up unto GOD in the name of JESUS CHRIST crucified.
     According whereunto we are wont to conclude our prayers with
     "through JESUS CHRIST our LORD." And this is the specification
     whereby the worship of a Christian is distinguished from that of the
     Jew. Now that which we in all our prayers and thanksgivings do
     vocally, when we say, "through JESUS CHRIST our LORD," the ancient
     Church, in her public and solemn service, did visibly, by
     representing Him, according as He commanded, in the symbols of His
     body and blood: for there He is commemorated and received by us for
     the same end for which He was given and suffered for us; that
     through Him we receiving forgiveness of our sins, GOD our FATHER
     might accept our service, and hear our prayers we make unto Him.
     What time then so fit and seasonable to commend our devotions unto
     GOD, as when the LAMB of GOD is slain upon the Holy Table; and we
     receive visibly, though mystically, those gracious pledges of His
     blessed Body and Blood? This was that Sacrifice of the ancient
     Church the Fathers so much ring in our ears; "the Sacrifice of
     praise and prayer, through JESUS CHRIST mystically represented in
     the creatures of bread and wine."

     But yet we have not all, there is one thing more my definition
     intimates, when I say, "through the Sacrifice of JESUS CHRIST
     commemorated in the creatures of bread and wine, wherewith GOD had
     first been agnized." The Body and Blood of CHRIST were not made of
     common bread and common wine, but of bread and wine first
     sanctified, by being offered and set before GOD as a present to
     agnize Him the LORD and giver of all: according to that, "The earth
     is the LORD'S, and the fulness thereof;" (Psal. xxiv. 1.) and, "Let
     no man appear before the LORD empty." (Deut. xvi. 1C.) Therefore as
     this Sacrifice consisted of two parts, as I told you, of praise and
     prayer, (which in respect of the other I call Sacrificium quod), and
     of the commemoration of CHRIST crucified (which I call Sacrificium
     quo), so the symbols of bread and wine traversed both; being first
     presented as symbols of praise and thanksgiving to agnize GOD the
     LORD of the creatures in the Sacrificium quod, then, by invocation
     of the Holy Ghost, made the symbols of the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     in the Sacrificium quo. So that the whole service throughout
     consisted of a reasonable part, and of a material part, as of a soul
     and a body: of which I shall speak more fully hereafter, when I come
     to prove this I have said by the testimonies of the ancients.--p.
     356, 7.

     And this is that Sacrifice which Malachi foretold the Gentiles
     should one day offer unto GOD; "in every place incense shall be
     offered unto My name, and a pure Mincha: for My name shall be great
     among the heathen, saith the LORD of Hosts." Which words I am now,
     according to the order I propounded, to explicate, and apply to my
     definition. Now to apply them.....

     "Incense" (as the Scripture itself tells) notes the "prayers of the
     saints." It was also that wherewith the remembrance was made in the
     sacrifices, or GOD put in mind. Mincha, which we turn munus, a
     "gift" or "offering," is oblatio farrea, an offering made of meal or
     flour, baked or fried, or dried or parched corn. We, in our English,
     when we make distinction, call it a "meat-offering;" but might call
     it a "bread offering," of which the libamen, or the drink-offering,
     being an indivisible concomitant, both are implied under the name
     mincha, where it alone is named.

     The application then is easy: "incense" here notes the rational part
     of our Christian Sacrifice, which is prayer, thanksgiving, and
     commemoration; mincha, the material part thereof, which is oblatio
     farrea, a present of bread and wine.--pp. 357, 8.

     I come now to the third and longest part of my task, to prove each
     particular contained in my definition by the testimonies and
     authorities of the ancient Fathers and writers of the first and
     purest ages of the Church. The particulars I am to prove are in
     number six.

     1. That this Christian service is an oblation, and expressed under
     that notion by the utmost antiquity.

     2. That it is an oblation of thanksgiving and prayer.

     3. An oblation through JESUS CHRIST commemorated in the creatures of
     bread and wine.

     4. That this commemoration of CHRIST, according to the style of the
     ancient Church, is also a Sacrifice.

     5. That the Body and Blood of CHRIST, in this mystical service, was
     made of bread and wine, which had first been offered unto GOD, to
     agnize Him the LORD of the creature.

     6. That this Sacrifice was placed in commemoration only of CHRIST'S
     Sacrifice upon the Cross, and not in a real offering of His Body and
     Blood anew. . . .

     Let us then begin with the first, That this Christian service is an
     oblation, and under that notion expressed by all antiquity. The
     names whereby the ancient Church called this service are Prosfora,
     Qusia, "oblation," "Sacrifice;" Eucaristia, "Eucharist," (a word, if
     rightly understood, of equipollent sense;) Qusia logikh kai
     anaimaktoV, "a Sacrifice of praise," "a reasonable and unbloody
     Sacrifice;" Sacrificium Mediatoris, Sacrificium Altaris, Sacrificium
     pretii nostri, Sacrificium, corporis et sanguinis Christi, "the
     Sacrifice of our Mediator," "the Sacrifice of the Altar," "the
     Sacrifice of our Ransom," "the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST." It would be infinite to note all the places and authors
     where and by whom it is thus called.--p. 360.

     But what if one of them, namely Qusia, were used sooner, even in St.
     Paul's and St. Peter's time? In the first Epistle of Peter, chap.
     ii. 5. "You are (saith he, speaking of the body of the Church) an
     holy priesthood, to offer pneumatikaV qusiaV spiritual sacrifices to
     GOD by JESUS CHRIST." In the Epistle to the Hebrews, xiii. 15. "By
     Him (that is, through CHRIST our Altar) let us offer qusian ainesewV
     diapantoV Qew the sacrifice of praise to GOD continually." Why
     should I not think St. Paul and St. Peter speak here of the solemn
     and public service of Christians, wherein the Passion of CHRIST was
     commemorated? I am sure the Fathers frequently call this Sacrifice
     qusian ainesewV, "the Sacrifice of praise." And in some ancient
     Liturgies, immediately before the Consecration, the Church gives
     thanks unto GOD for choosing them to be an holy priesthood to offer
     Sacrifices unto Him, as it were alluding to St. Peter. Thus you see,
     first or last or both, the words Prosfora and Qusia were no
     strangers to the Apostles' age.

     I will now make but one quere, and answer it, and so conclude this
     point: whether these words or names were used (seeing they were
     used) properly, or improperly (katacrhstikwV) of the subject we
     speak of. I answer briefly; this Christian service, as we have
     defined it, is an oblation properly: for wheresoever any thing is
     tendered or presented unto GOD, there is truly and properly an
     oblation; (Heb. v. 7. xiii. 15. 1 Pet. ii. 5.) be it spiritual or
     visible, it matters not; for oblatio is the genus: and Irenaeus
     (lib. iv. c. 34.) tells me here,--"For offerings in the general are
     not reprobated; there were offerings there (via. in the Old
     Testament), there are also offerings here (viz. in the New
     Testament); there were Sacrifices among the people (that is, the
     Jews), there are Sacrifices also in the Church: but the
     specification only is changed." But as for Qusia, or Sacrifice,
     according to its prime signification, it signifies a
     "slaughter-offering," as in Hebrew, so in Greek of quw, macto, "to
     slay;" as the angel, Acts x. 13. says to St. Peter, Petre, quson kai
     fage, "Peter, kill and eat." Now we, in our Christian service, slay
     no offering, but commemorate Him only that was slain and offered
     upon the Cross; therefore our service is called Qusia, improperly
     and metaphorically. But if Qusia be synecdochically taken for an
     offering in general, as it is both in the New Testament and
     elsewhere, then the Christian Sacrifice is as truly called Qusia, as
     Prosfora, or Eucaristia.--p. 361.

     Now I come to the second particular contained in my definition; to
     prove that the Christian Sacrifice, according to the meaning of the
     ancient Church, is an oblation of thanksgiving and prayer.

     My first author shall be Justin Martyr, in his dialogue with Tryphon
     the Jew; where, to the evasion of the Jews, labouring to bereave the
     Christians of this text. Justin replies,--"That prayers and
     thanksgivings, made by those that are worthy, are the only
     Sacrifices that are perfect and acceptable unto GOD, I do also
     affirm; for these are the only Sacrifices which Christians have been
     taught they should perform." If you ask where, and how; he tells
     you, "in that thankful remembrance of their food both dry and
     liquid, wherein also is commemorated the Passion which the SON of
     GOD suffered by Himself." . . . My next author shall be Tertullian.
     . . Thirdly, Clemens Alexandrinus. . . Cyprian. . . These
     authorities are all within the first three hundred years, to which I
     will add one of the fourth; Optatus Milevitanus .. .

     Furthermore, that the Christian Sacrifice was an oblation of prayer,
     and consisted in invocation, is also another way to be evinced;
     namely, because the Fathers, when they speak thereof, use the terms
     of "prayer," "oblation," and "Sacrifice" promiscuously, and
     interchangeably one for the other, as words importing the same
     thing. Tertullian. . . Augustine.

     For this reason the Christian Sacrifice is among the Fathers, by way
     of distinction, called qusian ainesewV, Sacrificium laudis, that is,
     of confession and invocation of GOD; namely, to difference it from
     those of blood and incense. Augustine. . .--pp. 363, 4.

     The second particular thus proved, the third comes next in place,
     which is, That this oblation of thanksgiving and prayer was made
     through JESUS CHRIST commemorated in the creatures of bread and
     wine; namely, they believed that our blessed SAVIOUR ordained this
     Sacrament of His Body and Blood as a rite to bless and invocate His
     FATHER by, instead of the manifold and Woody Sacrifices of the Law.

     Instead, therefore, of the slaying of beasts and burning of incense,
     whereby they called upon the name of GOD in the Old Testament; the
     Fathers, I say, believed our SAVIOUR ordained this Sacrament of
     bread and wine as a rite whereby to give thanks and make
     supplication to His FATHER in His name.

     The mystery of which rite they took to be this; that as CHRIST, by
     presenting His Death and Satisfaction to His Father, continually
     intercedes for us in heaven; so the Church on earth semblably
     approaches the throne of Grace, by representing CHRIST unto His
     Father in these holy mysteries of His Death and Passion. "Veteres
     enim (saith Cassander) in hoc mystico Sacrificio," &c. ..." The
     ancients did not, in this mystical Sacrifice, so much consider and
     respect the oblation once made upon the cross, (the memory whereof
     is here celebrated,) as the everlasting Priesthood of CHRIST, and
     the perpetual Sacrifice which He, our High Priest for ever, doth
     continually offer in heaven; the resemblance whereof is here on
     earth expressed by the solemn prayers of GOD'S Ministers."

     This a Reverend and famous Divine [Perkins.] of blessed memory, once
     of this society, and interred in this place, saw more clearly, or
     expressed more plainly, than any other Reformed writer I have yet
     seen, in his Demonstratio Problematis, and Title de Sacrificio
     Missae; [Vide Workes, vol. ii. pp. 550--554. Compare "Reformed
     Catholike," vol. i. pp. 593, 4.] where he speaks thus: "Veteres,"
     &c....."The ancient Fathers used to call the Supper of the LORD, or
     the whole action of the Supper, a Sacrifice; and that for divers
     reasons. Because it is a commemoration, and also a representation
     unto GOD the FATHER, of the Sacrifice of CHRIST offered upon the
     cross." He goes on, "Hoc modo fideles," &c. "In this sense the
     faithful in their prayers do offer CHRIST, as a Sacrifice unto GOD
     the Father for their sins, in being wholly carried away in their
     minds and affections unto that only and true Sacrifice, thereby to
     procure and obtain GOD'S favour to them." That which every Christian
     doth mentally and vocally, when he commends his prayers to GOD the
     FATHER through JESUS CHRIST, making mention of His death and
     satisfaction; that, in the publick service of the Church, was done
     by that rite which our SAVIOUR commanded to be used in commemoration
     of Him.

     These things thus explained, let us now see by what testimonies and
     authorities it maybe proved the ancient Church had this meaning. I
     will begin with S. Ambrose. . . Eusebius. . . Cyril of Jerusalem,
     (or more likely John, his successor). . Tertullian. . S. Austin. . .
     .

     Lastly, that the representation of the Body and Blood of CHRIST in
     this Christian service, was intended and used as a rite whereby to
     find grace and favour with God, when the Church addressed herself
     unto Him, (which is that I undertook to prove) is apparent by a
     saying of Origen, Hom. 13 in Levit., where, treating of the
     Shewbread, which was continually set before the LORD with incense,
     for a memorial of the children of Israel, that is, to put GOD in
     mind of them, he makes it in this respect to have been a lively
     figure of the Christians' Eucharist; "For," saith he, "that is the
     only commemoration which renders GOD propitious to men."

     All these testimonies have been express for our purpose, that the
     thanksgivings and prayers of the Church in the Christian Sacrifice
     were offered unto the Divine Majesty, through CHRIST commemorated in
     the symbols of bread and wine, as by a medium whereby to find
     acceptance.

     There is, besides these, an usual expression of the Fathers, when
     they speak of the Eucharist; which, though it be not direct and
     punctual, as the former, yet, I verily believe, it aimed at the same
     mystery: namely, when they say that in this Sacrifice, they offer
     praise and prayer to GOD the Father, through JESUS CHRIST the great
     High Priest. . . Clemens. . . Justin Martyr. . . Irenaeus. . .
     Origen. . . the third Council of Carthage and Hippo. . .--pp.
     365--368.

     The fourth particular propounded was this, that the Sacrament of the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST, or LORD'S Supper, or the commemoration of
     CHRIST in the creatures of bread and wine, is also a Sacrifice,
     according to the style of the ancient Church.

     It is one thing to say, that the LORD'S Supper is a Sacrifice, and
     another to say, that CHRIST is properly sacrificed therein. These
     are not the same: for there may be a sacrifice which is a
     representation of another sacrifice, and yet a sacrifice too. And
     such a Sacrifice is this of the New Testament; a Sacrifice wherein
     another Sacrifice, that of CHRIST'S death upon the cross, is
     commemorated. Thus the Papists gain nothing by this notion of
     antiquity, and our asserting the same: for their tenet is, that
     CHRIST in this Sacrifice is really and properly sacrificed; which we
     shall show in due time that the ancients never meant.

     To begin with this, that the LORD'S Supper, or mystical rite of the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST, is a Sacrifice: as, in the Old Testament,
     the name of Sacrifice was otherwhile given to the whole action in
     which the rite was used, sometimes to the rite alone, so, in the
     notion and language of the ancient Church, sometimes the whole
     action or Christian service, (wherein the LORD'S Supper was a part,)
     is comprehended under that name; sometimes the rite of the sacred
     Supper itself is so termed, and truly, as ye shall now hear.

     The resolution of this point depends altogether upon the true
     definition of a Sacrifice, as it is distinguished from all other
     offerings. Which, though it be so necessary that all disputation
     without it is vain; yet shall we not find that either party
     interested in this question hath been so exact therein as were to be
     wished. This appears by the differing definitions given and confuted
     by Divines on both sides: the reason of which defect is, because
     neither are deduced from the notion of Scripture, but built upon
     other conceptions. Let us see, therefore, if it may be learned out
     of Scripture, what that is, which Scripture, in a strict and special
     sense, calls a Sacrifice.

     Every Sacrifice is an oblation or offering: but every offering is
     not a Sacrifice, in that strict and proper acceptation which we
     seek. For tithes, first-fruits, and all other called heave-offerings
     in the Law, and whatsoever, indeed, is consecrated unto GOD, are
     oblations or offerings; but none of them Sacrifices, nor ever so
     called in the Old Testament. What offerings are then called
     Sacrifices? I answer, burnt-offerings, sin-offerings,
     trespass-offerings, and peace-offerings. These, and no other, are
     called by that name. Out of these, therefore, must we pick the true
     and proper ratio and nature of a Sacrifice. . . .

     A Sacrifice, I think, should be defined thus; an offering whereby
     the offerer is made partaker of GOD'S table, in token of covenant
     and friendship with Him, &c. or more explicately thus; an offering
     unto the Divine Majesty of that which is given for the food of man;
     that the offerer, partaking thereof, might, as by way of pledge, be
     certified of his acceptation into covenant and fellowship with his
     GOD, by eating and drinking at His table. . . .

     In a word, a Sacrifice is oblatio foederalis. For the true and right
     understanding thereof, we must know, that it was the universal
     custom of mankind, and still remains in use, to contract covenants,
     and make leagues and friendship by eating and drinking together. . .
     .

     Such, now, as were these covenant-feastings, and eatings and
     drinkings, in token of league and amity between man and man, such
     are Sacrifices between man and his GOD; epulae foederales, federal
     feasts, wherein GOD deigneth to entertain man to eat and drink with
     or before Him, in token of favour and reconcilement. For so it
     becomes the condition of the parties, that he which hath offended
     the other, and seeks for favour and forgiveness, should be
     entertained by Him to whom he is obnoxious; and not e contra: that
     is, that GOD should be the convivator, the entertainer or maker of
     the feast, and man the conviva, or guest. To which end, the viands
     for this sacred epulum were first to be offered unto GOD, and so
     made His; that He might entertain the offerer, and not the offerer
     Him. For we are to observe, that what the fire consumed was
     accounted GOD'S own mess, and called by Himself the meat of His
     fire-offerings: (Levit. iii. 11. 16. Numb, xxviii. 2. 24.) the rest
     was for His guests, which they were partakers of, either by
     themselves, as in all the peace-offerings; or by their proxies, the
     Priests, as in all the rest, to wit, the holocausts, the sin and
     trespass-offerings.--pp. 369, 370.

     Having thus seen what is the nature of a Sacrifice, and wherein the
     ratio or essential form thereof consisteth, it will not be hard to
     judge, whether the ancient Christians did rightly in giving the
     Eucharist that name, or not. For that the LORD'S Supper is--"a
     federal feast," we all grant, and our SAVIOUR expressly affirms it
     of the cup in the institution, "This cup is the rite of the new
     Covenant in My blood, which is poured out for many for the remission
     of sins;" evidently implying that the bloody Sacrifices of the Law,
     with their meat and drink-offerings, were rites of an Old Covenant,
     and that this succeeded them as the rite of the New: that that was
     contracted with the blood of beeves, sheep, and goats; but this
     founded in the Blood of CHRIST, This parallel is so plain, as I
     think none will deny it. There is nothing then remains to make this
     sacred eymlum a full sacrifice, but that the viands thereof should
     be first offered unto GOD, that He may be the convivator, we the
     convivae, or the guests.--p. 372.

     And this the ancient Church was wont to do; this they believed our
     Blessed SAVIOUR Himself did, when, at the institution of this sacred
     rite, He took the bread and the cup into His sacred hands, and,
     looking up to heaven, gave thanks and blessed. And after His
     example, they first offered the bread and wine unto God, to agnize
     Him the LORD of the creature; and then received them from Him again
     in a banquet, as the symbols of the Body and Blood of His Son. This
     is that I am now to prove out of the testimonies of antiquity, not
     long after, but next unto the Apostles' times, when it is not likely
     the Church had altered the form they left her for the celebration of
     this mystery.

     I will begin with Irenaeus. . . Justin Martyr. . . Origen. . .

     Thus much out of Fathers; all of them within less than two hundred
     and fifty years after CHRIST, and less than one hundred and fifty
     after the death of St. John.

     The same appears in the forms of the ancient Liturgies. As in that
     of Clemens, where the Priest, in the name of the whole Church
     assembled, speaks thus;--"We offer unto Thee our King and GOD,
     according to His (that is CHRIST'S) appointment, this bread and this
     cup; . . . and we beseech Thee, Thou GOD that wantest nothing, that
     Thou wouldest look favourably upon these gifts here set before Thee,
     and accept them to the honour of Thy CHRIST," &c. . . .

     Yea, in the Canon of the Roman Church, though the rite be not used,
     yet the words remain still; as when the Priest, long before the
     consecration of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, prays;--"We humbly
     beseech and entreat Thee, most merciful Father, through JESUS CHRIST
     Thy Son, our LORD, to accept and bless these gifts, these presents:"
     and other like passages, which now they wrest to a new-found
     oblation of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, which the ancient Church
     knew not of.--p. 374.

     Lastly, this oblation of the bread and wine is implied in St. Paul's
     parallel of the LORD'S Supper and the sacrifice of the Gentiles: (1
     Cor. x. 21.) "Ye cannot, (saith he) be partakers of the table of the
     LORD, and the table of devils;" namely, because they imply contrary
     covenants, incompatible one with the other; a Sacrifice (as I told
     you) being epulum foederale, a federal feast. Nowhere it is manifest
     that the table of devils is so called, because it consisted of
     viands offered to devils, (for so St. Paul expressly tells us,)
     whereby those that eat thereof, eat of the devil's meat; ergo, the
     table of the LORD is likewise called His table, not because He
     ordained it, but because it consisted of viands offered unto Him.

     Having thus, as I think, sufficiently proved what I took in hand, I
     think it not amiss to answer two questions which this discourse may
     beget. The first is, how the ancients could gather out of the
     institution, that our SAVIOUR did as hath been shewed. I answer,
     They believed He did as the Jews were wont to do: but they did thus.
     How, will you say, doth this appear? I answer, it may appear thus.
     The passover was a Sacrifice, and, therefore, the viands here, as in
     all other holy feasts, were first offered unto GOD. Now the bread
     and wine, which our SAVIOUR took when He blessed and gave thanks,
     was the Mincha or meat-offering of the Passover. If, then, He did as
     the Jews used to do, He agnized His Father, and blessed Him, by
     oblation of these His creatures unto Him, using the like or the same
     form of words--"Blessed be Thou, O LORD our GOD, the King of the
     world, Which bringest forth bread out of the earth;" and over the
     wine--"Blessed be Thou, O LORD our God, the King of the world, Which
     createst the fruit of the vine." Moreover, the Church, ab initio,
     applied that precept of our SAVIOUR, Matt, v. 23. "If thou bring thy
     gift to the altar," &c. to the Eucharist; for they believed that He
     would not enact a new law concerning legal Sacrifices, which He was
     presently to abolish, but that it had reference to that oblation
     which was to continue under the Gospel.

     The other question is, If all this be so, how is not our celebration
     of the Eucharist defective, where no such oblation is used? I
     answer, This concerns not us alone, but all the Churches of the
     West, of the Roman Communion, who, as in other things they have
     depraved this mystery, and swerved from the primitive pattern
     thereof, so have they, for many ages, disused this oblation of bread
     and wine, and brought in, in lieu thereof, a real and hypostatical
     oblation of CHRIST Himself. This blasphemous oblation we have taken
     away, and justly; but not reduced again that express and formal use
     of the other. Howsoever, though we do it not with a set ceremony and
     form of words, yet, in deed and effect we do it, so often as we set
     the bread and wine upon the holy table: for whatsoever we set upon
     GOD'S table, is ipso facto dedicated and offered unto Him; according
     to that of our SAVIOUR, (Matt, xxiii. 19.)--"The altar sanctifies
     the gift," that is, consecrates it unto GOD, and appropriates it to
     His use. In which respect it were much to be wished that this were
     more solemnly done than is usual; namely, not until the time of the
     administration, and by the hand of the Minister, in the name and
     sight of the whole congregation, standing up and showing some sign
     of due and lowly reverence; according as the deacon was wont to
     admonish the people in ancient Liturgies .... "Let us stand in an
     upright posture before GOD to offer with fear and trembling."--pp.
     375, 6.

     The sixth and last thing to be proved was, that CHRIST is offered in
     this Sacrifice commemoratively only, and not otherwise.

     Though the Eucharist be a Sacrifice, (that is, an oblation wherein
     the offerer banquets with his GOD,) yet is CHRIST in this Sacrifice
     no otherwise offered, than by way of commemoration only of His
     Sacrifice once offered upon the cross, as a learned Prelate of ours
     [Bishop Morton] hath lately written, objectivè only, not subjectivè.
     And this is that which our SAVIOUR Himself said, when He ordained
     this sacred rite, "This do in commemoration of Me."

     But this commemoration is to be made to GOD His Father, and is not a
     bare remembering or putting ourselves in mind only, (as is commonly
     supposed), but a putting of GOD in mind: for every Sacrifice is
     directed unto GOD, and the oblation therein, whatsoever it be, hath
     Him for its object, and not man. If, therefore, the Eucharist be
     Sacrificium Christi commemorativum, a commemorative Sacrifice of
     Christ, as ours grant, then must the commemoration therein be made
     unto GOD: and if CHRIST therein be offered objectivè, that is, as
     the object of the commemoration there made, (as that learned Bishop
     speaks,) the commemoration of Him be an oblation of Him, to whom is
     this oblation, that is, commemoration, made but unto GOD?

     Well then, CHRIST is offered in this sacred Supper, not
     hypo-statically, as the papists would have Him, (for so He was but
     once offered,) but commemoratively only: that is, by this sacred
     rite of bread and wine we present and inculcate His blessed Passion
     to His Father; we put Him in mind thereof, by setting the monuments
     thereof before Him; we testify our own mindfulness thereof unto His
     sacred Majesty; that so He would, for His sake, according to the
     tenour of His covenant, in Him be favourable and propitious unto us,
     miserable sinners.

     That this, and no other offering of CHRIST in the blessed Eucharist,
     the ancient Church ever meant or intended, I am now to show by
     authentical testimonies. First, by the constant form of all the
     Liturgies; in which, after the reciting of the words of institution,
     is subjoined, Memnhmenoi prosferomen commemorantes, or commemorando,
     offerimus, "commemorating," or by "commemorating, we offer."

     Clemens, Memnhmenoi toinun prosferomen soi .... "Therefore
     commemorating His Passion, and Death, and Resurrection from the
     dead, and Ascension into heaven. . . . we offer to Thee our KING and
     GOD this bread and this cup." Mark here, "commemorating we offer,"
     that is, we offer by commemorating. But this commemoration is made
     unto GOD to whom we offer. This is the tenour of all the Greek
     Liturgies, save that some, instead of "We offer unto Thee this bread
     and this cup," have "We offer unto Thee this dreadful and unbloody
     Sacrifice;" as that of Jerusalem (called St. James's Liturgy:)
     others, "this reasonable and unbloody Service;" as that of St.
     Chrysostom: others, ta sa ek twn swn "Thine own of Thine own;" as
     that of Basil and of Alexandria, (called St. Mark's:) but all
     Memnhmenoi prosferomen, Commemorantes offerimus, "commemorating, we
     offer."

     In the same form runs the Ordo Romanus, "Memores, Domine," &c.
     ..."We, O LORD, Thy servants, as also Thy holy people, being mindful
     both of the Blessed Passion and Resurrection from the dead, as also
     of the glorious Ascension into heaven, of the same CHRIST Thy Son
     our LORD, offer unto Thy excellent Majesty, of Thy own gifts, a pure
     Sacrifice, a holy Sacrifice, an immaculate Sacrifice, the holy bread
     of eternal life and the cup of everlasting salvation." Note here
     also Memores offerimus, "being mindful of," or "commemorating, we
     offer."

     Memores therefore in the Latin Canon is "commemorantes," which the
     Greek expresses better, Memnhmenoi: of the sense whereof that we may
     not doubt, hear the explication of that great council of Ephesus in
     this manner: kataggellonteV. "Showing forth the Death of the Only
     Begotten Son of GOD, that is, of JESUS CHRIST, as also confessing
     His Resurrection and Ascension into heaven, we celebrate in our
     Churches the unbloody Sacrifice" or "service." . . .

     I shall need allege no more of the Latin Liturgies; there is no
     material difference amongst them; so that, if you know the form of
     one, you know of all. . . .

     This may suffice for Liturgies. Now let us hear the Fathers speak.

     I quoted heretofore a passage of Justin Martyr affirming a twofold
     commemoration to be made in the Eucharist; the one of our "food dry
     and liquid," (as he speaks) that is, of our meat and drink, by
     agnizing and recording Him the LORD and Giver of the same; the other
     an anamnhsiV in the same food,--of the Passion of the Son of GOD.
     The first of these commemorations is made unto GOD; for to whom else
     should we tender our thankfulness for the creature? Ergo, the
     second, the commemoration of the Passion of the Son of GOD, is made
     to Him likewise.

     My next Father is Origen, Hom. 13. in Lev. cap. 24, where comparing
     the Eucharist to the shewbread which was every Sabbath set for a
     memorial before the LORD, Ista est, (saith he, meaning the
     Eucharist,)--"that's the only commemoration which renders GOD
     propitious to men." Where note that both this commemoration is made
     unto GOD, as that of the shewbread was; and that the end thereof is
     to make Him propitious to men. . . .

     My next witness is Eusebius, Demonst. Evang. lib. 1. cap.
     10.--"After all these things done," saith he, speaking of Christ,
     "He made that so wonderful an oblation and excellent Sacrifice to
     GOD for the salvation of us all, appointing us to offer continually
     a Remembrance thereof instead of a Sacrifice." And again, toward the
     end of that chapter, having cited this place of Malachi, which I
     have chosen for my text, and alluding thereunto, "We offer the
     incense spoken of by the Prophet;" "we offer Sacrifice and incense,
     while we celebrate the remembrance of the Great Sacrifice according
     to the mysteries given to us by Him, and offer the Eucharist with
     holy hymns and prayers to God for the salvation of our souls; as
     also in that we consecrate ourselves wholly unto Him, and dedicate
     ourselves both soul and body to His High Priest the Word."

     But above all other, St. Chrysostom speaks so full and home to the
     point as nothing can be more; to wit, Hom. xvii. in Epist. ad
     Hebraeos. . . What then? (saith he). "Do not we offer every day?" He
     answers--"We offer indeed, but it is by making a commemoration of
     his death," &c. . . [Vid. sup. cit. pp. 63. 66.] What can be more
     express than this is?

     Primasius is short, but no less to the purpose. "Our priests indeed
     offer," saith he, "but it is in remembrance of His death." St.
     Augustine calls it "Memoriale Sacrificium," a Sacrifice by way of
     remembrance," in his Book against Faustus.

     In a word, the Sacrifice of Christians is nothing but that one
     Sacrifice of CHRIST once offered upon the cross, again and again
     commemorated.

     Which is elegantly expressed by those words of St. Andrew, recorded
     in the history of his passion, written by the Presbyters of Achaia:
     where, Ægeas the proconsul requiring of him to sacrifice to idols,
     he is said to have answered thus;--"I sacrifice daily to ALMIGHTY
     GOD, but what? not the smoke of frankincense, nor the flesh of
     bellowing bulls, nor the blood of goats: no, but I offer daily the
     unspotted Lamb of GOD on the Altar of the Cross; whose Flesh and
     Blood though all the faithful eat and drink of, yet after all this
     notwithstanding, the Lamb that was sacrificed remains entire and
     alive still." This riddle, though Ægeas the proconsul were not able
     to unfold, I make no question but you are. And here I conclude.--pp.
     376--379.

                        DUPPA, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.
     [Note inserted just before the Prayer for the Church Militant, in a
    copy of the Book of Common Prayer, which belonged to Bp. Duppa, with
    marginal notes in his handwriting, written during the rebellion. The
          book is preserved in the Bodleian Library, Arch. D. 59.]

     In the primitive Church, the Offertory was a considerable part in
     the administering and receiving the Sacrament, and was for a double
     end, the one in relation to the Sacrament in the offering of bread
     and wine, the other for the use of the poor. And these oblations
     were called a Sacrifice.

                    COMPILERS OF THE SCOTCH PRAYER BOOK.
   [The following passage from Laud's "History of his Troubles and Trial,"
     (pp. 113--115.) shows, among others, that the Scotch Common Prayer
    Book, was indeed compiled by the Bishops of that Church, and not (as
                      was afterwards alleged) by Laud.

     "'The Large Declaration professeth, that all the variation of our
     Book from the Book of England, that ever the king understood, was in
     such things as the Scottish humours would better comply with, than
     with that which stood in the English Service.'

     "That which the 'Large Declaration' professeth, I leave the author
     of it to make good. Yet, whosoever was the author, thus much I can
     say, and truly, that the Scottish Bishops (some of them) did often
     say to me, that the people would be better satisfied by much, to
     have a Liturgy composed by their own Bishops, (as this was,) than to
     have the Service Book of England put upon them. . . . This I
     remember well, that when a deliberation was held, whether it were
     better to keep close to the English Liturgy, or venture upon some
     additions, some of your Scottish Bishops were very earnest to have
     some alterations and some additions. And they gave this for their
     reason; because, if they did not then make that Book as perfect as
     they could, they should never be able to get it perfected after.
     'Canterbury,' therefore, was not the man 'that added this fuel to
     your fire.'

     "But they say; ' there are divers secret reasons of this change' in
     the order [of the Communion]. Surely there was reason for it, else
     why a change? But that there was any hidden secret reason for it
     (more than that the Scottish Prelates thought fit that Book should
     differ in some things from ours in England; and yet that no
     difference could be more safe than those which were in the order of
     the Prayers; especially, since both they and we were of opinion,
     that of the two, this order came nearest to the Primitive Church,)
     truly, I neither know nor believe."]

                        Sentences for the Offertory.

     [In the present Scotch Communion Office, the Offertory stands
     thus:--

     Then the Deacon or Presbyter shall say,

     Let us present our offerings unto the Lord with reverence and godly
     fear.

     Then the Presbyter shall begin the Offertory, saying one or more of
     these sentences.

     ["The sentences are the same as those in the old Scotch Prayer Book,
     with this single exception, that 1 Chron. xxix. 10, is not inserted
     in its order, being reserved for a particular place, where it is
     introduced with peculiar propriety; for when the Presbyter places
     the bason containing the offering on the holy table, then he repeats
     1 Chron. xxix. 10."]

     And the Presbyter shall then offer up, and place the Bread and Wine
     prepared for the Sacrament upon the Lord's Table, and shall say,

     The Lord be with you, &c.

     See Bp. Horsley's "Collation of Offices," in Skinner's "Office for
     the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or Holy Communion, according to
     the use of the Episcopal Church in Scotland."--p. 173, sqq.]

     Gen. iv. 3. And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain
     brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD: and
     Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat
     thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel, and to his offering:
     but unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect.

     Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering:
     of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart, ye shall take
     my offering. Exod. xxv. 2.

     Ye shall not appear before the LORD empty: every man shall give as
     he is able, according to the blessing of the LORD your GOD, which he
     hath given you. Deut. xvi. 16.

     David blessed the Lord before all the congregation: and said,
     Blessed be Thou, O LORD GOD, for ever and ever. Thine, O LORD, is
     the greatness, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for
     all that is in the heaven, and in the earth, is Thine: Thine is the
     kingdom, O LORD, and Thou art exalted as head above all: both riches
     and honour come of Thee, and of Thine own do we give unto Thee. I
     know also, my GOD, that Thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure in
     uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of my heart, I have
     willingly offered all these things. And now have I seen with joy Thy
     people which are present here, to offer willingly unto Thee. 1
     Chron. xxix.

     Give unto the LORD the glory due unto His name: bring an offering,
     and come into His courts. Psal. xcvi. 8.

     Lay not up for yourselves, &c. Matt. vi. 19, 20.

     ¶ While the Presbyter distinctly pronounceth some or all of these
     sentences for the Offertory, the Deacon, or (if no such be present)
     one of the Churchwardens, shall receive the Devotions of the people
     then present, in a Bason provided for that purpose. And when all
     have offered, he shall reverently bring the said Bason, with the
     oblations therein, and deliver it to the Presbyter, mho shall humbly
     present it before the Lord, and set it upon the holy Table. And the
     Presbyter shall then offer up, and place the Bread and Wine prepared
     for the Sacrament upon the Lord's Table, that it may be ready for
     that service: And then he shall say,--

     Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church, &c. ALMIGHTY and
     everliving GOD, who by Thy holy Apostle hast taught us to make
     prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all men, &c. . .
     .truly serving Thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of
     their life. And we commend especially unto Thy merciful goodness,
     the congregation which is here assembled in Thy Name, to celebrate
     the commemoration of the most precious death and sacrifice of Thy
     Son and our SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST. And we most humbly beseech Thee,
     of Thy goodness, O LORD, &c. . . .

     [Prayer of Consecration.]
     [In the present Scotch Communion Office, the Form of Consecration
     stands thus; "All glory be to Thee, Almighty God, for that Thou, of
     Thy tender mercy, &c."]

     ALMIGHTY GOD, our heavenly Father, which of Thy tender mercy, didst
     give Thine only Son JESUS CHRIST to suffer death upon the cross for
     our redemption, who ["Who (by His own oblation of Himself once
     offered) made."] made there (by His one oblation of Himself once
     offered,) &c. . . . and did institute, and in His holy Gospel
     command us to continue a perpetual memory ["Memorial."] of that His
     precious death and sacrifice, until His coming again; ["For, in the
     night, &c."] . . Hear us, O merciful Father, we most humbly beseech
     Thee, and of Thy Almighty goodness vouchsafe so to bless and
     sanctify with Thy word and Holy Spirit, these Thy gifts and
     creatures of bread and wine, that they may be unto us the Body and
     Blood of Thy most dearly beloved Son: so that we, receiving them
     according to Thy Son our SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST'S holy institution,
     may be partakers of His most precious Body and Blood; who, in the
     night that He was betrayed, &c. . .in remembrance of Me.

     ¶ Immediately after shall be said thin Memorial, or Prayer of
     Oblation, as followeth:--

     Wherefore, O Lord and heavenly Father, according to the institution
     of Thy dearly beloved Son, our SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST, we Thy humble
     servants do celebrate and make here before Thy divine Majesty, with
     these Thy holy gifts, ["Which we now offer unto Thee."] the memorial
     which Thy Son hath willed us to make, having in remembrance His
     blessed passion, ["And precious death, His mighty resurrection."]
     mighty resurrection, and glorious ascension, rendering unto Thee
     most hearty thanks for the innumerable benefits procured unto us by
     the same. And we entirely desire, &c.

     [In the present office, here follows, out of the Prayer of
     Consecration, "And we most humbly beseech Thee, O merciful Father,
     to hear us; and of Thy Almighty goodness vouchsafe to bless and
     sanctify with Thy word and Holy Spirit, these Thy gifts and
     creatures of bread and wine, that they may become the Body and Blood
     of Thy most dearly beloved Son. And we earnestly desire, &c. And
     here we humbly present unto Thee, beseeching Thee," &c. [as in the
     old Scotch Prayer Book, except that the word "filled" is used
     instead of "fulfilled."]

     After the Prayer of Oblation and Invocation, follows the Prayer for
     the whole state of Christ's Church--See Bp. Horsley's "Collation."]

              NICHOLSON, BISHOP.--Exposition of the Catechism.

     A "remembrance" of it: the Sacrament was "ordained for" that end. On
     all hands it is agreed, that it is a Sacrifice of commemoration.--p.
     209.

     A command there is, that upon the first day of the week (a day
     appointed for the Sacrifice), every man should set apart somewhat
     for the use of the poor.--p. 210.

     BRAMHALL, ARCHBISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Answer to M. de la Militiere's
     Epistle to the King. [Epistle to the King of Great Britain, wherein
     he inviteth his majesty to forsake the Church of England, and to
     embrace the Roman Catholic Religion.]

     First, you say, we have renounced your Sacrifice of the Mass. If the
     Sacrifice of the Mass be the same with the Sacrifice of the Cross,
     we attribute more unto it than yourselves: we place our whole hope
     of salvation in it. If you understand another propitiatory
     Sacrifice, distinct from that (as this of the Mass seems to be, for
     confessedly the priest is not the same, the altar is not the same,
     the temple is not the same); if you think of any new meritorious
     satisfaction to GOD for the sins of the world, or of any new
     supplement to the merits of CHRIST'S Passion, you must give us leave
     to renounce your Sacrifice indeed, and to adhere to the Apostle: "by
     one offering He hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified."
     Heb. x. 14.

     Surely you cannot think that CHRIST did actually sacrifice Himself
     at His last supper; (for then He had redeemed the world at His last
     supper, then His subsequent Sacrifice upon the cross had been
     superfluous); nor that the priest now doth more than CHRIST did
     then. We do readily acknowledge an Eucharistical Sacrifice of
     prayers and praises; we profess a commemoration of the Sacrifice of
     the cross; and, in the language of holy Church, things commemorated
     are related as if they were then acted: as "ALMIGHTY GOD, who hast
     given us Thy Son [as this day] to be born of a pure virgin;" and,
     "whose praise the younger innocents have [this day] set forth;" and,
     between the Ascension and Pentecost, "which hast exalted Thy Son
     JESUS CHRIST with great triumph into Heaven, we beseech Thee leave
     us not comfortless, but send unto us thy Holy Spirit." We
     acknowledge a representation of that Sacrifice to GOD the Father; we
     acknowledge an imputation of the benefit of it; we maintain an
     application of its virtue: so here is a commemorative, impetrative,
     applicative Sacrifice. Speak distinctly, and I cannot understand
     what you can desire more. To make it a suppletory Sacrifice, to
     supply the defects of the only true Sacrifice of the cross, I hope
     both you and I abhor.--Works, pp. 35, 6.

                   ID.--Protestants' Ordination defended.

     His third argument is contained in the sixth section. "The English
     superintendents, after their fall from the Roman Church, neither
     intended to give those holy orders instituted by CHRIST, neither did
     the ordained intend to receive them. For the priesthood instituted
     by CHRIST comprehended two functions, the one appertaining to the
     real Body of CHRIST, to complete it and offer it to GOD; the other,
     over the mystical Body of CHRIST, to remit sins. But, with the
     Protestants, the consecrating bishops do not intend to give, nor the
     consecrated ministers to receive either of these two functions, but
     on the contrary, do deny them, and disdain them. Therefore,
     notwithstanding their character, they have not those sacred orders
     which were instituted by CHRIST. But their ordination is a mere
     personation of that Sacrament. . . To his argument then I answer . .
     .

     Thirdly, to his two functions of consecrating and remitting sin,
     Protestants do intend to confer them both, so far as either CHRIST
     did confer them, or the blessed Apostles execute them. Doubtless
     they know their own intentions better than S. N. He who saith, "Take
     thou authority to exercise the office of a priest in the Church of
     GOD," (as the Protestant consecraters do,) doth intend all things
     requisite to the priestly function, and among the rest, to offer a
     representative Sacrifice, to commemorate and to apply the Sacrifice
     which CHRIST made upon the Cross. But for any other Sacrifice,
     distinct from that which is propitiatory, meritorious, and
     satisfactory by its proper virtue and power, the Scriptures do not
     authorize, the Fathers did not believe, the Protestants do not
     receive any such. This is a certain truth, that the Passion of
     CHRIST is the only ransom and propitiation for sin.--pp. 992, 3.

     In the next place he goes about to refute Mr. Mason, a Protestant
     writer who saith, that we have purged that holy priesthood which
     CHRIST ordained, from the corruptions of sacrificing and shrift,
     which the Romanists had added. So saith he, "The whole question is
     brought to this issue, whether our SAVIOUR instituted a sacrificing
     priesthood, to which authority is given to remit sins in the
     Sacrament of penance." And concludes, "that if the Protestants have
     pared away these priestly functions, they have rejected the whole
     substance, and pared off the pith of CHRIST'S heavenly priesthood."
     In the name of GOD, what have we to do with CHRIST'S heavenly
     priesthood in this question, which is to make intercession and
     atonement for us to His FATHER, in respect whereof, He is called our
     Passover, our Propitiation, our Advocate, our Mediator; as St.
     Austin saith, "the same is the Priest, and the Sacrifice, and the
     Temple; the Priest by whom we are reconciled, the Sacrifice
     wherewith we are reconciled, the Temple wherein we are reconciled:
     but Priest, Sacrifice, Temple, and all, is GOD in the form of a
     servant." They are not the Protestants then, but the Romanists, who
     pare off the pith of CHRIST'S heavenly priesthood, who daily make as
     many distinct propitiatory Sacrifices as there are masses in the
     world, who mix the sufferings of the saints with the blood of
     CHRIST, to make up the treasury of the Church, who multiply their
     mediators, as the heathens did their tutelary gods, begging at their
     hands to receive them at the hour of death, to reconcile them to
     GOD, to be their advocates, their mediators, their propitiation, and
     briefly to do all those offices which belong to the heavenly
     priesthood of CHRIST.....

     Thus he mistakes CHRIST'S heavenly priesthood for man's earthly
     priesthood; he mistakes the power or actions of the presbyterate for
     the essence of it. And lastly, he mistakes the tenet of his
     adversaries. Mr. Mason does not say, that the Protestants have pared
     away all manner of Sacrifices. First, they acknowledge spiritual and
     eucharistical Sacrifices, as prayers, praises, a contrite heart,
     alms, and the like. Secondly, they acknowledge a commemoration, or a
     representative Sacrifice, in the holy Eucharist. Thirdly, they teach
     that this is not nuda commemoratio, a bare commemoration without
     efficacy, but that the blessed Sacrament is a means ordained by
     CHRIST, to render us capable, and to apply unto us the virtue of
     that all-sufficient Sacrifice of infinite value, which CHRIST made
     upon the Cross; which is as far as the moderate Romanists dare go,
     in distinct and particular expressions. But the Protestants dare not
     say, that the holy Eucharist is a Sacrifice propitiatory in itself,
     by its own proper virtue and expiatory efficacy. Whatsoever power it
     hath, is in relation to the Sacrifice of CHRIST, as a means ordained
     to apply that to true believers. In sum, the essence of the Roman
     Sacrifice doth consist, according to the doctrine of their own
     schools, either in the consecration alone, or in the manducation
     alone, or both in the consecration and participation, but not at all
     either in the oblation before consecration, or in the oblation after
     consecration, or in the fraction or mixion. Seeing therefore the
     Protestants do retain both the consecration and consumption or
     communication, without all contradiction, under the name of a
     Sacrament, they have the very thing which the Romanists call a
     Sacrifice. How is the world amused with a show of empty names to no
     purpose!--pp. 996, 7.

   COSIN, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Collection of Private Devotions. Prayers
                            before the Sacrament.

     I. ALMIGHTY LORD, who hast of Thine infinite mercy vouchsafed to
     ordain this dreadful Sacrament for a perpetual memory of that
     blessed Sacrifice which once Thou madest for us upon the cross;
     grant me, with such diligent remembrance, and such due reverence, to
     assist the holy celebration of so heavenly and wonderful a mystery,
     that I may be made worthy by Thy grace to obtain the virtue and
     fruits of the same, with all the benefits of Thy precious death and
     passion, even the remission of all my sins, and the fulness of all
     Thy graces; which I beg for Thy only merits, who art my only
     SAVIOUR, GOD from everlasting, and world without end. Amen.

     II. O LORD, our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting GOD,
     regard, we beseech Thee, the devotion of Thy humble servants, who do
     now celebrate the memorial which Thy Son our SAVIOUR hath commanded
     to be made in remembrance of His most blessed Passion and Sacrifice,
     that by the merits and power thereof, now represented before Thy
     divine Majesty, we and all Thy whole Church may obtain remission of
     our sins, and be made partakers of all other the benefits of His
     most precious death and passion, together with His mighty
     resurrection from the earth, and His glorious ascension into heaven,
     who liveth and reigneth with Thee and the Holy Ghost ever one GOD,
     world without end. Amen.

     III. Be pleased, O GOD, to accept of this our bounden duty and
     service, and command that the prayers and supplications, together
     with the remembrance of CHRIST'S Passion, which we now offer up unto
     Thee, may be received into Thy heavenly tabernacle; and that Thou
     not weighing our own merits, but looking upon the blessed Sacrifice
     of our SAVIOUR, which was once fully and perfectly made for us all,
     mayst pardon our offences, and replenish us with Thy grace and
     heavenly benediction, through the same JESUS CHRIST our LORD.

     ID.--Notes on the Common Prayer.
     [MS. Notes collected by Bishop Cosin, and written in an interleaved
     Common Prayer Book, in the Bishop of Durham's Library, printed 1636.
     See Additional Notes, in Nicholls on the Common Prayer.]

     "A perpetual memory."] ... It is peculiar to this celebration, that
     the death of our LORD is commemorated therein, not by bare words, as
     in other prayers, but also by certain sacred symbols, signs and
     sacraments, which, according to St. Austin, are a sort of "verba
     visibilia." "Nam dum frangitur hostia," &c. (Lib. 19. cont. Faust,
     cap. 16.)

     There is indeed a remembrance and a prayer, both within and without
     this most holy Sacrament; because the body of CHRIST, which was
     delivered to death, is exhibited therein; and besides, by symbolical
     or sacramental actions, the delivery of His Body, and the effusion
     of His Blood, are figured out; therefore the ancients love to call
     the commemoration peculiar to this Sacrament, a "Commemorative
     Sacrifice," and the prayer, an "Oblation:" both these words being
     taken properly, but in an improper and large or metaphorical
     signification. It is a known passage, that of St. Austin in his
     Epistle to Boniface, "Die Dominico dicimus." "Now by the same figure
     as CHRIST is said to have risen that day by which the remembrance of
     his resurrection is celebrated, so is He said to be sacrificed in
     the Eucharist, because therein the memory of His Sacrifice is
     performed:" and likewise that place in Fulgentius is remarkable, de
     Fid. ad Pet. cap. 19. Firmissime tene, &c. . . . Euseb. Demonstr.
     Evang. lib, 2. sub fin. Ejus Sacrificii memoriam, &c.

     It pleased the Synod at Trent (not long after this Liturgy of ours
     was published) to lay their curse (their "Anathema") upon all them
     that held the "celebration of this Sacrament to be made a
     commemoration only of CHRIST'S Sacrifice upon the cross; or that
     said, it was not a true propitiatory Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice only
     of praise and thanksgiving; or that taught any more, that this
     Sacrifice profited none but those who communicate of it, and was not
     truly offered up for the sins, pains, and satisfactions of the
     living and the dead." Sess. 22. For thus they declared themselves in
     ambiguous words, which, as they may have a right and true sense put
     upon them, so are they capable of a wrong and a false, if they
     intended them (as they did) against us. For we do not hold this
     celebration to be so naked a commemoration of CHRIST'S Body given to
     death, and of His Blood there shed for us; but that the same Body
     and Blood is present there in this commemoration (made by the
     Sacrament of bread and wine) lo all that faithfully receive it: nor
     do we say, it is so made a Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, but
     that, by our prayers also added, we offer and present the death of
     CHRIST to GOD, that for His death's sake we may find mercy; in which
     respect we deny not this commemorative Sacrifice to be propitiatory.
     The receiving of which Sacrament, or participating of which
     Sacrifice exhibited to us, we say is profitable only to them that
     receive it, and participate of it; but the prayers that we add
     thereunto, in presenting the death and merits of our SAVIOUR to GOD,
     is [are] not only beneficial to them that are present, but to them
     that are absent also, to the dead and living both, to all true
     members of the Catholic Church of CHRIST: but a true real presence
     and propitiatory Sacrifice of CHRIST, toties quoties, as this
     Sacrament is celebrated, which is the Popish doctrine, and which
     cannot be done without killing of CHRIST so often again, we hold
     not; believing it to be a false and blasphemous doctrine, founding
     ourselves upon the Apostle's doctrine, that CHRIST was sacrificed
     but once, and that now He dieth no more.--p. 46.

     "Do this in remembrance"--"Drink this in remembrance."] That is, of
     CHRIST put to death, and sacrificed for us upon the cross, which is
     the Sacrifice which He truly and properly once made, and whereof we
     only make a commemoration or representation, toties quoties, as
     often as we celebrate this His Sacrament, and observe the precept
     which He gave us about it.

     But as much as the breaking of bread, or the pouring out of wine, or
     the mystical taking of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, is far
     different from being the true suffering and death of our LORD, and
     the separation of the Soul from our LORD'S Body, so is the Sacrifice
     of the Eucharist far from being a Sacrifice of a proper and strict
     nomination; and this denominated from that only extrinsically as the
     image of its prototype.--;p. 48,

     "This our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving,"] i. e. this
     Sacrifice of our Eucharist. In which regard, and in divers other
     besides, the Eucharist may, by allusion, analogy, and extrinsical
     denomination, be fitly called a Sacrifice, and the LORD'S table an
     Altar; the one relating to the other; though neither of them can be
     strictly and properly so termed.

     It is the custom of Scripture, to describe the service of GOD under
     the New Testament, be it either internal or external, by the terms
     which otherways most properly belonged to the Old; as "immolation,"
     "offering," "sacrifice," and "altar." And, indeed, the Sacrament of
     the Eucharist carries the name of a Sacrifice; and the table,
     whereon it is celebrated, an altar of oblation, in a far higher
     sense, than any of their former Sacrifices did, which were but the
     types and figures of those services, that are performed in
     recognition and memory of CHRIST'S one Sacrifice, once offered upon
     the altar of His cross. The prophecy of Malachi, concerning the
     Church under the New Testament ("My name is great among the
     Gentiles, and they shall offer a sacrifice unto me, a pure
     oblation." Mai. i. 10.), applied by the Doctors of the Roman Church
     to their proper Sacrifice (as they call it) of the Mass, is
     interpreted and applied by the ancient Fathers, sometimes in general
     to all the acts of our Christian religion, and sometimes in
     particular to the Eucharist; that is, the act of our prayers and
     thanksgiving for the Sacrifice of CHRIST once made for us upon the
     cross, (as here we use in the Church of England) Hieron. in hunc
     locum, &c. . . . The Church of England herein followeth the Holy
     Scriptures, and the ancient Fathers. Psal. 1. 14. Hos.xiv. 3. Heb.
     xiii. 15, &c.. . .

     "That by the merits and death," &c.] "Insigne admodum Sacrificii
     genus," &c. A very excellent kind of Sacrifice is this: for to
     beseech and pray to GOD the Father by CHRIST'S death and merits, is
     nothing else, but to offer CHRIST and CHRIST'S death and merits to
     GOD the Father; therefore, in the celebration of the Sacrament of
     the Eucharist, GOD'S Son and His Son's death (which is the most true
     Sacrifice) is represented by us to GOD the Father, and by the same
     representation, commemoration, and obtestation, is "offered;" and
     that (as will appear from what will be afterwards said) for the
     living and for the dead, i. e. for the whole Church: for, as CHRIST
     Himself, now He is in heaven, does appear in the presence of GOD for
     us, making intercession for us, (Heb. ix. 20. Rom. viii. 34.) and
     does present and offer Himself and His death to GOD; so also the
     Church upon earth, which is His body, when it beseeches GOD for His
     sake and His death, does also represent and offer Him, and His
     death, and consequently that Sacrifice which was performed on the
     cross: for no one is so blind, as not to see the difference between
     a "proper offering," which was once performed by His death on the
     cross, and between an "improper offering," which is now made either
     in heaven, by that His appearance on our behalf, or here on earth,
     by prayers and representation, or obtestation, or commemoration,
     there being only the same common name for these, but a very wide
     difference in the things themselves. But if any one does consider
     the true nature of a Sacrifice, he will find, that to have a live
     thing which is offered to GOD destroyed, is not a Sacrifice properly
     so called, but improperly only, and by external denomination.

     It appears therefore how this may be called a Sacrifice, and how it
     may not; which is to be observed; for if we take a Sacrifice
     properly and formally, whether for the action of sacrificing (as it
     is at this day taken by the Roman priests), then truly, although, by
     the commemoration and representation, it be the same numerical
     Sacrifice with that which was offered on the Cross, yet the action
     itself, or the oblation which is now made by us in the Eucharist,
     agrees neither in species nor genus with the oblation or immolation
     which was on the Cross. For there is no form or reason of the
     oblation given, which can be univocally predicated of that; for upon
     the Cross the oblation was made by a true destruction and death of
     the live thing, without which no Sacrifice properly so called can
     be; but in our Eucharist there is a Sacrifice made by prayers, a
     commemoration, and a representation, which is not properly a
     Sacrifice. But nothing hinders, but that the Eucharist may be
     accounted and called the commemorative Sacrifice of the proper
     Sacrifice of the death of CHRIST, which our LORD Himself hath taught
     us, when He said, "This do in remembrance of Me."

     'That we and all Thy whole Church may obtain remission of our sins,
     and all other benefits of His passion."] Whereby all "the whole
     Church" is to be understood, as well those who have been heretofore,
     and those who shall be hereafter, as those that are now the present
     members of it. And hereupon my Lord of Winchester, Bishop Andrews,
     propounded his answer to Cardinal Perron, when he said, "We have and
     offer this Sacrifice both for the living and for the dead: as well
     for them that are absent, as those that be present;" or words to
     this purpose, for I have not the book now by me. . . .

     So that the virtue of this Sacrifice (which is here in this Prayer
     of Oblation commemorated and represented) doth not only extend
     itself to the living, and those that are present, but likewise to
     them that are absent, and them that are already departed, or shall
     in time to come live and die in the faith of CHRIST: Which thing
     being observed, several expressions of the ancients, concerning the
     Sacrifice and Oblation of the Church for the living and the dead,
     (which otherways at first view may seem difficult) may be cleared up
     and easily explained; for they thought of nothing less than of the
     "opus operatum" of the popish mass, and a Sacrifice so called, which
     the Romish priests (not the reformed) pretend and boast, though
     without ground, "toties quoties," to offer up. But we, with the
     ancient Fathers, assert and teach, that in the Sacrament of the
     LORD'S Supper, among the ancients, there was no other oblation made
     for the living and the dead, but only that the priest or presbyter,
     standing before the holy table, prayed to GOD for them for the sake
     of CHRIST, and CHRIST'S Passion and death.

     Therefore we do not depart from the tradition of antiquity, and the
     custom of the universal Church in this matter.

     "To offer unto Thee any Sacrifice."] The celebration of this
     Sacrament may for divers reasons be called a Sacrifice; and we do
     acknowledge, that by the ancient Church it was so called; but yet we
     deny that there is any reason why it should be called a "true
     Sacrifice," and "properly so called," or ought to be so; for when we
     call any thing a true Sacrifice, we have regard to the formal reason
     of a Sacrifice, and not the final. For the end is to pay worship and
     obedience to GOD, and to do what GOD approves and accounts
     acceptable to Him. For whatsoever work is of this kind, is by S.
     Austin called a true Sacrifice. . . .

     So that by the ancients and us, the celebration of this Sacrament is
     called a Sacrifice, yea a true Sacrifice in the manner we have
     explained it in. First, because it is a sensible rite, supplying the
     place of sensible things. Secondly, because, when it is celebrated,
     those things are wont to be offered, which were used in Sacrifices,
     or at least went to the use of the ministers of the Church, or the
     poor, which in scriptural phrase are called "Sacrifices acceptable
     to GOD." Thirdly, because therein thanks are given to GOD, and
     prayers are poured out, which in Scripture are styled by the name of
     "Sacrifice." Fourthly, because by these prayers the Passion, Death
     and Merits of CHRIST, are offered up to GOD the FATHER by
     commemoration and representation. As we showed before that S. Austin
     spoke.--pp. 49--51.

                 ID.--Paper concerning the Differences, &c.
     [A Paper concerning the Differences in the chief points of Religion
    betwixt the Church of Rome and the Church of England, written to the
   late Countess of Peterborough.--Hickes's Controversial Letters, vol. i.
                             Appendix, Paper i.]

                              The Differences.

     5. That the priests offer up our SAVIOUR in the mass, as a real,
     proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the dead; and
     that whosoever believes it not is eternally damned.

                               Our Agreements.

     7. In commemorating at the Eucharist the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Body
     and Blood once truly offered for us.

          HEYLYN, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--Antidotum Lincolniense.

     For when our blessed LORD and SAVIOUR had, by that one offering of
     Himself once for all, "perfected for ever all them that are
     sanctified," and "by His own blood entered into the holy place" and
     "obtained eternal redemption for us," there was forthwith an end of
     all those sacrifices in the law, by which this one of His had been
     prefigured. . . .Yet did not CHRIST deprive His Church for ever of
     all manner of Sacrifices, but only abrogated those which had been
     before; which, if continued, might have been a strong presumption of
     His not coming in the flesh; in which respect, those, and all other
     ceremonies of the Jews, are by the Fathers said to be, not only
     dangerous, but deadly, to us Christian men. The Passion of our
     SAVIOUR, as, by the LORD'S own ordinance, it was prefigured to the
     Jews in the legal Sacrifices, à parte ante; so by CHRIST'S
     institution, it is to be commemorated by us Christians in the holy
     Supper, à parte post. A Sacrifice it was in figure, a Sacrifice in
     fact, and so, by consequence, a Sacrifice in the commemorations, or
     upon the post-fact. A Sacrifice there was among the Jews, shewing
     forth CHRIST'S death unto them, before His coming in the flesh: a
     Sacrifice there must be amongst the Christians, to show forth the
     Lord's death till He come in judgment. And if a Sacrifice there must
     be, there must be also Priests to do, and Altars whereupon to do it;
     because, without a Priest and Altar, there can be no Sacrifice: yet
     so that the precedent Sacrifice was of a different nature from the
     subsequent; and so are also both the Priest and Altar from those
     before: a bloody Sacrifice then, an unbloody now; a Priest derived
     from Aaron then, from Melchisedec now; an Altar for Mosaical
     Sacrifices then, for Evangelical now;--the Sacrifice prescribed by
     CHRIST, qui novi testamenti, &c. ["who taught the new oblation of
     the New Testament,"] saith Irenaeus, l. iv. c. 32. "Who the same
     night in which He was betrayed, took bread, &c.....Do this, as often
     as you drink it, in remembrance of me." Which words, if they express
     not plain enough the nature of the Sacrifice to be commemorative, we
     may take those that follow by way of commentary; "for as often as ye
     eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the LORD'S death till
     He come."--pp. 137--139.

     Of any expiatory Sacrifice, of any offering up of CHRIST for the
     quick and dead, more than had been done by Him once, and once for
     all, those blessed ages never dreamt. And howsoever some of the
     ancient Fathers did amplify, with the choicest of their rhetoric,
     the dignity and nature of this holy Sacrament, the better to
     influence the people with a lively zeal, at their partaking of the
     same; yet they meant nothing less, than to give any opportunity to
     the future ages, of making that an expiatory Sacrifice, which they
     did only teach to be commemorative, or representative of our
     SAVIOUR'S Passion. A Sacrifice they did confess it, Altars and
     Priests they did allow of, as necessary thereunto; not thinking fit
     to change those terms, which had been recommended to them from pure
     antiquity. Those blessed spirits were not lohomacoi, contentious
     about words and forms of speech, in which there was not manifest
     impiety. The Supper of the LORD they called sometimes a Sacrifice,
     and sometimes a memorial of the Sacrifice,--and so St. Chrysostom on
     the 9th chapter to the Hebrews, sometimes a Sacrifice, and sometimes
     a Sacrament, and so St. Austin for example; for, in his book de
     Civitate Dei, he calleth it a Sacrifice; and saith, that it
     succeeded in the place of those legal Sacrifices, mentioned in the
     Old Testament. The same St. Austin, as you tell us, doth in the same
     book call it a Sacrament of memory; . .. and I am sure, that in the
     very same book it is called "the Sacrament of the Altar:" which was
     a very common appellation among the Fathers, as was acknowledged by
     the Martyrs in queen Mary's time. So for the Minister thereof, they
     called him sometimes Presbyter, and sometimes Sacerdos, Elder, or
     Priest, indifferently, without doubt or scruple. . . The Table, or
     the Altar, were to them such indifferent words, that they used them
     both equally. ... So that, in all this search into antiquity, we
     find a general consent in the Church of GOD, touching the business
     now in hand: the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper being confessed to
     be a Sacrifice; the Minister therein, entitled by the name of
     Priest; that on which the Priest did consecrate, being as usually
     called by the name of Altar, as by that of Table..... Not an
     improper Altar, and an improper Sacrifice, as you idly dream of: for
     Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars being relatives, as yourself
     confesseth, the Sacrifice and the Altar being improper, must needs
     infer that even our Priesthood is improper also; and we may speak in
     proper and significant terms, as the Fathers did, without approving
     either the Popish mass, or the Jewish sacrifices.--pp. 155--8.

     It were an infinite labour to sum up all places of and in the
     Rubrics, wherein the Minister is called by the name of Priest; which
     being so, as so it is, and that your own self hath told us that
     Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice are relatives, the Church of England,
     keeping still as well the office of Priesthood, as the name of
     Priest, must needs admit of Altars, and of Sacrifices, as things
     peculiar to the Priesthood. But, not to trust so great a matter to
     your rules of logic, we will next see, what is the judgment of the
     Church in the point of Sacrifice. Two ways there are by which the
     Church declares herself in the present business: first, positively,
     in the Book of Articles and that of Homilies; and practically, in
     the Book of Common Prayer. First, in the Articles; (Art. xxxi.) "The
     offering of CHRIST once made," &c. . . .This Sacrifice or oblation,
     once for ever made, and never more to be repeated, was, by our
     SAVIOUR'S own appointment, to be commemorated and represented to us,
     for the better quickening of our faith: whereof, if there be nothing
     said in the Book of Articles, it is because the Articles related
     chiefly unto points in controversy; but in the Book of Homilies,
     which do relate unto the Articles, as confirmed in them, and are
     (though not dogmatical, but rather popular discourses,) a comment,
     as it were, on those points of doctrine, which are determined of
     elsewhere, we find it thus: (Hom. of the Sacrament, Part ii. p.
     197.) "That the great love of our SAVIOUR CHRIST to mankind doth not
     only appear, in that dear bought benefit of our redemption, and
     satisfaction by His death and Passion, but also in that He hath so
     kindly provided that the same most merciful work might be had in
     continual remembrance. Amongst the which means is the public
     celebration of the memory of His precious death at the LORD'S
     table:--our SAVIOUR having ordained and established the remembrance
     of His great mercy expressed in His Passion, in the institution of
     His heavenly Supper." Here is a commemoration of that blessed
     Sacrifice which CHRIST once offered, a public celebration of the
     memory thereof, and a continual remembrance of it by Himself
     ordained. Which, if it seem not full enough for the commemorative
     Sacrifice, in the Church observed, the Homily will tell us further;
     "that this LORD'S Supper is in such wise to be done and ministered,
     as our LORD and SAVIOUR did, and commanded it to be done; as His
     holy Apostles used it; and the good Fathers in the primitive Church
     frequented it." So that whatever hath been proved to be the purpose
     of the institution, the practice of the holy Apostles, and usage of
     the ancient Fathers, will fall within the meaning and intention of
     the Church of England.

     For better manifesting of the which intention, we will next look
     into the Agenda, the public Liturgy of this Church. Where first we
     find it granted, that "CHRIST our SAVIOUR is the very Paschal Lamb
     that was offered for us, and hath taken away the sin of the world;"
     (Preface on Easter Day.) that suffering "death upon the cross for
     our redemption," He "made there by His one oblation of Himself once
     offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, oblation and
     satisfaction for the sins of the whole world;" (Prayer of
     Consecration.) "and, to the end that we should always remember, &c.
     . . He hath instituted and ordained holy mysteries, as pledges of
     His love and continual remembrance of His death;" (Exhortation
     before the Communion.) "instituting, and in His holy Gospel
     commanding us to continue a perpetual memory of that His precious
     death till His coming again." (Prayer of Consecration.) Then
     followeth the consecration of the creatures of bread and wine, for a
     remembrance of His death and Passion, in the same words and phrases
     which CHRIST our SAVIOUR. recommended unto His Apostles, and the
     Apostles to the Fathers of the primitive times: which now, as then,
     is to be done only by the Priest, ("then the Priest standing up,
     shall say as followeth,") to whom it properly belonged], and upon
     whom his ordination doth confer a power of ministering the
     Sacraments, not given to any other order in the holy Ministry. The
     memory or commemoration of CHRIST'S death thus celebrated, is called
     (Prayer after the Communion) a Sacrifice, a "Sacrifice of praise and
     thanksgiving;" a Sacrifice, representative of that one and only
     expiatory Sacrifice, which CHRIST once offered for us all: the whole
     communicants "beseeching GOD to grant, that," &c.....Nor stay they
     there, but forthwith "offer and present unto the LORD themselves,
     their souls, and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively
     Sacrifice unto Him:" and, howsoever, as they most humbly do
     acknowledge, they are "unworthy through their manifold sins, to
     offer to Him any Sacrifice, yet they beseech Him to accept that
     their bounden duty and service." In which last words, that present
     service which they do to ALMIGHTY GOD, according to their "bounden
     duties," in celebrating the "perpetual memory of CHRIST'S precious
     death," and the oblation of themselves, and, with themselves "the
     Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving," in due acknowledgment of the
     benefits and comforts by His death received, is humbly offered unto
     GOD, for and as a Sacrifice, and publicly avowed for such, as from
     the tenour and coherence of the words doth appear most plainly. Put
     all together which hath been here delivered from the Book of
     Articles, the Homilies, and public Liturgy, and tell me if you ever
     found a more excellent concord, than this between Eusebius and the
     Church of England, in the present business: our SAVIOUR'S Sacrifice
     upon the cross, called there, to tou pantoV kosmou kaqarsion, and
     here acknowledged to be the "perfect redemption, propitiation, and
     satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world." . . The memory or
     commemoration of this His death, called there, tou aswmatoV autou
     kai tou aimatoV upomnhsin, and here, (Hom.) the public "celebration
     of the memory" of His precious death, at the LORD'S table; there,
     mnhmhn tou megalou qumatoV, here, (Hom.) the remembrance of His
     great mercy expressed in His Passion; there, for the offering of
     this Sacrifice to ALMIGHTY GOD, pantwV kai ierwsunhV &c. there was a
     Priesthood thought to be very necessary, and, here, the Priest alone
     hath power to consecrate the creatures of bread and wine, for a
     remembrance of His death and Passion; there, the whole action, as it
     relates to Priest and people, is called qusian ainesewV, and here,
     the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; there, taV logikaV qusiaV
     kai ieroprepeV quma, here, in the selfsame words, a "reasonable and
     holy Sacrifice:" there, the communicants do offer to the LORD sfaV
     autouV, swmati kai yuch and here they do present unto Him
     theirselves, souls, and bodies; finally, there it is said, quomen
     thn mnhmhn tou melou qumatoV, that they do sacrifice unto the LORD
     the memory of that great oblation; i. c. as he expounds himself,
     they offer to Him the commemoration of the same, anti thV qusiaV,
     for, and as a Sacrifice; and here, we do beseech the LORD to accept
     this our "bounden duty and service," for, and as a Sacrifice, which,
     notwithstanding, we confess ourselves "unworthy to offer" to Him.
     Never did Church agree more perfectly with the ancient
     patterns.--pp. 159--164.

       ID.--Life and Death of Archbishop Laud, Necessary Introduction.

     The Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper they (the first Reformers) called
     the Sacrament of the Altar, as appears plainly by the statute 1st
     Edward VI., entituled, "An Act against such as speak unreverently
     against the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, commonly
     called the Sacrament of the altar." For which consult the body of
     the Act itself. Or, secondly, by Bishop Ridley, (one of the chief
     Compilers of the Common Prayer Book,) who doth not only call it the
     "Sacrament of the Altar," affirming thus, "that in the Sacrament of
     the altar is the natural Body and Blood of CHRIST," &c. but, in his
     reply to an argument of the Bishop of Lincoln's, taken out of St.
     Cyril, he doth resolve it thus, viz. "The word 'Altar' in the
     Scripture signified) as well the altar whereon the Jews were wont to
     offer their burnt Sacrifice, as the Table of the LORD'S Supper: and
     that St. Cyril meaneth by this word Altar, not the Jewish altar, but
     the Table of the LORD," &c. (Acts and Mon. part iii. p. 492. 497.)
     Thirdly, by Bishop Latimer, his fellow martyr, who plainly grants,
     "That the LORD'S Table may be called an Altar, and that the Doctors
     called it so in many places, though there be no propitiatory
     Sacrifice, but only CHRIST." (Part ii. p. 85.) Fourthly, by the
     several affirmations of John Lambert, and John Philpot, two learned
     and religious men, whereof the one suffered death for religion under
     Henry VIII., the other in the fiery time of Queen Mary,--this
     Sacrament being called by both, "the Sacrament of the altar" in
     their several times: for which consult the Acts and Monuments,
     commonly called the Book of Martyrs.--p. 21.

     Here, then, we have the word, the "altar," sed ubi est victima
     holocausti; (as Isaac said unto his father,) "but where is the lamb
     for the burnt-offering?" (Gen. xxii. 7.) Assuredly, if the Priest
     and Altar be so near, the lamb for the burnt-offering cannot be far
     off, even the most blessed "Lamb of GOD, which taketh away the sins
     of the world," as the Scripture styles Him, whose Passion we find
     commemorated in the Sacrament of the Altar, as before is said;
     called for the same reason by St. Augustine, in his Enchiridion,
     Sacrificium altaris, "the Sacrifice of the altar;" by the English
     Liturgy, in the Prayer next after the participation, the "Sacrifice
     of praise and thanksgiving" (Sacrificium laudis); by Chrysostom,
     AnamnhsiV thV qusiaV, "the remembrance of a Sacrifice;" by many
     learned writers amongst ourselves, a "commemorative Sacrifice." For
     thus saith Bishop Andrews in his answer to Cardinal Bellarmine, (c.
     8.) "Tollite," &c..... The like we find in Bishop Morton. . . But
     what need any thing have been said for the proof hereof, when the
     most Rev. Archbishop Cranmer, one (and the chief) of the compilers
     of the public Liturgy, and one who suffered death for opposing the
     Sacrifice of the Mass, distinguisheth most plainly between the
     Sacrifice propitiatory, made by CHRIST Himself only, and the
     Sacrifice commemorative and gratulatory, made by Priests and people:
     for which consult his Defence against Bishop Gardiner, lib. v. p.
     439. And, finally, the testimony of John Lambert, who suffered for
     his conscience in the time of Henry VIII., whose words are these:
     "CHRIST (saith he) being offered up once for all in His own proper
     person, is yet said to be offered up, not only every year at Easter,
     but also every day in the celebration of the Sacrament; because His
     oblation, once for all made, is thereby represented." (Act. Mon. p.
     ii. 35.) So uniform is the consent of our Liturgy, our Martyrs, and
     our learned writers in the name of Sacrifice: so that we may behold
     the Eucharist or the LORD'S Supper, first, as it is a Sacrifice, or
     the commemoration of that Sacrifice offered unto GOD; by which both
     we and the whole Church do obtain remission of our sins, and all
     other benefits of CHRIST'S Passion; And, secondly, as it is a
     Sacrament, participated by men, by which we hope that, being made
     partakers of that holy Communion, we may be fulfilled with His grace
     and heavenly benediction. Both which occur in the next Prayer after
     the Communion. Look on it as a Sacrifice, and then the LORD'S board
     not improperly may be called an altar, as it is properly called the
     table in respect of the Sacrament.--pp. 22, 3.

         SPARROW, BISHOP.--Rationale upon the Book of Common Prayer.

     The reason why this Creed [the Nicene] follows immediately after the
     Epistle and Gospel, is the same that was given for the Apostles'
     Creed following next after the Lessons at Morning and Evening
     Prayer. To which the canon of Toledo, last cited, hath added another
     reason of the saying it here before the people draw near to the holy
     Communion. . . .

     A third reason is given by Dionys. Eccl. Hierarch. It will not be
     amiss to set down some passages of his at large; because they will
     both give us a third reason of using the Creed in this place, and
     discover to us, as I conceive, much of the ancient beautiful order
     of the Communion service.

     The Bishop or Priest, standing at the altar, begins the melody of
     psalms, all the degrees of ecclesiastics singing with him. . . .
     Then is read by some of the ministers, first a lesson out of the Old
     Testament, then one out of the New, in their order. . . . After this
     the catechumens, the possessed, and the penitents are dismissed, and
     they only allowed to stay, who are deemed worthy to receive the holy
     Sacrament. . . . Then the ministers and devout people, reverently
     beholding the holy signs, not yet consecrated but blest and offered
     up to God on a by-standing table, called "the table of proposition,"
     (trapeza proqesewV) praise and bless the FATHER of lights, from
     whom, as all good gifts, so this great blessing of the Communion
     does come, with the Catholic hymn of praise,'which some call the
     Creed, others, more divinely, the pontifical Thanksgiving, as
     containing in it all the spiritual gifts which flow from heaven upon
     us, the whole mystery of our salvation. When this hymn of praise is
     finished, the Deacons, with the Priests, set the holy bread and cup
     of blessing upon the altar; after which, the Priest or Bishop says
     the most sacred, that is, the LORD'S prayer, and gives the blessing
     to the people. Then they (in token of perfect charity, a most
     necessary virtue at this time of offering at the altar, St. Matt. v.
     23.) salute each other. After which, the names of holy men, that
     have lived and died in the faith of CHRIST, are read out of the
     diptychs, and their memories celebrated, to persuade others to a
     diligent imitation of their virtues, and a stedfast expectation of
     their heavenly rewards. This commemoration of the saints, presently
     upon the setting of the holy signs upon the altar, is not without
     some mystery; to show the inseparable sacred union of the saints
     with CHRIST, who is represented by those sacred signs.--pp.
     215--218.

     The Offertory follows, which are certain sentences out of holy
     Scripture, which are sung and said while the people offered. Durant.

     Offerings or oblations are an high part of GOD'S service and
     worship, taught by the light of nature and right reason, which bids
     us to "honour GOD with our substance" as well as with our bodies and
     souls; to give a part of our goods to GOD as an homage or
     acknowledgment of His dominion over us, and that all that we have
     comes from GOD. 1 Chron. xxix. 14. "Who am I, and what is my
     people," &c. to "bring presents to Him that ought to be feared."
     Psalm lxxvi. 11. This duty of offering was practised by the fathers
     before the law, with a gracious acceptation; witness Abel, Gen. iv.
     4; was commanded in the Law, Exod. xxv. 2. "Speak to the children of
     Israel," &c. so, Deut. xvi. 16; and confirmed by our SAVIOUR in the
     Gospel, St. Matt. v. 23. "Therefore, if thou bring thy gift," &c.

     If any man conceives that this offering here mentioned was a Jewish
     perishing rite, not a duty of the Gospel to continue, let him
     consider,

     First, that there is the same reason for this duty under the Gospel,
     as there was under or before the Law; GOD being LORD of us and ours
     as well as of them, and, therefore, to be acknowledged for such by
     us, as well as by them.

     Secondly, That all the rest of our SAVIOUR'S Sermon upon the Mount
     was Gospel, and concerning duties obliging us Christians: and it is
     not likely that our SAVIOUR should intermix, one only Judaical rite
     amongst them.

     Thirdly, That our SAVIOUR, before all these precepts mentioned in
     this His Sermon, whereof this of oblations is one, prefaces this
     severe sanction, St. Matt. v. 19. "Whosoever shall break one of the
     least of these commandments," &c.; which could not be truly said
     concerning the breach of a Jewish outworn rite.

     4. That our SAVIOUR hath carefully taught us there the due manner of
     the performance of this duty of oblations, like as He did concerning
     alms and prayers: and no man can show that ever He did any where
     else, nor is it probable that he should here, carefully direct us,
     how to do that which was presently to be left, and was already out
     of force, as this was, supposing it to be a Jewish rite. We may
     then, I conceive, suppose it for a truth, that oblations are here
     commanded by our SAVIOUR.--pp. 224--226.

             [Of Chancels, Altars, and the fashion of Churches.]
        "The Chancels shall remain as they have done in times past."

     That we may the better understand the intent of this rubric, it will
     not be amiss to examine, how CHANCELS were in time past, both for
     the fashion and necessary furniture; for as they were then, so they
     are to continue still, in the same fashion, and with the same
     necessary appendices, utensils, and furniture. All this may be, and,
     for ought appears to me, must be meant in these words, "The Chancels
     shall remain as they have done in times past." . . .

     The Church of old was parted into two principal parts; Navis, the
     NAVE or body of the Church; and Sacrarium, the CHANCEL. The first,
     the Nave, was common to all the people that were accounted worthy to
     join in the church's service: the Chancel was proper and peculiar to
     the priests and sacred persons. . . .

     The Chancel was divided from the body of the Church, cancellis,
     whence it is called the Chancel. This was, as was said, peculiar to
     the priests and sacred persons. In it were, at least in some
     principal churches, these divisions: Chorus cantorum, the Choir;
     where was an high seat for the Bishop, and other stalls or seats for
     the rest of the Choir; yet, perhaps, this Chorus, as also the next,
     called Soleas, might be more properly reckoned a part of the Nave,
     and the Chancel properly that which of old was called agion bhma,
     the Sanctuary. . . . The Bishop, sitting in this seat by the Altar,
     having his assistant priests sitting with him, resembles CHRIST,
     with His Apostles by Him, instituting the holy Sacrament, and
     blessing the prayers offered up at the Altar by the priest. Right
     under this seat stood the "Altar" or "holy Table," the propitiatory,
     CHRIST'S monument, the tabernacle of His glory, and the seat of the
     great Sacrifice. Sym. Thessal.

     Now that no man take offence at the word "Altar," let him know that
     anciently both these names, "Altar," or "holy Table," were used for
     the same things, though most frequently the Fathers and councils use
     the word "Altar." And both are fit names for that holy thing: for,
     the holy Eucharist being considered as a Sacrifice, in the
     representation of the breaking of the bread, and pouring forth the
     cup, doing that to the holy symbols which was done to CHRIST'S Body
     and Blood, and so shewing forth and commemorating the LORD'S death,
     and offering upon it the same Sacrifice that was offered upon the
     Cross, or rather the commemoration of that Sacrifice, (S. Chrysostom
     in Heb. x. 9,) it may fitly be called an "Altar;" which again is as
     fitly called an "holy Table," the Eucharist being considered as a
     Sacrament, which is nothing else but a distribution and application
     of the Sacrifice to the several receivers.

     To put all out of doubt; it is questionless lawful and safe to speak
     the language of the New Testament, and to give this holy thing the
     name which is given it there. Now there it is called an Altar, (Heb.
     xiii. 10.) "We have an altar," &c. St. Paul, in the verse before,
     had persuaded that they should not be carried away with strange
     doctrines of Jewish and carnal observances, which are grown
     unprofitable to those that walk in them. For "we have an altar" now,
     "whereof they that serve at the Tabernacle," the Jewish Priests,
     "have no right to eat," unless they will receive the faith of
     CHRIST; our altar is better than theirs, and theirs was but a shadow
     of ours; the Sacrifices of their altar, but types of ours; theirs
     are vanished, and ours only continue. And for this reason, do you
     leave strange doctrines of legal observances, and Jewish altars, and
     continue in the grace of the Gospel, whose altar is to continue; for
     "we have an altar." Again, St. Matt. v. 23, "When thou bringest thy
     gift to the altar." That precept and direction for offerings is
     Evangelical, as is proved at large on the Office for the Communion;
     and if the duty there mentioned be Evangelical, then altars are to
     be under the Gospel; for those gifts are to be offered upon the
     altar. So that I hope we may go on and call it "Altar" without
     offence,--pp. 327--329.

     To return then to the appendices of the Chancel. On each side or
     wing of the Altar, in the transverse line, which makes the figure of
     the cross, stand two side tables; the one, mensa propositionis,
     trapeza proqesewV, a by-standing table, appointed for the people's
     offerings, which the Bishop or Priest, there standing, received from
     the people, offered upon that Table, in their names, and blessed;
     and though the oblations there offered were not yet consecrated, yet
     were they there fitted and prepared for consecration, and were types
     of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, says Symeon Thessal. The other was
     skeuofulakeion, Sacristae mensa, the Vestiary. . . . These several
     places and this furniture' some principal and cathedral Chancels
     had; which I have named, not that I think this rubric does require
     them all in every chancel, but because I conceive the knowledge of
     them may serve to help us in the understanding of some ancient
     canons and ecclesiastical story.

     But though all chancels of old had not all these, yet every chancel
     had, even in rural churches, "an Altar" for the consecrating of the
     holy Eucharist, which they always had in high estimation. . . .
     placing it aloft in all their churches, at the upper end, the east..
     .. And so they stood at the east in the Church of England, till Q.
     Elizabeth's time, when some of them were taken clown indeed; upon
     what grounds I dispute not; but wheresoever the altars were taken
     down, the holy Tables, which is all one, were set up in the place
     where the Altars stood, by the Queen's Injunctions, and so they
     continued in most cathedral Churches; and so ought to have continued
     in all; for they were enjoined by Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions,
     forbidden by no after law, that I know, but rather confirmed by this
     rubrick: "The Chancels are to remain as in times past."--pp.
     322--332.

                           [Of the word "Priest."]

     The Greek and Latin words which we translate "Priest," are derived
     from words which signify "holy:" and so the word Priest, according
     to the etymology, signifies him whose mere charge and function is
     about holy things; and therefore seems to be a most proper word for
     him, who is set apart to the holy public service and worship of GOD;
     especially when he is in the actual ministration of holy things. . .
     .

     If it be objected that, according to the usual acception of the
     word, it signifies him that offers up a Sacrifice, and, therefore,
     cannot be allowed to a Minister of the Gospel, who hath no Sacrifice
     to offer; it is answered that the Ministers of the Gospel have
     Sacrifices to offer; St. Peter, 1 Ep. ii. 5, "Ye are built up a
     spiritual house, a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual
     Sacrifices" of prayer, praises, thanksgivings, &c. In respect of
     these, the Ministers of the Gospel may be safely in a metaphorical
     sense called Priests; and in a more eminent manner than other
     Christians are, because they are taken from among men to offer up
     these Sacrifices for others. But, besides these spiritual Sacrifices
     mentioned, the Ministers of the Gospel have another Sacrifice to
     offer, viz. the unbloody Sacrifice, as it was anciently called, the
     commemorative Sacrifice of the death of CHRIST, which does as really
     and truly "show forth the death of CHRIST," as those Sacrifices
     under the Law did foreshow it; and in respect of this Sacrifice of
     the Eucharist, the ancients have usually called those that offer it
     up, Priests. And if Melchisedec was called a Priest, (as he is often
     by St. Paul to the Hebrews,) who yet had no other offering or
     Sacrifice, that we read of, but that of bread and wine, Gen. xiv.
     "He brought forth bread and wine, and," or "for (the Hebrew word
     bears both,) He was a Priest," that is, this act of his was an act
     of Priesthood; (for so must it be referred, "he brought forth bread
     and wine; for he was a Priest;" and not thus, "and he was a Priest,
     and blessed Abraham;" for, both in the Hebrew and Greek, there is a
     full point after these words, "and," or, "for he was a Priest;") if,
     I say, Melchisedec be frequently and truly called a Priest, who had
     no other offering, that we read of, but "bread and wine," why may
     not they, whose office is to bless the people as Melchisedec did,
     and, besides that, to offer that holy bread and wine, the Body and
     Blood of CHRIST, of which, his bread and wine, at the most, was but
     a type, be as truly and without offence called "Priests" also?--pp.
     337--339.

                 FERNE, BISHOP.--Certain Considerations, &c.

     His last exception against the calling of our Bishops, ever since
     the beginning of the Queen's time, is, because they were not veri
     Sacerdotes, truly made Priests; which, saith he, is such an
     essential defect, that it renders their episcopal ordination
     altogether invalid, cap. 17. We grant it of veri Presbyteri; those
     that are not truly-made Presbyters first, cannot be true and
     complete Bishops. But for his veri Sacerdotes, we say, as there are
     no such Priests under the Gospel, so is there no need that Bishops
     should first be made such; for Priests, in the Romish sense, are
     such as, in their ordination, "receive a power of sacrificing for
     the quick and the dead," i. e. a real offering up again the Son of
     GOD to His Father. . . .

     I do not mean to follow Champny here step by step, for he runs into
     the controversy of the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, heaping
     up the sayings of the Fathers, usually alleged by their writers, and
     as often answered and cleared by ours. I shall not examine those
     sayings particularly, but stay upon some generals, which may in
     brief show the meaning of that manner of speech the Fathers commonly
     used in and about the celebration of the Eucharist, the high
     presumption of the Romanists in taking to themselves such a power of
     sacrificing, and their vanity in reproaching us for not assuming it.

     First, it is true that some Fathers seem to say, CHRIST offered
     Himself up in His last supper; but it is evident they meant it not
     really and properly, (for how could it be so, when there was no real
     effusion of His Blood, no real occision or death?) but mystically,
     or, as Saint Augustine sometimes expresseth it, significante
     mysterio, in a mystery or Sacrament, signifying or representing His
     Sacrifice, or offering on the cross, presently to follow; that
     Sacramentum Dominici Sacrificii, Sacrament of the LORD'S Sacrifice,
     as St. Cyprian calls it, Ep. 63. ad Caecil... .

     Champny, endeavouring to clear the relation which the Sacrifice of
     the Eucharist hath to that of the Cross, is forced to make a wide
     difference between them, and indeed to come to that which we allow
     in the Eucharist as it is a Sacrament, without placing such a
     Sacrifice in it as they vainly contend for. "The Sacrifice of the
     Cross (saith he, p. 704), is absolute and independent, which hath
     his effect, ex propria sua efficacia, valore, et virtute, "from his
     own efficacy, value, and virtue: but the Sacrifice of Eucharist" is
     respectivum, dependens, et applicativum, "relative" to that
     Sacrifice on the Cross, "depending" on it, and borrowing totam suam
     propitiandi vim a Sacrificio Crucis, all the propitiatory force it
     hath from that on the Cross; lastly, it is "applicative" of the
     Sacrifice of the Cross, applicando nobis Crucis merita et valorem;
     "it applies," saith he, "unto us the merits of that Sacrifice." . .
     .

     Now, in all this, we may observe what a wide difference is made
     between the Sacrifice in the Eucharist and on the Cross; and,
     thereupon, how impossible it is to make them one and the same; also
     ... we may further observe, how the Romanists, after all their
     contending for a real, proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice, are fain
     to make it but "applicative;" and that is it which we ascribe to the
     Eucharist, as it is a Sacrament appointed for this end and purpose,
     that by it the Sacrifice of the Cross may be applied to us.

     Secondly, it is true that the Fathers often speak of the Eucharist
     as of a Sacrifice. . . .

     Thirdly. However the Fathers used, for the most part, to speak of
     this mystery of the Eucharist mystically and obscurely, under the
     properties of the things signified, rather than of the external
     symbols, and therefore seeming to imply a real conversion, or
     transubstantiation of the symbols into the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     and a real Sacrifice, or offering up of that Body and Blood again in
     the Eucharist, yet do they sometimes punctually and positively
     express their meaning by the "memorial," "representation," and
     "showing" in the Sacrament what was done upon the Cross; and this
     they learnt from St. Paul, who tells us (1 Cor. xi. 26) to "do this"
     is to "remember" and "to show" the LORD'S death.....Now for this
     explication of this manner of speech used by the Fathers, I shall
     instance only in three of them.

     First, in Chrysostom.....Hom. 17 in Heb.....Next, St. Augustine, Ep.
     23.....lib. 20. contra Faustum, cap. 21..... Lastly, let Eusebius
     (sub. cit.) speak, who, in his first book, de Demonstr. Evang. cap.
     10, accurately sets down and clears this whole business of the
     Eucharist. . . .

     All that the Romanists have to reply unto the evidence of these and
     other Fathers, speaking properly of that respect and relation the
     Eucharist hath to the Sacrifice on the Cross, comes to this: that
     the placing of a remembrance or representation of the Sacrifice of
     the Cross in the Eucharist, doth not hinder it to be a true and
     proper Sacrifice also: no more, saith Champny, page 699, than the
     respect which the sacrifices of the law had to CHRIST'S Sacrifice,
     hindered them to be true and real sacrifices. But all this is very
     impertinent; for if the Fathers had barely said, there was a
     remembrance in the Eucharist of CHRIST'S Sacrifice, it had not
     excluded a real Sacrifice; but when, in explaining themselves (why
     they call the Eucharist a Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     and why they say CHRIST is there offered up) they give it for the
     reason of their so speaking, because that Sacrifice once offered by
     our SAVIOUR is there remembered, shown, and represented, it is most
     plain they did not think that which is done in the Eucharist to be a
     real sacrificing of CHRIST. Their instance also of the legal
     sacrifices is as impertinent, for they were real sacrifices in
     regard of the beasts really slain and offered. Now if the Romanists
     will have the bread and wine (which represent the Body and Blood
     which was really offered) to be the real Sacrifice in the Eucharist,
     then indeed the remembrance or representation of CHRIST'S Sacrifice
     there doth not hinder, but there may be also an external oblation
     (and so many Fathers accounted the bread and wine to be, as they
     were brought and offered to that holy use and service). But the
     Romanists will not say the bread and wine is the Sacrifice they
     contend for, but that it is the very Body and Blood which is offered
     up; which Body and Blood being the same which was offered up upon
     the Cross, their real Sacrifice cannot have help by their instance
     of the legal sacrifices of the bodies and blood of beasts, but
     stands excluded by the Fathers saying, CHRIST is offered up in the
     Eucharist by a "mystical signification," by a "remembrance," by
     "representation," as above said. It is very remarkable what Peter
     Lombard saith to this purpose1. .. . The sum of all is this. The
     Fathers usually expressed the celebration or work of the Eucharist,
     by the words of Sacrifice, or offering up the Body of CHRIST, for
     themselves and others, because there was a representing of the real
     Sacrifice of the Cross, and a presenting (as we may say) of it again
     to GOD, for the impetration or obtaining of the benefits thereof for
     themselves, and for all those, they remembered in the celebration of
     the Eucharist.

     Fourthly, it is true that the ancient Fathers speak of offering this
     Sacrifice for the dead, but far from the popish sense, according to
     which Romish Priests, in their ordination, are said to receive
     "power to offer Sacrifice for the quick and dead:" for that offering
     for the dead, which the ancients speak of, in the celebration of the
     Eucharist, had the same extent, purpose, and meaning, that their
     prayers there for the dead had; and these anciently were made for
     those whom they judged to be in bliss, Apostles, Martyrs,
     Confessors, Holy Bishops, &c....... And it is plain, by the writers
     of those times, that this remembering of the dead, thus in the
     celebration of the Eucharist (which was the representation of
     CHRIST'S Sacrifice), was that which the ancients called "offering
     for them," or, as in St. Augustine's time, "offering the Sacrifice
     of the Altar," or the "Sacrifice of our SAVIOUR" for them; i. e. an
     acknowledging of, and thanksgiving for their sleeping (pro
     dormitione, as St. Cyprian and others,) in the LORD, and their
     saving by the merits of His death; and an impetration (by His
     Sacrifice then represented) of all that mercy, redemption, and
     glory, which was yet behind. Thus St. Augustine, in his Confessions,
     speaks of offering for his mother Monica (whom he doubted not to be
     in bliss); i. e. remembering her upon the like respects.

     The Romanists have applied all prayers and offering for the dead to
     the souls in purgatory......so contrary doth the Church of Rome now
     run to antiquity which offered for and prayed for the saints, and
     both in the honour of CHRIST and His Sacrifice. Now the offering of
     their mass, and the prayers for the dead, are made for the souls in
     purgatory; and in regard of them only, it is that the Romish Priests
     "receive power to offer Sacrifice for the dead." . . .

     Now to conclude. By all that hath been said, it appears how
     groundless, unwarrantable, and presumptuous this power is which the
     Romish Priests pretend to; and how that power which our Priests or
     Presbyters receive in ordination, and use in celebrating the
     Eucharist, is warranted by the express word, and doth the whole work
     of the Sacraments sufficiently, according to all purposes that our
     SAVIOUR intended it for, when He said "Do this," and according to
     the true and proper meaning of the Fathers, speaking usually of a
     Sacrifice in it......Bellarm. lib. 3. de Pontif. Rom. c. 19. writing
     of Antichrist, and answering to this as a piece of Antichristianism
     charged upon the Church of Rome, dare not simply affirm that the
     Priest offers up CHRIST, but that CHRIST offers up Himself, per
     manus Sacerdotis, by the hands of the Priest. Whether Bellarmine
     mend or mar his business here, it is hard to say; this we know, that
     CHRIST, our High Priest (according to the Apostle, Heb. vii. 25. and
     ix. 24), is in heaven, at GOD'S right hand, executing His eternal
     Priesthood, by interceding for us, and in that representing still
     what He hath done and suffered for us. And we know, and we have
     warrant and His appointment to do the like sacramentally here below,
     i. e. in the celebration of the Eucharist, to remember His death and
     passion, and represent His own oblation upon the Cross, and by it to
     beg and impetrate what we or the Church stand in need of......Yea,
     the Priest saith directly, in order of their Mass: Suscipe, Pater,
     hanc hostiam, quam ego indignus servus tuus offero tibi "Receive, O
     Father, this Sacrifice, which I, thine unworthy servant, do offer
     unto Thee." They that composed this prayer knew not that CHRIST (as
     the Cardinal contrives it) offered up Himself there, by the hands of
     the Priest; or, rather, knew not that CHRIST was there really
     offered; but by the hanc hostiam "this Sacrifice," meant as the
     ancient Fathers did, as shown above. . . .

     All this considered, we see how needless, unwarrantable, and
     presumptuous a thing this, their Sacrifice of the Mass; and that
     such also is the power of sacrificing given to their Priests, and
     how vainly they reproach us for not assuming, and as vainly question
     the lawful calling of our Bishops.--pp. 320--356.

      HAMMOND, PRESBYTER, CONFESSOR, AND DOCTOR.--Practical Catechism.

     S. Is there any third observation of this kind?

     C. There is this, that CHRIST instituted this after a peculiar
     Supper, to wit, the Passover, which being a sacrifical feast (of
     which notion there were many among the Jews and Gentiles, it being
     common to both those to annex to their Sacrifices to GOD, a feeding
     with mirth and festivity upon some parts of the Sacrifice) and
     peculiarly commemorative of GOD'S mercy of deliverance to the
     Israelites out of Egypt, and so, very fit to signify the crucifixion
     of CHRIST,--that Lamb slain by the Jews, and fed on by us with
     bitter herbs, a mixture of sourness in this world (whereupon CHRIST
     is called our Passover, or Paschal Lamb, slain for us)--this
     Sacrament (which was after the commemorative Passover) is to be
     conceived a confederation of all Christians one with another, to
     live piously and charitably, both by commemorating the death of
     CHRIST, and by making His Blood (as it was the fashion in the
     Eastern nations) a ceremony of this covenant, mutual betwixt GOD and
     us. ...

     S. Is there any fifth observation of this kind?

     C. Yes; the manner of CHRIST'S instituting this supper, by way of
     blessing or praising GOD, or giving thanks over it, from whence it
     is called the Eucharist.

     S. What doth this import to us?

     C. The offering up somewhat unto GOD in imitation of the first
     fruits under the Law. To which purpose you may please to observe the
     manner of the Sacrament in the first apostolical and ancient Church.
     The Christians, all that were present, brought some of the good
     fruits of the earth along with them, and offered them at GOD'S Altar
     or Table; and there the prefect or bishop, or, if he were not there,
     the presbyter, receiving them as an Abel's offering, blessed GOD for
     all His mercies, the fruits of the season, but above all for the
     death of CHRIST, signified by and commemorated in the breaking of
     the bread and pouring out of the wine; and, all the people saying
     Amen, the officer or attendant, called the deacon, delivered
     portions of these, to wit, bread and wine, to all that were present.
     . . .

     S. Is there yet any more behind?

     C. Yes; to enquire what is the full importance of those words, added
     in St. Luke xxii. 19. and repeated by St. Paul 1 Cor. xi. 24. though
     not mentioned in the other Gospels "Do this in remembrance of Me."

     S. What is the full importance of them?

     C. It is, first, a commission given to His Apostles to continue this
     ceremony (now used by Him) as an holy ceremony or Sacrament in the
     Church for ever. Secondly, a direction that (for the manner of
     observing it) they should do to other Christians as He had now done
     to them, i. e, take, bless, break this bread, take and bless this
     cup, and then give and distribute it to others. . .. Thirdly, a
     specifying of the end to which this was designed, a commemoration of
     the death of CHRIST, a representing His Passion to GOD, and a coming
     before Him in His name, first, to offer our Sacrifices of
     supplications and praises, in the name of the crucified JESUS, (as
     of old, both among Jews and heathens, all their Sacrifices were
     rites in and by which they supplicated GOD, see 1 Sam. xiii. 12.);
     and secondly, to commemorate that His daily continual Sacrifice, or
     intercession for us at the right hand of His FATHER now in heaven.

     S. Will you now proceed to the fourth part of your proposed method,
     and see what is to be found to this purpose in that special place, 1
     Cor. x. 16?

     C. I shall; and for a right understanding of it, and collecting that
     which the context was meant to afford us, you must mark that tie
     practice of the Israelites first in their Sacrifices, and then of
     the heathens in theirs, are there brought to convince the truth of
     what is there said of this Christian Sacrament, and therefore it
     will be useful to observe first, what it is that is there said of
     the Israelites, then of the Gentiles, and then to apply or bring it
     home to this business.

     S. What then is it that is said of the Israelites?

     C. It is this observation concerning their sacrifical feasts, ver.
     18. that they that eat any part of them (as, when the priest offered
     up a Sacrifice, some parts of the beasts were eaten together by the
     people) are conceived to have joined in the service performed by the
     priest or sacrificer, and to have right together with him in all the
     benefits of the Sacrifice; his eating is called "eating before the
     LORD," and is by GOD counted as an acceptable service; and whatever
     flows from GOD in this case by way of benefit or advantage, comes to
     them as really as to the priest, it being the priest's part to
     sacrifice, the people's to eat: and so, in those two things, there
     is a mutual, reciprocal action betwixt GOD and them; they serve GOD,
     and GOD blesses them; and that is called communicating or being
     partakers of the Altar.

     S. What is it that is said of the heathens?

     C. First, that they sacrifice to their false gods, when only the
     true one ought to have that worship from them, vers. 20 and 22. and
     (as by the 22nd it appears) that this is a breach of the second
     Commandment. . . . Secondly, that they which have this mutual
     conjunction with those false gods, are supposed to have received
     influxes from them, and to disclaim expecting any thing from the
     true one, ver. 20, 21. ...

     S. What then is the result of both these instances together?

     C. That they that eat of the sacrifical feast, either of the true or
     false gods, have a mutual conjunction with them, a kind of
     confederation, perform services to, and receive influences,
     benefits, and advantages from them, do so really from the true GOD,
     and are supposed to do so from the false.

     S. How then will you bring this home to our business in hand, to the
     Sacrament?

     C. You shall see, verse 16. For there the Sacrament is set down, and
     the nature and use of it, thus: "the cup of blessing which we
     bless," or (as the Syriac) "the cup of praise," i. e. the chalice of
     wine, which is, in the name of the people, offered up by the bishop
     or presbyter to GOD with lauds and thanksgivings, i. e. that whole
     Eucharistical action (and that expressed to be the action of the
     people, as well as the presbyter, by their drinking of it) is "the
     communication of the Blood of CHRIST,"--a service of theirs to
     CHRIST, a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, commemorative of that great
     mercy and bounty of CHRIST in pouring out His Blood for them, and a
     making them for a means ordained by CHRIST to make them partakers of
     the Blood of CHRIST, not of the guilt of shedding it, but (if they
     come worthily thither) of the benefits that are purchased by it,
     viz. the washing away of sin in His Blood: so in like manner, the
     breaking and eating of the bread is a communication of the Body of
     CHRIST,--a Sacrifice commemorative of CHRIST'S offering up His Body
     for us, and a making us partakers, or communicating to us the
     benefits of that bread of life, strengthening and giving us grace. .
     . .

     I will now give you a compendium or brief of the main substantial
     part of this Sacrament. And that consists only of two branches, one
     on our parts performed to GOD, the other on GOD'S part performed to
     us. That on our part is commemorating the goodness of GOD in all,
     but especially that His great bounty of giving His SON to die for
     us: and this commemoration hath two branches, one of praise and
     thanksgiving to Him for this mercy, the other of annunciation or
     showing forth, not only first to men, but secondly, and especially,
     to GOD, this Sacrifice of Christ's offering up His Body upon the
     Cross for us. That which respecteth or looks towards men, is a
     professing of our faith in the death of CHRIST; that which looks
     towards GOD, is our pleading before Him that Sacrifice of His own
     SON, and, through that, humbly and with affiance requiring the
     benefits thereof, grace and pardon, to be bestowed upon us. And then
     GOD'S part is the accepting of this our bounden duty, bestowing that
     Body and Blood of CHRIST upon us, not by sending it down locally for
     our bodies to feed on, but really for our souls to be strengthened
     and refreshed by it. ...

     S. There is then only a fifth behind, to apply all this by way of
     illustration and confirmation to what is said of this matter in the
     Catechism.

     C. This will be easily done; you would be able to do it yourself;
     yet I shall go before you in this also.

     S. The first question then is, Why the Sacrament of the LORD'S
     Supper was ordained? and the answer, "For the continual remembrance
     of the Sacrifice of the death of CHRIST, and of the benefits which
     we receive thereby:" What is the meaning of that answer?

     C. Dissolve the words, and you shall see most clearly. First, CHRIST
     died. Secondly, this death of His was a Sacrifice for us, an
     oblation once for all offered to His FATHER for us weak sinful men.
     Thirdly, by this Sacrifice we that are true Christians receive
     unspeakable benefits; as, strength to repair our weakness, and
     enable us to do what GOD in His SON will accept; and reconciliation,
     or pardon for us miserable sinners. And, fourthly, the end of
     CHRIST'S instituting this Sacrament was on purpose that we might, at
     set times, frequently and constantly returning, (for that is the
     meaning of "continual," parallel to the use of "without ceasing"
     applied to the Sacrifice among the Jews, and the duty of prayer
     among Christians) remember and commemorate before GOD and man this
     Sacrifice of the death of CHRIST.--Works, vol. i. pp. 124--130.

                  ID.--View of the New Directory, sect. 39.

     For the order of the Offertory, it must first be observed that, in
     the primitive Apostolic Church, the Offertory was a considerable
     part of the action, in the administering and receiving the
     Sacrament; the manner of it was thus. At their meetings for divine
     service, every man, as he was able, brought something along with
     him, bread, or wine, the fruits of the season, &c.: of this, part
     was used for the Sacrament, the rest kept to furnish a common table
     for all the brethren .... Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. p. 97. sets down
     the manner of it clearly in his time.....This clearly distinguished
     two parts of the Offertory, one designed for the use of all the
     faithful in the Sacrament, another reserved for the use of the poor;
     the former called prosforai, "oblations," in the Council of
     Laodicea, the other, karpoforiai, in that of Gangra; and
     proportionably, the repository for the first called Sacrarium, in
     the fourth Council of Carthage, can. 93. (and by Possidonius, in the
     life of Saint Augustine, Secretarium unde altari necessaria
     inferuntur, "where those things are laid, and from whence fetched,
     which are necessary to the altar,") the other gazophylacium, or
     treasury:--the first St. Cyprian calls Sacrificia, "Sacrifices;" the
     second, Eleemosynae, "Alms," parallel to those, which we find both
     together mentioned, Acts xxiv. 17.--"I came to bring alms to my
     nation, and offerings." This, saith Justin Martyr, is our Christian
     Sacrifice; which will more appear to him that considers, that the
     feasting of the people, their partaking of the Sacrifice, having
     their tomaV and meridaV, was always annexed to Sacrifices, both
     among Jews and Heathens, which the Apostle calls "partaking of the
     Altar;" and, consequently, that the Sacrifice and the feast
     together, the Sacrifice in the Offertory, the Feast in the eating
     and drinking there, do complete and make up the whole business of
     this Sacrament, as far as the people are concerned in it; and all
     this blessed by the Priest, and GOD blessed and praised by Priest
     and people, and so the title of Eucharist belongs to it. Thus after
     Justin, Irenaeus ... So Tertullian . . . Much more might be said of
     this out of ancient Constitutions and Canons, if 'twere not for my
     desire of brevity.--pp. 374, 5.

                  ID.--Preface to "Dispatcher dispatched."

     As for his other way of charging the schism upon us, from a supposed
     "separation betwixt us in necessary points of Divine worship, viz.
     in Sacrifice and Sacrament," if he and I, being both Englishmen,
     speak the same language, and there lie not some undiscovered
     ambiguity in the words "Sacrifice" and "Sacrament," I should hope,
     when the Universal Pastorship by Divine right were discarded, and
     only the Primacy of Order taken in its stead, the issue would be
     brief. . . .

     What controversies are now risen, and waged among us on these heads,
     he hath in part truly enumerated, though, as he omits the two
     principal, concerning their private masses, and denying the cup,
     their no-communion and their half-communion, ... so I must confess,
     I should not have begun the list as he doth, that "all Roman
     Catholics believe and reverence the Sacrifice of the Mass, as the
     most substantial and essential act of their religion, all
     Protestants condemn and abhor it." When 'tis visible that the
     Protestants of the Church of England believe and reverence, as much
     as any, the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, as the most substantial and
     essential act of our religion; and doubt not, but the word Missa,
     "Mass," has fitly been used by the Western Church to signify it; and
     herein abhor and condemn nothing, but the corruptions and
     mutilations which the Church of Rome, without care of conforming
     themselves to the Universal, have admitted in the celebration.--Vol.
     ii. p. 164.

                               BARLOW, BISHOP.
      [Addition to the Prayer of Consecration, in a copy of the Book of
     Common Prayer, habitually used by Bishop Barlow, with very copious
   extracts from the Fathers and ancient Liturgies on the doctrine of the
    Oblation. This volume is preserved in the Bodleian Library, Arch. C.
                                     9.]

     "Almighty GOD, our heavenly FATHER," &c. Hear us, O merciful FATHER,
     we most humbly beseech Thee, (through the operation of the HOLY
     GHOST sanctifying both us and these (c e) gifts, and exalting them
     above their ordinary use, importance, and conception, &c. [The
     letters c e refer to the two marginal directions to the Priest to
     "lay his hand upon all the Bread," and "upon every vessel in which
     there ii any Wine to be consecrated."]

             THORNDIKE, PRESBYTER.--Epilogue, book iii. chap. v.

     I come now to the question of the Sacrifice, the resolution whereof
     must needs proceed according to that which hath been determined in
     the point now despatched. For, having showed the presence of the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST in the Eucharist, because it is appointed
     that in it the faithful may feast upon the Sacrifice of the Cross,
     we have already showed, by the Scriptures, that it is the Sacrifice
     of CHRIST upon the Cross, in the same sense, and to the same effect,
     as it contained the Body and Blood of CHRIST, which it representeth,
     that is, mystically and spiritually, and sacramentally, (that is, as
     in and by a Sacrament) tendereth and exhibiteth. For, seeing the
     Eucharist not only tendereth the Flesh and Blood of CHRIST, but
     separated one from the other, under and by several elements, as His
     Blood was parted from His Body by the violence of the Cross; it must
     of necessity be as well the Sacrifice, as the Sacrament of CHRIST
     upon the Cross.--p. 38.

     But, for the same reason, and, by the same correspondence between
     the Sacrifices of the Law and that of CHRIST'S Cross, it may be
     evident, that it is not, nor can be any disparagement to the
     Sacrifice of our LORD CHRIST upon the Cross, to the full and perfect
     satisfaction and propitiation for the sins of the world which it
     hath made, that the Eucharist should be counted the Sacrifice of
     CHRIST crucified, mystically, and, as in a Sacrament, represented
     to, and feasted upon by His people. The Apostle saith, that "CHRIST
     is gone into no holy place made with hands," &c. Heb. ix. 24--28.
     But have I said anything to cause any man to imagine, that I suppose
     CHRIST to be crucified again, as often as the Eucharist is
     celebrated? . . . Certainly, I will speak freely, neither can they
     that hold Transubstantiation be truly said to stand obliged to any
     such consequence, so long as they acknowledge, with all Christians,
     that the Covenant of Grace is for once settled by the one Sacrifice
     of our LORD upon the Cross. Why? because, though they believe the
     natural Flesh and Blood of CHRIST, as crucified, to be there, yet
     not naturally but sacramentally, (that is, in their sense, under the
     accidents of bread and wine, which is, indeed, and in the sense of
     the Church, under the species or kinds); which difference is so
     great an abatement of that common and usual sense, in which all
     Christians understand that CHRIST was sacrificed upon the Cross,
     that all that know it to be their profession (which all must know,
     that will not speak of they know not what) must acknowledge that the
     repeating of the Sacrifice of CHRIST crucified by the Eucharist, is
     not the repeating of that Sacrifice by which mankind was redeemed,
     otherwise than as a Sacrament is said to be that whereof it is a
     Sacrament. What ground and advantage this gives me, and any man of
     my opinion, to argue from those things which themselves acknowledge,
     that there is no cause why they should insist upon the abolishing of
     the substance of the elements in the Eucharist, I leave to them that
     shall think fit to consider the premises, to judge. But for me, who
     demand no more than this, that, inasmuch as the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST is in the Eucharist, insomuch it is the Sacrifice of CHRIST
     upon the Cross, I cannot foresee what occasion slander can have to
     pick any such consequence out of my sayings. Certainly, the
     Sacrifices of the old Law ceased not to be Sacrifices, because they
     were figures and prophecies of that one Sacrifice upon the Cross,
     which mankind was redeemed with. And why should the commemoration
     and representation (in that sense of this word representation which
     I determined afore) of that one Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross,
     which mankind was redeemed with, be less properly a Sacrifice, in
     dependence upon and denomination from that one which the name of
     Sacrifice upon the Cross was first used to signify? For all conceit
     of legal Sacrifice is quite shut out, by supposing the Sacrifice
     past, which the Sacrifice of the Eucharist represents and
     commemorates; whereas, all Sacrifices of the Old Law are essentially
     (at least to Christians) figurative of the one Sacrifice of CHRIST
     to come.

     Indeed, by that which I have said, concerning the nature of a
     Sacrifice in the Eucharist, as it is intended for Christians to
     feast upon, it is evident that this commemorative and representative
     Sacrifice is of the nature and kind of Peace-offerings, which, by
     the Law, those that offered were to feast upon. "I will take the cup
     of salvation," &c. . . . saith the Psalm cxvi. 12,13. And that, in
     answer to the question made, "What reward shall I give unto the LORD
     for all the benefits that He hath done unto me?" At feasting upon
     the parts, or remains of peace-offerings, the master of the
     Sacrifice began the cup of thanksgiving for deliverance received, in
     consideration whereof he pays his vows; and the Sacrifices which he
     pays are called swthria, or "Sacrifices of thanksgiving for
     deliverance received." Is not this the same that Christians do, in
     celebrating the Eucharist, setting aside the difference between Jews
     and Christians? Wherefore I have showed, that it is celebrated, and
     is to be celebrated, with commemoration of, and thanksgiving for the
     benefits of GOD, especially that of CHRIST crucified. Which
     thanksgiving, as it tends to the consecrating thereof, so, inasmuch
     as the consecration tends to the receiving of it, another
     thanksgiving, at the receiving of it, becomes also due, as at
     feasting upon peace-offerings. And hereupon I have showed, that it
     is called by the Apostle "the Sacrifice of praise, the fruit of our
     lips giving thanks to GOD:" and that, having showed that Jews have
     no right to it as a propitiatory Sacrifice, that is, not to it
     because not to the propitiatory Sacrifice which it representeth; but
     therefore, that Christians have right to feast upon it, as the Jews
     upon their peace-offerings. But if it be true, as I have showed,
     that the celebration of the Eucharist is the renewing of the
     Covenant of Grace, which supposeth propitiation made for the sin of
     mankind, by that one Sacrifice which it commemorateth and
     representeth; the celebration thereof being commanded, as a
     condition to be performed on our part, to qualify us for the
     promise, which it tendereth to those that are qualified as it
     requireth; shall it be a breach on Christianity, to say also, that
     it is such a Sacrifice whereby we make GOD propitious to us, and
     obtain at His hands the blessings of Grace, which the Covenant of
     Grace tendereth?--pp. 39--41.

     In as much, then, as I have showed that the Eucharist is a
     Sacrifice, in so much, and for that very reason, that which
     Christians offer to GOD for the celebration of the Eucharist, is no
     otherwise a Sacrifice than those things which were appropriated to
     the Altar under the Law were Sacrifices, from the time that they
     were dedicated to that purpose; saving always the difference between
     Sacrifices figurative of the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross,
     (such as Christianity supposeth all the Sacrifices of the Old Law to
     be) and the commemoration and representation of the same past, which
     I have showed that the Eucharist pretendeth. And truly, having
     showed that this representative and commemorative Sacrifice is of
     the nature and kind of peace-offerings, in as much as it is
     celebrate on purpose to communicate with the Altar, in feasting upon
     it; and knowing that every beast that was sacrificed for a
     peace-offering was attended with a meat-offering of flour, and a
     drink-offering of wine, which are the kinds in which the Eucharist
     is appointed to be celebrated; I must needs say, that those species,
     set apart for the celebration of the Eucharist, are as properly to
     be called Sacrifices of that nature which the Eucharist is of, (to
     wit, commemorative and representative,) as the same are to be
     counted figurative under the Law, from the time that they were
     deputed to that use. This is then the first act of oblation by the
     Church, that is, by any Christian that consecrates his goods, not at
     large, to the service of GOD, but peculiarly to the service of GOD
     by Sacrifice in regard whereof the elements of the Eucharist, before
     they be consecrated, are truly counted Oblations or Sacrifices.

     After the consecration is past, having showed you that St. Paul hath
     appointed that, at the celebration of the Eucharist, prayers,
     supplications, and intercessions be made for all estates of the
     world, and of the Church; and that the Jews have no right to the
     Eucharist, (according to the Epistle to the Hebrews) because, though
     Eucharistical, yet it is of that kind the blood whereof is offered
     to GOD within the vail, with prayers for all estates of the world,
     as Philo and Josephus inform us; seeing the same Apostle hath so
     plainly expounded us the accomplishment of that figure, in the
     offering of the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross to the FATHER in
     the highest heavens, to obtain the benefits of His passion for us;
     and that the Eucharist is nothing else but the representation here
     upon earth of that which is done there; these things, I say,
     considered, necessarily it follows, that whoso believes the prayers
     of the Church, made in our LORD'S name, do render GOD propitious to
     them for whom they are made, and obtain for them the benefits of
     CHRIST'S death, (which he that believes not is no Christian,) cannot
     question that those which are made, by St. Paul's appointment, at
     the celebration of the Eucharist, offering up unto GOD the merits
     and sufferings of CHRIST there represented, must be peculiarly and
     especially effectual to the same purposes. And, that the Eucharist
     may very properly be accounted a Sacrifice propitiatory and
     impetratory both, in this regard, because the offering of it up to
     GOD, with and by the said prayers, doth render GOD propitious and
     obtain at His hands the benefits of CHRIST'S death which it
     representeth, there can be no cause to refuse, being no more than
     the simplicity of plain Christianity enforceth.

     But whether the Eucharist, as in regard of this oblation, so, in
     regard of the consecration may be called a propitiatory Sacrifice,
     this, I perceive, is yet a question even among those of the Church
     of Rome. For it is acknowledged, that there is yet among them a
     party, even since the decree of the Council of Trent, who,
     acknowledging the nature of a Sacrifice propitiatory in the
     Eucharist, in regard of the offering of it, already consecrated,
     (according to the order of the Latin Mass,) to GOD, for the
     necessities of the Church, utterly deny any nature of such a
     Sacrifice in it, by virtue of the consecration otherwise. True it
     is, these men are looked upon as bordering upon heretics, in regard
     they acknowledge no other nature of a Sacrifice but that which those
     who acknowledge no Transubstantiation may grant, without prejudice
     to their positions. And, if my aim were only to hold a mean opinion
     between two extremes, and not freely to declare what may be affirmed
     with truth, it might seem very convenient to take up that position,
     for which I may allege a party at present extant, in the communion
     of the Church of Rome. But, having resolved to set all regard of
     faction behind the consideration of truth manifested by the
     Scriptures, I stick not to yield and maintain, that the consecration
     of the Eucharist, in order to the participation of it, is indeed a
     Sacrifice, whereby GOD is rendered propitious to, and the benefits
     of CHRIST'S death obtained for, them that worthily receive it; but
     this, perhaps, neither in the sense nor to the interest of them who
     make it their business to maintain the present abuses of the Church
     of Rome, by disguising the true intentions and expressions of the
     Catholic Church.--pp. 41--43.

     For having maintained that the elements are really changed from
     ordinary bread and wine into the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     mystically present, as in a Sacrament; and that, in virtue of the
     consecration, not by the faith of him that receives; I am to admit
     and maintain whatsoever appears duly consequent to this truth,
     namely, that the elements so consecrated are truly the Sacrifice of
     CHRIST upon the Cross, in as much as the Body and Blood of CHRIST
     crucified are contained in them,--not as in a bare sign, which a man
     may take up at his pleasure, but as in the means by which GOD hath
     promised His Spirit,--but not properly the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon
     the Cross, because that is a thing that consists in action, and
     motion, and succession, and therefore, once done, can never be done
     again, because it is a contradiction, that that which is done should
     ever be undone. It is therefore enough, that the Eucharist is the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross, as the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon
     the Cross is represented, renewed, revived, and restored by it, and
     as every representation is said to be the same thing with that which
     it representeth; taking "representing" here not for barely
     signifying, but for tendering and exhibiting thereby that which it
     signifieth.--p. 44.

     For though there be only a general reason of offering, no particular
     consideration of destroying, seen in the act of the Church offering
     either the elements to be consecrated, or the consideration of
     CHRIST'S Cross represented, to render GOD propitious to His Church;
     yet are the consecrated elements no less the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S
     Cross, than the presence of CHRIST'S Body and Blood in them will
     allow, though in order to that Evangelical banquet upon them, at
     which, and by which the Covenant of Grace is renewed. For, the
     Apostles having made the Eucharist a Sacrifice in this regard, I
     must not count the making of it one offensive. I say; then, that
     having proved the consecration of the Eucharist to be the production
     of the Body and Blood of CHRIST crucified, or the causing them to be
     mystically present in the elements thereof, as in a Sacrament
     representing them separated by the crucifying of CHRIST; and the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross being necessarily propitiatory
     and impetratory both; it cannot be denied that the Sacrament of the
     Eucharist, in as much as it is the same Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the
     Cross, (as that which representeth is truly said to be the thing
     which it representeth,) is also both propitiatory and impetratory by
     virtue of the consecration of it, whereby it becometh the Sacrifice
     of CHRIST upon the Cross. For is it not all the reason in the world
     that, if the Eucharist be the Sacrifice of CHRIST crucified, the
     consecration of the Eucharist, that is, the causing of the elements
     to become this Sacrifice, should be, and be accounted, and called
     the sacrificing of CHRIST? And, if the participation of the
     Eucharist be, as I have showed it to be, the renewing of the
     Covenant of Grace, (by virtue whereof the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon
     the Cross becomes propitiatory and impetratory in behalf of
     Christians,) shall not the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, whereof they
     participate, be counted propitiatory and impetratory, by virtue of
     the consecration indeed, though in order to the participation of it?
     For if the profession of Christianity be the condition that renders
     GOD propitious to us, and obtains for us the benefits of CHRIST'S
     Passion; and that the receiving of the Eucharist is the renewing of
     that profession, by virtue whereof the faults whereby we have failed
     of that profession, for that which is past, are blotted out, and we,
     for the future, are qualified for the blessings which CHRIST'S
     Passion tendereth; then is the Eucharist a Sacrifice propitiatory
     and impetratory, by virtue of the consecration, though in order to
     the participation of it. Which, whether those that are so much for
     the Sacrifice, in the Church of Rome, rest content with it or not,
     seemeth to me so natively proper to the simplicity and holiness of
     Christianity, that nothing can be held forth more pertinent to
     advance the zeal of frequenting, together with the devotion and
     reverence of communicating in this most precious of GOD'S ordinances
     to Christians. For what can more oblige a Christian to the frequent
     and worthy communion of this Sacrament than to consider that, by
     receiving it, he is reinstated in his right to those promises which
     the Gospel tendereth; provided that he, on his part, reestablish in
     his own heart that resolution to Christianity by professing which he
     was at the first estated in GOD'S kingdom? Hereupon arises a fourth
     reason, why this Sacrament is a Sacrifice; to wit, of the bodies and
     souls of men, who, having consecrated their goods to GOD, for the
     celebration of it, do, by receiving it, profess to renew that
     consecration of themselves to the service of GOD, according to the
     Law of CHRIST, which their baptism originally pretendeth.--pp. 45,
     6,

     And now I confess, that all they who do not believe the promises of
     the Gospel to depend upon any condition to be performed by our free
     will, qualifying us with a right title to them, may very well say by
     consequence, that it is a disparagement to the Sacrifice of CHRIST
     upon the Cross, to make the Eucharist a propitiatory and impetratory
     Sacrifice in behalf of the Church, in that sense and to that effect
     as I have said. But, supposing that condition, I challenge all the
     world to say wherein any such disparagement lies. For let any man
     think either me or the doctors of the Church of Rome so mad, as to
     ascribe that propitiation, which is once made for the whole world,
     by the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross, to the representation and
     commemoration of it by the Sacrifice of the Eucharist. But, in
     regard the Gospel requires a certain condition at thine hands, which
     being not performed, to thee CHRIST is neither born nor crucified,
     nor risen again, as St. Prosper saith; and that the communion of the
     Eucharist professeth the performance thereof; and that truly, if it
     be worthy, so that the propitiation wrought by the Cross thereby
     becomes effectually thine;) in that regard the Eucharist becomes to
     thee a propitiatory Sacrifice, by virtue of the consecration indeed,
     (which makes the elements to become the Body and Blood of CHRIST
     mystically, as in a Sacrament,) but yet in order to the
     participation of it. And is not this the applying of the
     propitiation wrought by the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Cross, when as by
     the Sacrament of the Eucharist a man becomes entitled to the benefit
     of it? Nor let any man tell me, that this application is wrought by
     living faith, as if that were evidence enough that not by the
     Sacrament of the Eucharist: for if, notwithstanding this faith, the
     Sacrament of Baptism is necessary to estate us in this right,
     because there is no living faith without being baptized into GOD'S
     Church, by the same reason, (supposing the frequentation of the
     Eucharist commanded for the daily redressing and maintenance of the
     same title,) of necessity it follows, that the application of that
     propitiation is to be ascribed to the Eucharist, which is not
     applicable without it. Again, if St. Paul enjoins the Church to
     offer up their prayers, supplications, and intercessions for all
     estates in the world, at the celebration of the Eucharist, as
     recommending them in the Name of CHRIST, there mystically present,
     in the commemoration of His death upon the Cross; can it seem
     strange, that the prayers which are so powerfully presented, by
     alleging an intercession of such esteem, should have a special
     virtue, and take a special effect, in making GOD propitious to His
     Church and all estates of the same, and obtaining for them those
     benefits which CHRIST'S Passion tenders? And if so, is not the
     Sacrament of the Eucharist a propitiatory and impetratory Sacrifice,
     by virtue of the consecration, though in order to the oblation and
     presentation of it, by the prayers of the Church, for the obtaining
     of their necessities? What is there in all this, that the tongue of
     slander can asperse with the imputation of Popery, unless they will
     have Popery to be that Christianity which we have received from our
     LORD CHRIST and His Apostles?--p. 47.

     As for the sayings of the Fathers, whereby the Eucharist is declared
     to be a Sacrifice, in regard of the consecration, I do no way doubt
     that they are utterly innumerable. For wheresoever the whole action,
     including the propitiation which the Church intends to procure by
     it, is called a Sacrifice, (which is most ordinary in the language
     of the Fathers,) there the consecration cannot be excluded, though
     referring it to the communion, not the communion to it, as some
     would have: for if it be considered, on the other side, that they
     were all said at such time as the communion was no less usual than
     the consecration thereof, (that is to say, when it was a strange
     thing to hear of the Eucharist celebrated, and none but the Priest
     to receive,) it will not be strange, that I demand it to be
     understood, in order to the communion of the same.--p. 49.

     Now that, in the sense of the Catholic Church, the Sacrament of the
     Eucharist is a Sacrifice propitiatory for the Church, and
     impetratory of the necessities thereof, in regard of those prayers
     wherewith it is offered and presented to GOD, in virtue of the
     Sacrifice of the Cross, which it is mystically, (that is,
     represented! and commemorateth,) a few words will serve to persuade
     him that knows the practice and custom of the Church in all ages, at
     the solemn and regular times and occasions of celebrating the
     Eucharist, to make mention of all states and qualities belonging to
     the Church; and not only so, but, upon occasions incident, of going
     to God for the necessities, either of the Church or of particular
     Christians, to celebrate the Eucharist, with an intent of presenting
     and offering the Cross of CHRIST, there present, for their
     necessities. . . . For in all the Liturgies, there is a place where
     mention is to be made of all states of the Church, for whom the
     oblations, out of which the Eucharist is consecrated, are offered.
     And, likewise, a place, where, the Eucharist being consecrated,
     prayer is made in behalf of all states in the Church; that is to
     say, the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Cross, there present, is offered up,
     to move GOD to grant them all that is desired, by the regular and
     continual prayers of the Church. And among them, there is a special
     place for those that offer at present.

     If any man be moved to imagine, that any part hereof is prejudicial
     to that Reformation which the Church of England professeth, (for I
     profess from the beginning, not to be scrupulous of offending those
     that offend it,) remit him to that learned Appendix of Dr. Field to
     his third book of the Church; the purpose whereof, (in answer to the
     question, Where the Reformed Church was before Luther?) is, to show
     that, in this point, as in others there handled, the sense of the
     whole Church of Christ, even to the time of Luther and to the
     Council of Trent, was no other than that which the Church of England
     embraceth and cherisheth: thereby to show, that the Reformation
     thereof never pretended to found a new Church, but to preserve that
     which was, by taking away those corruptions which time and the
     enemies of Christianity had sown in the laws and customs of it.
     Which he doth so evidently perform, in this point, that I must needs
     challenge any man, that hath a mind to blast anything here said with
     the stale calumny of popery, to consider first, whether he can prove
     those things, which the authors, past exception, there quoted,
     declare to be the sense of the Catholic Church at that time, to
     contain any thing prejudicial to the Gospel of CHRIST, and that
     purity thereof which the Reformation pretendeth.--pp. 49--51.

     In fine, it is not that consideration of a Sacrifice in the
     Sacrament of the Eucharist, which the sense and practice of the
     Catholic Church enforceth, but the violent interpretations of it,
     which are made on both sides, to both extremities, that can give the
     least pretence for division in the Church. For while, on the one
     side, the sacrificing of Christ anew is so construed, as if to doubt
     of the virtue of it in behalf of all that assist in it, whether they
     communicate in it or not, whether their devotions concur to it or
     not, were to doubt of the virtue of CHRIST'S Cross; it is no marvel
     if this create so great offence, that the receiving of the
     Eucharist, nay, the assisting of it with the devotions of Christian
     people, comes to be a matter of indifference. On the other side,
     while the renewing of the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross, by
     that representation thereof which the Eucharist tendereth, for the
     redressing of the Covenant of Grace between GOD and those which
     receive, is construed as prejudicial to that one Sacrifice, whereby
     our LORD for ever hath perfected those whom He sanctifieth, no
     marvel if the very celebrating of it come to be a matter of
     indifference, the effect whereof, by believing that a man is
     predestinate or justified, is had before and without it. The matter
     of the Sacrifice, then, being so great a subject for the division,
     upon so little cause, it is time for good Christians to awake and
     look about them, and see that the less cause there is, the greater
     good-will the parties have to continue at distance. In the meantime,
     it is the common interest of Christianity, even the means of their
     salvation, by the worthy frequenting of this holy Sacrament, that
     suffers. As for the Church of England, I refer myself to the very
     form of those laws, according to which, as many as have received
     orders in it, have promised to exercise the ministry to which they
     were appointed by the same, and that before GOD and His Church, at
     so solemn an occasion, that nothing can be thought obligatory to him
     that would transgress it. For the Offertory which the Church of
     England prescribeth, if it signify anything, signified! the
     dedication of that which is offered, as at large to the necessities
     of the Church, so in particular to the celebration of the Eucharist
     then and there. At the consecration the Church prayeth, "that we,
     receiving," &c. . . And after communion, "We, Thy humble servants,"
     &c. . . . all this, having premised prayer for all states of
     CHRIST'S Church. Which, whether it make not the Sacrament of the
     Eucharist, by virtue of the consecration, the Sacrifice of CHRIST
     upon the Cross, propitiatory and impetratory for them who
     communicate in it by receiving the elements; (whether or no by
     virtue of this oblation, propitiatory and impetratory, for the
     necessities of the rest of the Church, as well as the congregation
     present;) I leave to men of reason, but not to puritans, to judge.
     This, I am sure, the condition of the Gospel, (which is the fourth
     reason, for which, I have showed that the Eucharist is counted a
     Sacrifice in the sense of the Church,) is exactly expressed in the
     words that follow, to the confusion of all puritans, that would have
     us expect the blessings promised, from such a kind of faith which
     supposeth it not, neither implies it; "And here we offer and present
     unto Thee, O LORD, ourselves, our souls," &c. For, the reason which
     obliges us to profess this at receiving the Eucharist, (which is the
     New Testament in the Blood of CHRIST,) is, because the promises
     which the Gospel covenanteth for, depend upon it, as the condition
     which renders them due. And, upon these premises, I may well
     conclude, that all the reasons, for which I have showed that the
     Eucharist is a Sacrifice in the sense of the Church, are
     recapitulated and comprised in that which followeth: "And though we
     be unworthy, through our manifold sins," &c.--pp. 52, 3.

                       ID.--Just Weights and Measures.

     This is further seen by the words of St. Paul, when, inferring his
     purpose, to wit, that Christians ought not to communicate in things
     sacrificed to idols, upon that which he had premised, "The cup,"
     &c., he addeth, 1 Cor. x. 18--21, "Behold, Israel after the flesh,"
     &c. These words manifestly suppose the Eucharist to be the communion
     of the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross. So that, as those who ate
     of the Sacrifices of the altar, (whether by the priests or by
     themselves) did feast with GOD, whose altar had received and
     consumed a part of those Sacrifices, so, those that communicate in
     the Eucharist, do feast upon the Sacrifice of our LORD CHRIST on the
     Cross, which GOD is so well-pleased with as to grant the covenant of
     grace, and the publication thereof, in consideration of it. This,
     being evidently that correspondence, which the discourse of St. Paul
     requires, remains manifestly proved by the same.--p. 9.

     The same sense is contained in St. Paul's words, 1 Cor. v. 8, 9.
     "CHRIST our Passover," &c. For, if we consider the circumstance of
     time and place, which our LORD took to institute the Sacrament of
     the Eucharist, just when the Paschal Lamb was eaten, how shall we
     deny the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross to have been as
     presently received there as the Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb was
     the subject and occasion of the feast, at which he ordained it? But
     the discourse by which the Apostle persuades Christians to separate
     themselves from the Jews, Heb. xiii. 10--16. is most pertinent to
     this purpose, as that which is not to be understood otherwise. . . .
     And surely, if we consider but the name of Eucharist, we cannot
     think it could have been more properly signified, than by calling it
     "the Sacrifice of praise, the fruit of the lips that confess the
     name of GOD;" for, when he proceeds to exhort, not to forget
     communicating their goods, do we not know, and have we not made it
     to appear, that this must be by their oblations to the altar, the
     first fruits of their goods, whereof the Eucharist being first
     consecrated, the rest served the necessities of the Church? ... If,
     therefore, the eating of the Sacrifice of the Cross, in the
     Sacrament of the Eucharist, mean no more but the signifying and the
     figuring of that eating of the Sacrifice of the Cross, which is done
     by a lively faith, (that is, by every one that considers the death
     of CHRIST with that faith, which, supposing all that the Gospel says
     of it to be true, resolves faithfully to profess Christianity,) the
     question is, why the Sacrament of the Eucharist was instituted by
     GOD? why, in those elements, and to what purpose, seeing, without
     GOD'S appointment, men could have done it of themselves, to the same
     effect? But, if it be manifest, that, by the Sacrament of the
     Eucharist, GOD pretends to tender us the communion of the Sacrifice
     of CHRIST upon the Cross, then is there another presence of the Body
     and Blood of our LORD in the Sacrament, beside that spiritual
     presence in the soul, which that living faith effecteth without the
     Sacrament, as well as in the receiving of it.--pp. 9, 10.

     If the consecrated elements be the Flesh and Blood of CHRIST, then
     are they the Sacrifice of CHRIST crucified upon the Cross. For they
     are not the Flesh and Blood of CHRIST as in His Body, while it was
     whole, but as separated by the Passion of His Cross. Not that CHRIST
     can be sacrificed again; for a Sacrifice being an action done in
     succession of time, cannot be done the second time, being once done
     because then it should not have been done before; but, because the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST crucified is represented, commemorated, and
     applied, by celebrating and receiving the Sacrament, which is that
     Sacrifice. They of the Church of Rome, that would make the breach
     wider than it is, do but justify the Reformation, by forcing any
     other reason of a Sacrifice out of the Scripture, expounded by the
     consent of GOD'S Church. And they which stumble at the Altar, and
     the Priesthood, which the Sacrifice inferreth, plainly they invite
     us to renounce the whole Church of GOD, with the Church of Rome, for
     their sakes. And how much Christianity they will leave us, when that
     is done, who will undertake?--pp. 95, 6.

     The common prayers of the Church, that is, of those who were
     admitted to communion with the Church, were always made at the
     altar, or communion table, in the action of the Sacrament. Reason
     good. How can Christians think their prayers so effectual with GOD,
     as when they are presented at the commemoration of the Sacrifice of
     CHRIST crucified, the representation whereof to GOD, in heaven,
     makes His intercession there so acceptable?--p. 102.

     However, the ancient Church manifestly signifieth, that they did
     offer their oblations, out of which the Eucharist was consecrated,
     with an intent to intercede with GOD for public or private
     necessities; and that, out of an opinion that they would be
     effectual, alleging the Sacrifice of CHRIST crucified then present,
     which renders CHRIST'S intercession effectual for us. And this is
     the true ground, why they attributed so much to this commemoration
     of the Sacrifice; which makes nothing for the effect of it in
     private Masses, but more than will be valued, for the frequenting of
     the holy Eucharist.--p. 103.

     ID.--Judgment of the Church of Rome.
     ["As it was delivered by him, in a Paper to a Lady, a little before
     his death." See Hickes's Controversial Letters, Appendix, Paper 1.]

     The council of Trent enjoineth to believe that CHRIST instituted a
     new passover to be sacrificed as well as represented, commemorated,
     and offered in the Eucharist, de Sacrificio Missae, cap. i. which is
     false.

     For the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Cross is commemorated, represented,
     and offered, as ready to be slain, in and by the Eucharist; but not
     slain, and therefore not sacrificed in it and celebrating it.

     And therefore, when it is said there, cap. 11. Quod in Missa
     Christus incruente immolatur, if it be meant properly, it is a
     contradiction; for that which hath blood is not sacrificed but by
     shedding the blood of it; if figuratively, it signifies no more than
     that which I have said, that it is represented, commemorated, and
     offered as slain.

     TAYLOR, BISHOP, CONFESSOR AND DOCTOR.--Life of Christ, Disc. xix.--
             On the Institution and Reception of the Sacrament.

     Upon the strength of the premises, we may sooner take an estimate of
     the graces which are conveyed to us, in the reception and
     celebration of this holy Sacrament and Sacrifice. For, as it is a
     commemoration and representment of CHRIST'S death, so it is a
     commemorative Sacrifice: as we receive the symbols and the mystery,
     so it is a Sacrament. In both capacities, the benefit is next to
     infinite. First: for whatsoever CHRIST did at the institution, the
     same He commanded the Church to do, in remembrance and repeated
     rites; and Himself also does the same thing in heaven for us, making
     perpetual intercession for His Church, the body of His redeemed
     ones, by representing to the FATHER His death and Sacrifice. There
     He sits, a High Priest continually, and offers still the same one
     perfect Sacrifice; that is, still represents it as having been once
     finished and consummate in order to perpetual and never-failing
     events. And this also His ministers do on earth; they offer up the
     same Sacrifice to GOD, the Sacrifice of the Cross, by prayers, and a
     commemorating rite and representment, according to His holy
     institution. And as all the effects of grace and the titles of glory
     were purchased for us on the Cross, and the actual mysteries of
     redemption perfected on earth, but are applied to us, and made
     effectual to single persons and communities of men, by CHRIST'S
     intercession in heaven; so also they are promoted by acts of duty
     and religion here on earth, that we may be "workers together with
     GOD," (as St. Paul expresses it,) and, in virtue of the eternal and
     all-sufficient Sacrifice, may offer up our prayers and our duty;
     and, by representing that Sacrifice, may send up, together with our
     prayers, an instrument of their graciousness and acceptation. The
     funerals of a deceased friend are not only performed at his first
     interring, but in the monthly minds and anniversary commemorations;
     and our grief returns upon the sight of a picture, or upon any
     instance which our dead friend desired us to preserve as his
     memorial: we "celebrate and exhibit the LORD'S death," in Sacrament
     and symbol; and this is that great express, which when the Church
     offers to GOD the FATHER, it obtains all those blessings which that
     Sacrifice purchased. Themistocles snatched up the son of King
     Admetus, and held him between himself and death, to mitigate the
     rage of the king, and prevailed accordingly. Our very holding up the
     SON of GOD, and representing Him to His FATHER, is the doing an act
     of mediation and advantage to ourselves, in the virtue and efficacy
     of the Mediator. As CHRIST is a Priest in heaven for ever, and yet
     does not sacrifice Himself afresh,--nor yet without a Sacrifice
     could He be a Priest,--but, by a daily ministration and
     intercession, represents His Sacrifice to GOD, and offers Himself as
     sacrificed; so He does upon earth, by the ministry of His servants:
     He is offered to GOD, that is, He is, by prayers and the Sacrament,
     represented or "offered up to GOD, as sacrificed;" which, in effect,
     is a celebration of His death, and the applying it to the present
     and future necessities of the Church, as we are capable, by a
     ministry like to His in heaven. It follows, then, that the
     celebration of this Sacrifice be, in its proportion, an instrument
     of applying the proper Sacrifice to all the purposes which it first
     designed. It is ministerially, and by application, an instrument
     propitiatory; it is eucharistical, it is an homage, and an act of
     adoration; and it is impetratory, and obtains for us, and for the
     whole Church, all the benefits of the Sacrifice which is now
     celebrated and applied; that is, as this rite is the remembrance and
     ministerial celebration of CHRIST'S Sacrifice, so it is destined to
     do honour to GOD, to express the homage and duty of His servants, to
     acknowledge His supreme dominion, to give Him thanks and worship, to
     beg pardon, blessings, and a supply of all our needs. And its profit
     is enlarged, not only to the persons celebrating, but to all to whom
     they design it, according to the nature of sacrifices and prayers,
     and all such solemn actions of religion.--Works, vol. iii. pp.
     296--298.

     This only remember, that we are, by the mystery of "one bread,"
     confederated into one body and the communion of saints, and that the
     Sacrifice which we then commemorate, was designed by our LORD for
     the benefit of all His Church; let us be sure to draw all faithful
     people into the society of the present blessing, joining, with the
     holy man that ministers, in prayers and offerings of that mystery,
     for the benefit of all sorts of men, of CHRIST'S Catholic Church. .
     . . And the celebration of the holy Sacrament is, in itself and its
     own formality, a sacred, solemn, and ritual prayer, in which we
     invocate GOD by the merits of CHRIST, expressing the adjuration, not
     only in words, but in actual representment and commemoration of His
     Passion. And if the necessities of the Church were well considered,
     we should find that a daily Sacrifice of prayer, and a daily prayer
     of Sacrifice, were no more but what her condition requires: and I
     would to GOD the governors of Churches would take care, that the
     necessities of kings and kingdoms, of Churches and states, were
     represented to GOD by the most solemn and efficacious intercessions;
     and CHRIST hath taught us none greater than the praying in the
     virtue and celebration of His Sacrifice. And this is the counsel
     that the Church received from Ignatius: "Hasten frequently to
     approach the Eucharist, the glory of GOD. For when this is daily
     celebrated, we break the powers of Satan, who turns all his actions
     into hostilities and darts of fire." But this concerns the ministers
     of religion, who, living in communities and colleges, must make
     religion the business of their lives, and support kingdoms, and
     serve the interest of kings, by the prayer of a daily
     Sacrifice.--pp. 310--312.

                    ID,--Holy Living, sect. x. chap. iv.

     The celebration of the holy Sacrament is the great mysteriousness of
     the Christian religion, and succeeds to the most solemn rite of
     natural and Judaical religion, the law of sacrificing. For God
     spared mankind, and took the Sacrifice of beasts, together with our
     solemn prayers, for an instrument of expiation. But these could not
     purify the soul from sin, but were typical of the Sacrifice of
     something that could. But nothing could do this, but either the
     offering of all that sinned, that every man should be the anathema
     or devoted thing; or else by some one of the same capacity, who, by
     some superadded excellency, might in his own personal sufferings
     have a value great enough to satisfy for all the whole kind of
     sinning persons. This the SON of GOD, JESUS CHRIST, GOD and Man,
     undertook, and finished by a Sacrifice of Himself upon the altar of
     the Cross.

     2. This Sacrifice, because it was perfect, could be but one, and
     that once; but because the needs of the world should last as long as
     the world itself, it was necessary that there should be a perpetual
     ministry established, whereby this one sufficient Sacrifice should
     be made eternally effectual to the several new arising needs of all
     the world who should desire it, or in any sense be capable of it.

     3. To this end CHRIST was made a Priest for ever; He was initiated
     or consecrated on the Cross, and there began His Priesthood, which
     was to last till His coming to judgment. It began on earth, but was
     to last and be officiated in heaven, where He sits perpetually
     representing and exhibiting to the FATHER that great effective
     Sacrifice which He offered on the Cross, to eternal and
     never-failing purposes.

     4. As CHRIST is pleased to represent to His FATHER that great
     Sacrifice as a means of atonement and expiation for all mankind, and
     with special purposes and intendment for all the elect, all that
     serve Him in holiness; so He hath appointed, that the same ministry
     shall be done upon earth too, in our manner, and according to our
     proportion; and therefore hath constituted and separated an order of
     men, who, by "showing forth the LORD'S death" by Sacramental
     representation, may pray unto GOD after the same manner that our
     LORD and High Priest does; that is, offer to GOD and represent, in
     this solemn prayer and Sacrament, CHRIST, as already offered; so
     sending up a gracious instrument, whereby our prayers may, for His
     sake and in the same manner of intercession, be offered up to GOD in
     our behalf, and for all them for whom we pray, to all those purposes
     for which CHRIST died.

     5. As the ministers of the Sacrament do, in a sacramental manner,
     present to GOD the Sacrifice of the Cross, by being imitators of
     CHRIST'S intercession; so the people are sacrificers too in their
     manner: for, besides that, by saying Amen, they join in the act of
     him that ministers, and make it also to be their own, so, when they
     eat and drink the consecrated and blessed elements worthily, they
     receive CHRIST within them, and therefore may also offer Him to GOD,
     while, in their Sacrifice of obedience and thanksgiving, they
     present themselves to GOD with CHRIST, whom they have spiritually
     received, that is, themselves with that, which will make them
     gracious and acceptable. The offering their bodies and souls and
     services to GOD in Him, and by Him, and with Him, who is His
     FATHER'S Well-beloved, and in whom He is well-pleased, cannot but be
     accepted to all the purposes of blessing, grace, and glory.

     6. This is the sum of the greatest mystery of our religion; it is
     the copy of the Passion, and the ministration of the great mystery
     of our redemption: and, therefore, whatsoever entitles us to the
     general privileges of .CHRIST'S Passion, all that is necessary by
     way of disposition to the celebration of the Sacrament of His
     Passion; because this celebration is our manner of applying or using
     it.--vol. iv. pp. 265, 6.

     When you have received, pray and give thanks. Pray for all estates
     of men; for they also have an interest in the body of Christ,
     whereof they are members: and you, in conjunction with CHRIST (whom
     then you have received) are more fit to pray for them in that
     advantage, and in the celebration of that holy Sacrifice, which then
     is sacramentally represented to GOD.--p. 272.

     When I said that the Sacrifice of the Cross, which CHRIST offered
     for all the sins and all the needs of the world, is represented to
     GOD by the minister in the Sacrament, and offered up in prayer and
     sacramental memory, after the manner that CHRIST Himself intercedes
     for us in heaven, (so far as His glorious Priesthood is imitable by
     His ministers on earth,) I must of necessity also mean, that all the
     benefits of that Sacrifice are then conveyed to all that communicate
     worthily.....And if we desire anything else and need it, here it is
     to be prayed for, here to be hoped for, here to be received.--p.
     273.

                  After the receiving the Cup of Blessing.

     It is finished. Blessed be the mercies of GOD revealed to us in
     JESUS CHRIST. O blessed and Eternal High Priest, let the Sacrifice
     of the Cross, which Thou didst once offer for the sins of the whole
     world, and which Thou dost now and always represent in heaven to Thy
     FATHER, by Thy never-ceasing intercession, and which this day hath
     been exhibited on Thy holy table sacramentally, obtain mercy and
     peace, faith and charity, safety and establishment, to Thy holy
     Church, which Thou hast founded upon a rock, the rock of a holy
     faith; and let not the gates of hell prevail against her, nor the
     enemy of mankind take any soul out of Thy hand, whom Thou hast
     purchased with Thy Blood, and sanctified by Thy Spirit.--p. 312.

         ID.--Collection of Offices.--Office for the Holy Communion.
    ["An office or order, for the administration of the Holy Sacrament of
    the LORD'S Supper, according to the way of the Apostolical Churches,
                and the doctrine of the Church of England."]

                           Prayer of Preparation.

     O LORD GOD, who, in mercy and great compassion, dost consider Thy
     people, and hast given unto us, Thy unworthy servants, miserable
     sinners, confidence and commandment to present ourselves before
     Thee, at Thy holy table, to represent a holy, venerable, and
     unbloody Sacrifice for our sins, and for the errors and ignorances
     of all Thy people, look upon me, the meanest and most polluted of
     all them that approach to Thy sacred presence. Pity me, O GOD, and
     wash away all my sins . . . and, by the power of the HOLY GHOST,
     make me worthy for this ministry, accepting this service for His
     sake whose Sacrifice I represent, and by whose commandment I
     minister, even our LORD and SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST. Amen.--vol. xv. p.
     291.

                                Let us Pray.

     O LORD GOD, our Creator, who hast given us life and being, and hast
     shown unto us the way of salvation, vouchsafing to us the revelation
     of heavenly mysteries, and hast commanded to us this service in the
     power of the Holy Ghost, and obedience of the LORD JESUS, be Thou
     well-pleased, O LORD, with this our service and duty, and grant that
     with a holy fear, and a pure conscience, we may finish this service,
     presenting a holy Sacrifice holily unto Thee, that Thou mayest
     receive it in heaven, and smell a sweet odour in the union of the
     eternal Sacrifice which our Blessed LORD perpetually offers; and
     accept us graciously as thou didst entertain the gifts of Abel, the
     Sacrifice of Noah, the services of Moses and Aaron, the
     peace-offering of Samuel, the repentance of David, and the incense
     of Zacharias; and as from the hands of Thy holy Apostles Thou didst
     accept this ministry; so vouchsafe by the hands of us miserable
     sinners to finish and perfect this oblation, that it may be
     sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and be accepted in the LORD JESUS ..
     .--pp. 292, 3.

                           Prayer of Consecration.

     Have mercy upon us, O Heavenly FATHER, according to Thy glorious
     mercies and promises, send Thy Holy Ghost upon our hearts, and let
     Him also descend upon these gifts, that by His good, His holy, His
     glorious presence, He may sanctify and enlighten our hearts, and He
     may bless and sanctify these gifts. ... pp. 299, 300.

                             Prayer of Oblation.

     We sinners, Thy unworthy servants, in remembrance of Thy life-giving
     passion, Thy Cross and Thy pains, Thy death and Thy burial, Thy
     resurrection from the dead, and Thy ascension into heaven, Thy
     sitting at the right hand of God, making intercession for us; and
     expecting, with fear and trembling, Thy formidable and glorious
     return to judge the quick and dead, when Thou shalt render to every
     man according to his works, do humbly present to Thee, O LORD, this
     present Sacrifice of remembrance and thanksgiving, humbly and
     passionately praying Thee not to deal with us according to our sins,
     nor recompense us after our transgressions . . .--p. 301.

                       Prayer for the Catholic Church.

     Receive, O eternal GOD, this Sacrifice for and in behalf of all
     Christian people whom Thou hast redeemed with the blood of Thy SON,
     and purchased as Thine own inheritance . . .--p. 303.

                 ID.--Worthy Communicant, chap. i. sect. iv.

     It is the greatest solemnity of prayer, the most powerful liturgy,
     and means of impetration, in this world. For when CHRIST was
     consecrated on the Cross, and became our High Priest, having
     reconciled us to GOD by the death of the Cross, He became infinitely
     gracious in the eyes of GOD, and was admitted to the celestial and
     eternal priesthood in heaven, where, in the virtue of the Cross, He
     intercedes for us, and represents an eternal Sacrifice in the
     heavens on our behalf. That He is a Priest in heaven, appears in the
     large discourses and direct affirmatives of St. Paul. That there is
     no other Sacrifice to be offered, but that on the Cross, it is
     evident, because "He hath but once appeared, in the end of the
     world, to put away sin by the Sacrifice of Himself;" and, therefore,
     since it is necessary, that He hath something to offer, so long as
     He is a Priest, and there is no other Sacrifice but that of Himself,
     offered upon the Cross,--it follows, that CHRIST, in heaven,
     perpetually offers and represents that Sacrifice to His Heavenly
     FATHER, and, in virtue of that, obtains all good things for His
     Church.

     (2.) Now what CHRIST does in heaven, He hath commanded us to do on
     earth; that is, to represent His death, to commemorate His
     Sacrifice, by humble prayer and thankful record; and, by faithful
     manifestation and joyful Eucharist, to lay it before the eyes of our
     heavenly Father, so ministering in His priesthood, and doing
     according to His commandment and example; the Church being the image
     of heaven; the priest, the minister of CHRIST; the holy table being
     a copy of the celestial altar; and the eternal sacrifice of the Lamb
     slain from the beginning of the world, being always the same: it
     bleeds no more after the finishing of it on the Cross; but it is
     wonderfully represented in heaven, and graciously represented here;
     by CHRIST'S action there, by His commandment here. And the event of
     it is plainly this,--that as CHRIST, in virtue of His Sacrifice on
     the Cross, intercedes for us with His FATHER, so does the minister
     of CHRIST'S priesthood here; that the virtue of the eternal
     Sacrifice may be salutary and effectual to all the needs of the
     Church, both for things temporal and eternal. And, therefore, it was
     not without great mystery and clear signification, that our blessed
     LOED was pleased to command the representation of his Death and
     Sacrifice on the Cross should be made, by breaking bread and
     effusion of wine; to signify to us the nature and sacredness of the
     liturgy we are about, and that we minister in the priesthood of
     CHRIST, who is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec;
     that is, we are ministers in that unchangeable priesthood,
     imitating, in the external ministry, the prototype Melchisedec: of
     whom it was said, "He brought forth bread and wine, and was the
     priest of the Most High GOD;" and, in the internal, imitating the
     antitype, or the substance, CHRIST Himself; who offered up his Body
     and Blood for atonement for us, and, by the Sacraments of bread and
     wine, and the prayers of oblation and intercession, commands us to
     officiate in His priesthood, in the external, ministering like
     Melchisedec, in the internal, after the manner of CHRIST Himself.

     (3.)This is a great and a mysterious truth, which, as it is plainly
     manifested in the Epistle to the Hebrews, so it is understood by the
     ancient and holy doctors of the Church. . . .

     (4.) The effect of this I represent in the words of Lyra; "That
     which does purge and cleanse our sins, must be celestial and
     spiritual; and that which is such, hath a perpetual efficacy, and
     needs not to be done again; but that which is daily offered in the
     Church, is a daily commemoration of that one Sacrifice, which was
     offered on the Cross, according to the command of CHRIST, 'Do this
     in commemoration of me.'

     (5.) Now this holy ministry and Sacrament of His death, being,
     according to CHRIST'S commandment, and, in our manner, a
     representation of that eternal Sacrifice,--an imitation of CHRIST'S
     intercession in heaven in virtue of that Sacrifice, must be after
     the pattern in the Mount: it must be as that is, by purâ prece, as
     Tertullian's phrase is, "by pure prayer;" it is an intercession for
     the whole Church, present and absent, in the virtue of that
     Sacrifice. I need add no more, but leave it to the meditation, to
     the joy and admiration of all Christian people, to think and to
     enumerate the blessings of this Sacrament, which is so excellent a
     representation of CHRIST'S death, by CHRIST'S commandment; and so
     glorious an imitation of that intercession, which CHRIST makes in
     heaven for us all; it is all but the representation of His death, in
     the way of prayer and interpellation; CHRIST as Head, and we as
     members; He as High Priest, and we as servants, His ministers. And,
     therefore, I shall stop here, and leave the rest for wonder and
     Eucharist; we may pray here with all the solemnity and advantages
     imaginable; we may, with hope and comfort, use the words of David,
     "I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
     LORD." We are here very likely to prevail for all blessings, for
     this is, by way of eminency, glory, and singularity, calix
     benedictionis, "the cup of blessing," which we bless, and by which
     GOD will bless us, and for which He is to be blessed for
     evermore.--vol. xv. pp. 437--440.

     For what CHRIST did once upon the Cross in real Sacrifice, that He
     always does in heaven, by perpetual representment and intercession;
     what CHRIST does by His supreme priesthood, that the Church doth by
     her ministerial; what He does in heaven, we do upon earth; what is
     performed at the right hand of GOD, is also represented, and, in one
     manner, exhibited upon the holy table of the LORD: and what is done
     on altars upon solemn days, is done in our closets in our daily
     offices; that is, GOD is invocated, and GOD is appeased, and GOD is
     reconciled, and GOD gives us blessings and the fruits of CHRIST'S
     Passion, in the virtue of the Sacrificed Lamb; that is, we,
     believing, and praying, are blessed, and sanctified, and saved,
     through JESUS CHRIST.--pp. 481, 482.

     A Prayer, to be said after the Communion, in behalf of our souls and
     all Christian people.

     O most merciful and gracious GOD, FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
     the LORD of glory; . . . . relying upon Thy goodness, trusting in
     Thy promises, and having received my dearest LORD into my soul, I
     humbly represent to Thy divine majesty the glorious Sacrifice, which
     our dearest JESUS made of Himself upon the Cross, and, by a
     never-ceasing intercession, now exhibits to Thee in Heaven, in the
     office of an eternal priesthood; in behalf of all that have
     communicated this day in the divine mysteries, in all the
     congregations of the Christian world, and in behalf of all them that
     desire to communicate, and are hindered by sickness or necessity, by
     fear or scruple, by censures ecclesiastical, or the sentences of
     their own consciences. . .

     I humbly present to Thy Divine Majesty this glorious Sacrifice,
     which thy servants, this day, have represented upon earth, in behalf
     of my dearest relations, wife, children, husband, parents, friends,
     &c. ...

     For all mankind whom I have, and whom I have not remembered, I
     humbly represent the Sacrifice of Thy eternal SON, His merits and
     obedience, His life and death, His resurrection and ascension, His
     charity and intercession. . .--pp. 686, 688.

           BREVINT, PRESBYTER.--Christian Sacrifice and Sacrament.

     For this must be granted, that the holy Communion is not only a
     Sacrament, that the worshipper is to come to for no other purpose,
     than to receive; nor a Sacrifice only, where he should have nothing
     else to do, but to give: but it is as the great solemnity of the
     ancient Passover was, whereof it hath taken place; a great mystery,
     consisting both of Sacrament and Sacrifice, that is, of the
     religious service which the people owe to GOD, and of the full
     salvation which GOD is pleased to promise to His people.--p. 2.

     It is a certain truth, that there never was on earth a true religion
     without some kind of Sacrifices: and it is a very great He to say
     that now the Christian should want them.. . .

     Of all the carnal Sacrifices, which the Jews do reduce to six kinds,
     (besides many more oblations,) none ever had any saving reality, as
     to the washing away of sins, but in dependence on JESUS CHRIST our
     LORD; and as to our service and duty towards GOD, which they were
     also to represent, none had this second end so fully performed under
     the Law as it must be under the Gospel. The blessed Communion alone,
     when whole and not mutilated, concenters and brings together these
     two great ends (full expiation of sins, and acceptable duty to God,)
     towards which all the old Sacrifices never looked, but as either
     simple engagements, or weak shadows. As for the first, which is
     expiation of sins, it is most certain that the Sacrifice of JESUS
     CHRIST alone hath been sufficient for it:... .And the reiteration of
     it were not only superfluous as to its real effect, but also most
     injurious to CHRIST in the very thought and attempt.

     Nevertheless, this Sacrifice, which by a real oblation was not to be
     offered more than once, is, by an Eucharistical and devout
     commemoration, to be offered up every day. This is what the Apostle
     calls, to "set forth the death of the LORD",--to set it forth, I
     say, as well before the eyes of GOD His Father, as before the eyes
     of all men,--and St. Augustine did explain, when he said that the
     holy Flesh of JESUS CHRIST was offered up in three manners; by
     prefiguring Sacrifices under the Law, before His coming into the
     world; in real deed upon the Cross; and by a commemorative
     Sacrament, after He is ascended into heaven. All comes to
     this--First, that the Sacrifice, as it is itself and in itself, it
     can never be reiterated; yet, by way of devout celebration and
     remembrance, it may nevertheless be reiterated every day. Secondly,
     that whereas the holy Eucharist is by itself a Sacrament, wherein
     GOD offers unto all men the blessings merited by the oblation of His
     Son, it likewise becomes, by our remembrance, a kind of Sacrifice
     also; whereby, to obtain at His hands the same blessings, we present
     and expose before His eyes that same holy and precious oblation once
     offered. Thus the ancient Israelites did continually represent, in
     their solemn prayers to GOD, that covenant which He had made once
     with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their forefathers. Thus did the
     Jews, in their captivity, turn their faces towards either the
     country or to the Temple, where the Mercy-seat and the Ark were,
     which were the memorials of His promises, and the Sacramental
     engagement of His blessings. And thus the Christians in their
     prayers do every day insist upon, and represent to GOD the Father
     the meritorious passion of their SAVIOUR, as the only sure ground,
     whereon both GOD may give, and they obtain the blessings which they
     do pray for. Now, neither the Israelites had ever Temple, or Ark, or
     Mercy-seat, nor the Christians have any ordinance, devotion, or
     mystery, that may prove to be such a blessed and effectual
     instrument to reach this everlasting Sacrifice, and to set it out so
     solemnly before the eyes of GOD ALMIGHTY, as the holy Eucharist is.
     To men it is a sacred Table, where GOD'S Minister is ordered to
     represent from GOD his Master the passion of His dear Son, as still
     fresh and still powerful for their eternal salvation: and to GOD it
     is an Altar, whereon men mystically represent to Him the same
     Sacrifice, as still bleeding and sueing for expiation and mercy. And
     because it is the High Priest Himself, the true Anointed of the
     LORD, who hath set up most expressly both this Table and this Altar
     for these two ends, namely, for the communication of His Body and
     Blood to men, and for the representation and memorial of both to
     GOD; it cannot be doubted, but that the one must be most
     advantageous to the penitent sinner, and the other most acceptable
     to that good and gracious Father, who is always pleased in His Son,
     and who loves of Himself the repenting and the sincere returning of
     His children. Luke xv. 22. Hence one may see both the great use and
     advantage of more frequent communion; and how much it concerns us,
     whensoever we go to receive it, to lay out all our wants, and pour
     out all our grief, our prayers, and our praises, before the LORD, in
     so happy a conjuncture. The primitive Christians did it so, who did
     as seldom meet to preach or pray, without a Communion, as did the
     old Israelites to worship, without a Sacrifice. On solemn days
     especially, or upon great exigencies, they ever used this help of
     sacramental oblation, as the most powerful means the Church had to
     strengthen their supplications, to open the gates of heaven, and to
     force in a manner GOD and His CHRIST, to have compassion on them.
     The people of Israel, for the better performance of prayer and
     devotion, went up to the Tabernacle and the Temple, because (besides
     other motives) both these were figures of that Body which was to be
     sacrificed. Wherefore CHRIST calls His body "this temple." John ii.
     19; and the first Christians went up to their Churches, there to
     meet with these mysteries, which do represent Him both as already
     sacrificed, and yet as in some sort offering and giving up Himself.
     Those, in worshipping, ever turned their eyes, their hearts, their
     hopes towards that Altar and Sacrifice, whence the High Priest was
     to carry the Blood into the sanctuary; and these, looking towards
     the Cross and their crucified SAVIOUR there, through His sufferings
     hope for a way towards heaven; being encouraged to this hope by the
     very memorial which they both take to themselves and show to GOD of
     these sufferings. Lastly, JESUS, our eternal Priest, being from the
     Cross, where He suffered without the gate, gone up into the true
     sanctuary which is in heaven, there above doth continually present
     both His Body in true reality, and us as Aaron did the twelve tribes
     of Israel, in a memorial. Exod. xxviii. 29. and, on the other side,
     we, beneath in the Church, present to GOD His Body and Blood in a
     memorial, that, under this shadow of His Cross, and image of His
     Sacrifice, we may present ourselves before Him in very deed and
     reality.

     "O LORD, who seest nothing in me, that is truly mine, but dust and
     ashes, and, which is worse, sinful flesh and blood. . . . Turn Thine
     eyes, O merciful Father, to the satisfaction and intercession of Thy
     Son, who now sits at Thy right hand; to the seals of Thy covenant,
     which lie before Thee upon this Table; and to all the wants and
     distresses, which also Thou seest in my heart." . . .--pp. 71--78.

     It is either the error, or the incogitancy of too many Christians,
     which makes them sometimes believe, and oftener live as if, under
     the Gospel, there were no other Sacrifice but that of CHRIST upon
     the Cross. It is very true, indeed, there is no other, nor can there
     be any other sufficient, and proper for this end, of satisfying
     GOD'S justice, and expiating our sins. "I have trodden the
     wine-press alone, and of the people there was none with me; I
     looked, and there was none to help." Isai. Ixiii. 3. 5. In this
     respect, though the whole Church should, in a body, offer up herself
     as a burnt Sacrifice to GOD, yet could she not contribute more
     towards the bearing up or bearing away "the wrath to come," than all
     those innocent souls, who stood near JESUS CHRIST when He gave up
     the ghost, did towards the darkening of the sun, or the shaking of
     the whole earth. But that which is not so much as useful, much less
     necessary to this eternal Sacrifice which alone could redeem
     mankind, is indispensably both necessary and useful, that we may
     have a share in this redemption. So that if the sacrifice of
     ourselves, which we ought to offer up to GOD, cannot procure
     salvation, it is absolutely necessary to receive it.--pp. 80, 81.

     And this act of the Church consecrating herself to GOD, and joining
     herself so to CHRIST as to make but one oblation with Him, is the
     mystery represented by the daily Sacrifice. Exod. xxix. 38. Numb,
     xxviii. 3.

     This Sacrifice did consist of two parts. The first and chiefest was
     the lamb, that did foreshow the Lamb of GOD; and the second was the
     meat and drink offering, made of flour mingled with oil and wine:
     all which, being but an additional thrown on the lamb, morning and
     evening, was counted but for one and the same Sacrifice. Those
     secondary oblations, so thrown and burnt upon the main Sacrifice,
     signified properly these offerings which Christians must present to
     GOD, of themselves, of then-goods, and of their praises. From this
     meat and drink offering, which was added to more substantial
     Sacrifices, came the bread and wine to be used at the celebration of
     CHRIST'S death. Which bread in the Communion considered as
     Sacrament, signifies the natural, but considered as Sacrifice, it
     represents the mystical Body of CHRIST, that is His Church. "For we
     that are many," saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. x. 17, "are one bread."...
     Soon after, the Church added oil and frankincense to bread and wine,
     to make up the whole meat-offering, which consisted of four things.
     The truth is, all that we can offer upon our own account, is but
     such an oblation as this meat and drink offering of Moses was, that
     cannot be presented but by the virtue and merits of JESUS CHRIST,
     who supports it: and that can never ascend up to heaven but along
     with the sacred smoke of that great Burnt Sacrifice, which is to
     carry it up thither. For, on the one side, our own persons, our
     works, or any thing else that may be ours, are by themselves but
     weak, unsubstantial kinds of offerings, which cannot be presented
     unto GOD, otherwise but as these additional oblations, which of
     themselves fall to the ground, unless a more solid Sacrifice do
     sustain them: and on the other side, this solid and fundamental
     Sacrifice upholds, saves, and sanctifies but those persons and
     things, that, according to the Law of Moses his meat-offerings, are
     thrown into this His fire, are allowed upon His altar, and are
     together with Him consecrated to GOD by Him.--pp. 88, 9.

     Now, though all men be called to this conformity and communion in
     the sufferings of CHRIST, from the time of those sufferings until
     there be no times at all; and although the days of our present life
     have all the privilege which those seven feast days once had, when
     every one might gird his loins, eat his unleavened bread, and kill
     his own bullock, as the Priest did sacrifice the Paschal Lamb;
     (which bullock was superadded to the Paschal Lamb, that both might
     better suffice for the seven festival days, besides its other ritual
     and figurative importance as a Sacrifice;) it is certain,
     nevertheless, that there are two more special and extraordinary
     days, wherein Christians are invited by more urgent and proper
     circumstances, to present their souls and bodies, by way of second
     offering, upon the Sacrifice of their SAVIOUR. The first is past,
     and that was when the SAVIOUR offered Himself to death; when heaven
     and earth, temple and graves, shook at the blow that killed Him;
     when pious souls either stood immovable, as the blessed Virgin, hard
     by His Cross, or, in a manner, crucified themselves, beating their
     breasts, as the daughters of Jerusalem; and when every disciple
     might, by the very conjunction of all the things he saw, be moved to
     say as Thomas, "Let us go and let us die with Him." John xi. 16. The
     other time most favourable and proper, next to that of His real
     Passion, is that of the holy Communion; which, as it hath been
     explained, is a Sacramental Passion, where, though the Body be
     broken, and the Blood shed but by way of representative mystery, yet
     both are as effectually, and as truly offered for our own use, if we
     go to it worthily, as when that Holy and Divine Lamb did offer
     Himself the first time.

     Therefore, whensoever Christians approach to this dreadful mystery,
     and to the Lamb of GOD "lying and sacrificed" (as some say that the
     holy Nicene Council speaks,) "upon the holy Table," it concerns
     their main interest, in point of salvation, as well as other duties,
     to take a special care not to lame and deprive the grand Sacrifice
     of its own due attendance: but to behave themselves in that manner
     that, as both the principal and additional sacrifices were consumed
     by the same fire, and went up towards heaven in the same flame, so
     JESUS CHRIST and all His members may jointly appear before GOD: this
     in a Sacramental mystery, these, with their real bodies and souls,
     offering themselves at the same time, in the same place, and by the
     same oblation.--pp. 92--94.

     "O Father of mercies, I beseech Thee, both by the merits of Thy Son,
     who now intercedes in heaven, and by that bloody Sacrifice which He
     hath offered on the Cross, (whereof Thou seest the Sacrament upon
     this table,) this day be pleased to receive me into the communion of
     His sufferings, and hereafter into the communion of His glory."--p.
     102.

     It is an express and often repeated law of God by Moses, and no
     where repealed by CHRIST, that no worshipper shall presume to appear
     before Him with empty hands. Sincere Christians must have them full
     at the receiving of the holy communion, with four distinct sorts of
     sacrifices, 1. The sacramental and commemorative Sacrifice of
     CHRIST. 2. The real and actual sacrifice of themselves. 3. The
     freewill offering of their goods. 4. The peace offering of their
     praises.

     The first as representing the Sacrifice offered on the Cross, is the
     ground of the three others, especially of the second; which must no
     more be separated from it, than parts are from the whole, or the
     body from its head.--p. 106.

     Now, though CHRIST our blessed SAVIOUR, by that everlasting and ever
     same Sacrifice of Himself, offer Himself virtually up on all
     occasions; and we, on our side, also, offer ourselves, and what is
     ours, with Him several other ways, besides that of the Holy
     Communion: . . . nevertheless, because CHRIST offers Himself for us
     at the holy communion in a more solemn and public sacramental
     way,--(thence it comes, that the memorial of the Sacrifice of CHRIST
     thereby celebrated, takes commonly the name of the Sacrifice itself,
     as St. Austin explains it often),--we are then obliged, in a more
     special manner, to renew all our Sacrifices, all the vows of our
     baptism, all the first fruits of our conversion, and all the
     particular promises which, it may be, we have made. ...

     So shall the new Israel tread on the pious steps of the old, who
     ever from time to time reiterated, either in Mispah or in Gilgal,
     &c., that covenant which the LORD had made with him in Sinai. It is
     true, the Lord did not then again repeat the thunder, that once made
     the mountains tremble; as, in our Churches, He doth not reiterate
     that very Passion that made the powers of heaven mourn and shake:
     nevertheless, as Joshua, Asa, Josias, Jehoiadah, and other such holy
     men, could from their Master assure the people, that the covenant
     which they did renew,--for example, in Shechem, Josh. xxiv. 25. 2
     Chron. xv. 12. and xxiii. 16.--was not less powerful, either to
     bless the observers, or to destroy the offenders thereof, than it
     was when Moses and the holy angels published it at the first upon
     Sinai: so now the ministers of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, having in
     their hands the Sacraments of the Gospel, (true seals and tables of
     the new law,) may both produce and give them out as evidences, that
     the Sacrifice of their Master is not less able to save men's souls,
     when it is offered to men, and sacramentally offered again to GOD,
     at the Holy Communion, than when it was new offered upon the Cross.
     . . .

     By this it is easy to see, that our holy eucharistical Communions
     are much correspondent to those feasts, that did call the people of
     Israel together, first to appear and prostrate themselves before the
     LORD with Sacrifices for their sin; and then to lay upon the altar
     that other kind of Sacrifices which they used to call "peace
     offerings," and which were ordained to express both their
     thankfulness to GOD, and their charity to men.--pp. 113--115.

     This is the reason why, because primitive Christians never received
     those holy mysteries but after they had made their offerings, and
     because those very mysteries which they received were commonly
     taken, as to the matter, from that bread and wine which they had
     before offered; the holy fathers, (for instance, St. Irenaeus,) who
     thus had no occasion to be so exact or cautious as to distinguish
     precisely the nature of two sacred offices, which went constantly
     together, do not scruple to speak of the blessed communion,
     promiscuously as Sacrament or Sacrifice.--pp. 119, 20.

     I dare appear before the LORD with all my sins and my sorrows; it is
     very just also, that I should appear with these few blessings which
     are mine; they are mine by Thy favour, and, having received them of
     Thy hand, now do I offer them to Thee. Forgive, I beseech Thee,
     sins, deliver me from my sorrows, and accept of this my small
     blessing. Accept of this my Sacrifice, as Thou didst of that of
     Abel, of Abraham, and of Noah; or rather, look in behalf on that
     only true Sacrifice, whereof here is the Sacrament,--the Sacrifice
     of the only unspotted Lamb, the Sacrifice of Thine own SON, of Thine
     only Begotten SON, of Thy SON proceeding from Thee, to die for me. O
     let Him again come from Thee to me; let Him come now as the Only
     Begotten of the FATHER, full of grace and of truth, to bless me.
     Amen, Amen.--pg. 128, 9.

                  Ib.--Depth and Mystery of the Roman Mass.

     The main intention of the Mass is, first, to offer up to GOD the
     FATHER the Body and Blood of His SON.....This is the grand object of
     Rome's Catholic religion; and whosoever every morning goes to that
     Church, it is in order to have some share in this unreasonable
     service.

     For, both in reason and Scripture, we are to offer ourselves to GOD;
     which St. Paul calls our "reasonable service." Rom. xii. 1. We must,
     likewise, offer our prayers, praises, elevation of hearts, tears of
     contrition, virtuous thoughts, just and charitable vows and works,
     &c., which, in opposition to the flesh and blood of Levitical
     Sacrifices, the ancient fathers use to call "Sacrifices without
     blood." We must also celebrate, and in a manner offer to GOD, and
     expose and lay before him the holy memorials of that great Sacrifice
     on the Cross, the only foundation of GOD'S mercies and of our hopes,
     in like manner as faithful Israelites did, at every occasion,
     represent unto GOD that covenant of His with Abraham their father,
     as the original conveyance of blessings settled on his posterity.
     And this is the "sacramental priestly office" in the Areopagite, the
     "commemorative Sacrifice" in St. Chrysostom, and the "Sacrifice
     after the order of Melchisedek" in St. Theodoret, which we solemnly
     do offer in the celebration of holy mysteries. All these things, I
     say, and whatsoever else depends on them, it is our duty to offer to
     GOD and to CHRIST, or rather to GOD by CHRIST. But that we should
     offer also CHRIST Himself, our LORD and our GOD, to whom we must
     offer ourselves;--it is a piece of devotion never heard of among
     men, till the Mass came in to bring such news.--pp. 28--30.

     Because it was the general custom of primitive Christians, never to
     receive the holy Sacrament but after they had made their offerings,
     out of which the two elements of bread and wine, being set apart and
     consecrated, and then, by an ordinary manner of speech, called the
     Body and Blood of Christ; the word, as well as the act of offering,
     got so large and common a use in two distinct offices, as to signify
     the whole service; which St. Augustine more distinctly calls
     "offering" and "receiving;" that is, offering the bread and wine
     before, and receiving part of it after it was consecrated. And
     really the whole service was little more than a continued oblation.
     For Christians, before the Sacrament, offered their gifts; and,
     after it, offered their prayers, their praises, and themselves. And
     this was the constant and solemn oblation of the Church, until dark
     and stupid ages, which by degrees have hatched Transubstantiation in
     the bosom of the Roman Church, have at last improved it to this
     horrid direful service, which mainly aims at this, to offer upon an
     altar, not the bread and wine as before, but the very Body and Blood
     of CHRIST.

     And because these public offices about the holy Sacrament are, in
     antiquity, commonly called Sacrifices, as being standing memorials
     of the true Sacrifice of CHRIST, the Church of Rome is now pleased
     to mistake these "antitypes" and "representations," as the ancient
     Church calls them, of the sufferings of CHRIST, for CHRIST Himself,
     represented by the antitypes; and upon this mistake she now builds
     up altars in every corner of her temples, thereon not only to offer,
     but also to sacrifice the SON of GOD.--pp. 57, 8.

     SANCROFT, ARCHBISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--MS. Corrections of the Common
                                   Prayer.

            [Rubrick before the Prayer for the Church Militant.]

     [From a copy of the Book of Common Prayer, in the Bodleian Library,
     (Arch. D. Bodl. 28.) prepared, as it would seem, by Sancroft for the
     consideration Of the Commissioners in 1661; containing also minute
     directions to the printer. Before the Prayer "We do not presume,"
     &c. there is a marginal note, "What follows from hence to the end of
     the distribution is somewhat otherwise methodized in page B, and
     both left to censure. See after the next leaf". Page B is headed,
     "Another method of the Consecration, Oblation, Address, and
     Distribution." This book, together with those of Bishops Barlow and
     Duppa, above quoted, was obligingly pointed out by the Rev. Bulkeley
     Bandinel, D.D., Bodley's Librarian.

     "The Convocation assembled on the 8th of May, 1661, and, after due
     deliberation, made considerable additions and alterations... .

     "It is well known, that Mr. Sancroft was eminently useful in
     assisting in the alterations, although it is not easy to ascertain
     on what particular parts of the work, or to what extent his services
     were employed. As he was not a member of Convocation at the time,
     for he then held no preferments, his name does not appear among
     those to whom the preparation of any portion of the work was
     committed; and it seems that he was only privately employed,
     probably by the recommendation of Bishop Cosin, who bore a
     considerable share in this business, and in consequence of the
     confidence reposed in his talents, learning, and judgment.

     "However, it is specially recorded that he assisted in rectifying
     the calendar and the rubrics, and that, after the work was
     completed, he was one of those appointed by an order of the upper
     house of Convocation for the supervision of the press."--D'Oyley's
     Life of Sancroft, vol. i. pp. 111-114.

     The alterations proposed in the Prayer of Consecration remarkably
     agree with those suggested by Bishop Cosin, in a paper of
     "Particulars to be considered, explained, and corrected in the Book
     of Common Prayer," printed in Nicholls, Appendix, pp. 67--71.
     [["Whether or no these following observations were drawn up by Dr.
     Cosin before the Restoration of King Charles, or afterwards, upon
     the last Review of the Common Prayer, I cannot say; but this is
     plain, that those reviewers had very great regard to these remarks,
     they having altered most things according as was therein desired;
     and it is probable, that they were laid before the Board, Bishop
     Cosin being one of the principal commissioners."--Note in Nicholls,
     p. 67.]]

     "In the Prayer of Consecration, where the Priest saith, 'to continue
     a perpetual memory of His precious death,' here seems to want 'and
     Sacrifice'--'until His coming again;' which, if added, would be more
     consonant to the nature of that holy action, and the words of the
     Catechism following, made and set forth for that purpose.

     "The Prayer of Oblation is here placed after the participation and
     distribution of the Sacrament made to the people, which in King
     Edward's First Service Book, and in all other ancient Liturgies, is
     set before it, and next after the Prayer of Consecration.

     "If it were ordered here, and the Prayer of Thanksgiving ('Almighty
     and everlasting GOD, we most heartily thank Thee,' &c.) appointed to
     follow for the Post Communion, it would be more consonant, both to
     former precedents, and the nature of this holy action."]

     And if there be a Communion, the Priest shall then offer up, and
     place upon the Table so much Bread and Wine as he shall think
     sufficient.

                   [Prayer of Consecration and Oblation.]

     ALMIGHTY GOD, our heavenly FATHER, who of Thy tender mercy, &c. . .
     and did institute, and in His holy Gospel command us to continue, a
     perpetual memory of that His precious death and Sacrifice, until His
     coming again; Hear us, O merciful FATHER, we most humbly beseech
     Thee, and by the power of Thy holy Word and Spirit, vouchsafe so to
     bless and sanctify these Thy gifts and creatures of bread and wine,
     that we receiving them according to Thy SON our Saviour JESUS
     CHRIST'S holy institution, in remembrance of Him, and to show forth
     His death and passion, may be partakers of His most blessed Body and
     Blood.

     Who, in the same night, &c.

     Immediately after shall follow this Memorial, or Prayer of Oblation.

     Wherefore, O LORD and heavenly FATHER, according to the institution
     of Thy dearly beloved SON, our SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST, we thy humble
     servants do celebrate and make here, before Thy divine Majesty, with
     these Thy holy gifts, the memorial which Thy Son hath willed and
     commanded us to make; having in remembrance His most blessed Passion
     and Sacrifice, His mighty Resurrection, and His glorious Ascension
     into heaven, rendering unto Thee most hearty thanks; for the
     innumerable benefits procured unto us by the same. And we entirely
     desire Thy fatherly goodness mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice
     of praise and thanksgiving; most humbly beseeching Thee to grant,
     that by the merits and death of thy SON JESUS CHRIST, now
     represented unto Thee, and through faith in His Blood, who maketh
     intercession for us at Thy right hand, we and all Thy whole Church
     may obtain remission of our sins, and be made partakers of all other
     benefits of His passion. And here we offer and present unto Thee, O
     LORD, ourselves, our souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and
     lively Sacrifice unto Thee; humbly beseeching Thee, that whosoever
     shall be partakers of this holy Communion, may worthily receive the
     most precious Body and Blood of Thy SON JESUS CHRIST, and be
     fulfilled, &c...

        SCRIVENER, PRESBYTER.--Course of Divinity. Book. i. chap. 44.

     Great contention has been about the Sacrifice of the altar; and,
     perhaps, though with just cause, yet not so great as is generally
     believed. For these two terms do much illustrate one the other. For
     neither is the altar upon which Christians offer, properly an altar,
     any more than (as is said before) the LORD'S day now observed is
     properly a Sabbath; nor is the Sacrifice thereon performed properly
     a Sacrifice. Some will have that only truly called a Sacrifice which
     consisted of living creatures slain and offered to GOD, and to this
     sense do I most incline. . . .

     Now, for brevity sake, to omit many things incident to this dispute,
     and to apply the notion of Sacrifice to the actions in the
     Eucharist; if we take Sacrifice in Melanchthon's sense, from which
     Calvin doth not much vary, for "every act and thing devoted to God,
     whereby we give Him honour," there are Sacrifices enough to be found
     in the Eucharist; and there are many known senses of Sacrifice given
     to GOD, admitted by Protestants. But, passing all them over, the
     question here must be stated concerning this Sacrifice, as it was
     concerning the Body of CHRIST, not whether there really it is, but
     whether it really and properly be predicated of the matter of the
     Sacrament; and that in as proper a sense as CHRIST'S Body was
     offered upon the Cross: this we deny, acknowledging only these three
     things, which fully satisfy the expressions of the ancient, calling
     the Host an "incruent Sacrifice." First, because here we call to
     remembrance CHRIST'S Sacrifice upon the Cross, according as He
     instituted and required that at our hands, saying, "Do this in
     remembrance of Me." Secondly, as it is a Sacrifice rememorative, so
     it is a Sacrifice representative, insinuating and signifying unto us
     the death and passion of CHRIST; and not as common signs and
     advertencies only to bring to mind, or, as Gulielmus Parisiensis
     hath it, "like a string tied about the finger," to put a man in
     remembrance, and no more; but also to inform the judgment, and
     confirm and increase the faith of the receiver. Thirdly, it is a
     Sacrifice representative to GOD as well as to man, for, though
     nothing can lie hid from Him, or be forgotten by Him, yet, taking
     things as He hath been pleased to express them unto us, after the
     manner of men, He, by the offering of this Sacrifice, and the devout
     worship there performed to God, is moved to behold, consider, and
     accept the true Sacrifice which Christ made for us in offering
     Himself for us; as it was by GOD'S own appointment in the rainbow,
     put for a sign between Him and man, of the covenant for not drowning
     the earth. "And the bow (saith the Scripture) shall be in the cloud,
     and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting
     covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh, that is
     upon the earth." Gen. ix. 16. In like manner, and much more
     effectually, may we say, that the action of the Eucharist presents
     to GOD the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S death, and mediation made by Him
     for mankind, especially those that are immediately concerned in that
     Sacrament; from which metony-mical Sacrifice what great and rich
     benefits may we not expect? Thus is the Host a Sacrifice, but not
     essentially, as the Sacrifices of the law, or CHRIST'S offering
     Himself; but analogically and metonymically, by virtue of the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST; and through whose virtue the benefits of
     CHRIST'S death and passion, are made over unto the worthy
     communicants agreeably to CHRIST'S institution, and the title given
     to it by the ancient and holy fathers.--pp. 218, 219.

          FELL, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--Paraphrase and Annotations.
   ["Done by several eminent men at Oxford, corrected and improved by the
        late Right Rev. and learned Bishop Fell."--Third edit. 1702.]

                               On Heb. v. 10.

     His Melchisedeckial or eternal Priesthood, joined with Kingship, was
     consummated in His resurrection; and is now continued in His service
     in the heavenly sanctuary. In which heavenly sanctuary, He
     perpetually offers His Blood and Passion to God; and, as Man, makes
     perpetual prayers and intercessions for us. . . As also He hath
     instituted the same oblation of His holy Body and Blood, and
     commemoration of His Passion, to be made in the holy Eucharist to
     GOD the FATHER by His ministers here on earth, for the same ends,
     viz. the application of all the benefits of His sole meritorious
     death and Sacrifice on the Cross, till His second return out of this
     heavenly sanctuary.

                            ID.--On Heb. xiii. 9.

     The Apostle here exhorts the Christians to withdraw themselves from
     all communion with the Jews, and partaking of their sacrifices; (see
     v. 13.) and to make oblation to GOD of their goods, (v. 16.) and of
     their praise, and thanksgiving, (v. 15.) in the celebration of the
     Eucharist, the Christian Sacrifice. At which time, solemn
     thanksgivings, prayers, and intercessions have, from the beginning
     of the Gospel, been presented unto GOD; (see 1 Tim. ii. 1.
     eucaristiai, understood anciently of the Eucharist joined with
     proseucai, &c.) and a feast of charity made among Christians, as was
     amongst the Jews at their peace offerings.

                                   (v. 9.)

     ..."Which have not profited them,"]--Likely, some of the Christian
     Jews, who believed in CHRIST'S expiatory Sacrifice, yet ceased not
     to feast on the Mosaical peace offerings, as formerly, which were
     shared between GOD or the altar, the priest, and the people; who,
     inviting their friends, the Levites, the poor, feasted thereon in
     the court of the temple; to which are opposed [v. 15.] our spiritual
     peace offerings.

                                  (v. 15.)

     "By him, therefore,"]--This verse relates to the tenth, (where the
     Apostle mentions the Christians' altar,) and, together with the next
     verse, specifies the duties which were more solemnly performed in
     the Eucharist, corresponding to former peace offerings.

     "Let us offer the [spiritual] sacrifice of praise to GOD
     continually."]--1 Pet. ii. 5. As, in the law, after atonement
     followed peace offerings of thanksgiving, &c. which were never laid
     upon the altar, but upon a sin 'offering underneath. Lev. iii. 5.

                      PATRICK, BISHOP.--Mensa Mystica.

     First, then, this holy rite of eating bread broken, and drinking
     wine poured out, is a solemn commemoration of CHRIST, according as
     He Himself saith to all His Apostles, Luke xxii. 19, and
     particularly to St. Paul, who twice makes mention of this command,
     "Do this in remembrance (or for a remembrance) of Me." His meaning
     is not, that we should hereby call Him to mind (for we are never to
     forget Him), but rather that we should keep Him in mind, and
     endeavour to perpetuate His name in the world, and propagate the
     memory of Him and His benefits, to the latest posterity. Now this is
     done by making a solemn rehearsal of His famous acts, and declaring
     the inestimable greatness of His royal love. For anamnhsiV doth not
     barely signify recordatio, recording or registering of His favours
     in our mind; but commemoratio, a solemn declaration that we do well
     bear them in our hearts, and will continue the memory, and spread
     the fame of Him, as far and as long as ever we are able.--pp. 3, 4.

     Now, for the fuller understanding of this matter, you must know that
     the Paschal supper (which is called by Gregory Nazianzen, very
     elegantly, tupoV tupou amudroteroV, "a more obscure type of this
     type") was instituted for a remembrance, and was a feast of
     commemoration--p . 7.

     Now, of two things it is a remembrance; and two ways we commemorate
     or remember them:--

     I. It is instituted for a remembrance that He was embodied for those
     that believe on Him, and became passible for their sakes. . .

     II. It was instituted in commemoration of His passion and sufferings
     for us. As the bread and wine do commemorate the truth of His Body,
     so do bread broken, and wine poured out, commemorate the truth of
     His sufferings for us. . . .

     But, as I said before, there are two parts of this commemoration;
     and it cannot be contained within the bounds of this world, but we
     must make it reach as high as heaven.

     I. We do show it forth, and declare it unto men, which is
     sufficiently clear by all that has been said. . .

     II. We do show forth the LORD'S death unto GOD, and commemorate
     before Him the great things He hath done for us. We keep it (as it
     were)in His memory, and plead before Him the Sacrifice of His Son,
     which we show unto Him, humbly requiring that grace and pardon, with
     all other benefits of it, may be bestowed on us. And, as the
     minister doth most powerfully pray in the virtue of CHRIST'S
     Sacrifice, when he represents it unto GOD, so do the people also,
     when they show unto Him what His Son hath suffered. Every man may
     say, "Behold, O LORD, the bleeding wounds of Thy own Son; remember
     how His Body was broken for us; think upon His precious Blood, which
     was she'd in our behalf. Let us die, if He have not made a full
     satisfaction. We desire not to be pardoned, if He have not paid our
     debt. But canst Thou behold Him, and not be well pleased with us?
     Canst Thou look on His Body and Blood, which we represent to Thee,
     and turn Thy face from us? Hast Thou not set Him forth to be a
     propitiation, through faith in His Blood? O LORD, then suffer us
     sinful creatures to plead with Thee. Let us prevail in the virtue of
     His Sacrifice, for the graces and blessings which we need; and hide
     not Thyself from us, unless Thou canst hide Thyself from Thy Son
     too, whom we bring with us unto Thee." In this sort may we take the
     boldness to speak to GOD, and, together with a representation of
     CHRIST, we may represent our own wants; and we may be confident
     that, when GOD sees His Son, when we hold Him up (as it were)
     between His anger and our souls, He will take some pity, and have
     mercy upon us.--pp. 10--15.

     We can hope to prevail for nothing, but through the name of our
     LORD, whom we can never mention with so much advantage, as when we
     solemnly commemorate His sufferings and deservings; for then we
     pray, and do something else also, which GOD hath commanded; so that
     there is the united force of many acceptable things to make us
     prevalent. And hence I suppose it is, that Isidore Pelusiota calls
     the sacramental bread, arton proqesewV, "the shewbread," which we
     set before GOD, as that stood alway before His face in the time of
     the law, that GOD, looking upon it, might remember His people Israel
     for good.

     It will not be unprofitable to add, that this was one reason why the
     ancients called this action a Sacrifice (which the Romanists now so
     much urge), because it doth represent the Sacrifice which CHRIST
     once offered. It is a figure of His death which we commemorate, unto
     which the Apostle St. Paul (as a learned man conceives), hath a
     reference, when he saith to the Galatians, that JESUS CHRIST was,
     set forth evidently before their eyes, crucified among them, They
     saw (as it were) His Sacrifice on the Cross; it was so lively
     figured in this Sacrament. And it is very plain, that St. Chrysostom
     understood no more, when as he thus speaks, upon the Epistle to the
     Hebrews: "What, then, do we not offer every day?" &c. Such an
     unbloody Sacrifice, which is only rememorative, and in
     representation, we all acknowledge. And, if that would content them,
     we make no scruple to use Eusebius' words, who saith "it is a
     remembrance instead of a Sacrifice;" and, in another place, "we
     sacrifice a remembrance of the great Sacrifice." And so every
     Christian is a Priest or a Sacrifice, when he comes to the table of
     the LORD; for, as our LORD saith to His Apostles, Luke xxii. 19, "Do
     this in remembrance of Me," so He saith to every private Christian
     the same words, 1 Cor. xi. 24. Only there is this difference, that
     "Do this," &c. in St. Luke, doth manifestly refer to those words
     before, to take bread, give thanks, and give to others (which is
     only the minister's work); but in St. Paul, "Do this," &c. refers to
     "take, eat," which immediately precedes, and this is to be done by
     al). So that both the one and the other, in their several kinds, do
     commemorate CHRIST, and represent Him to the Father.

     And that it is only a memorial of a Sacrifice, and not a
     propitiatory Sacrifice, the arguments of a divine, in the Council of
     Trent, will prove, in spite of all opposers.--pp. 15--17.

     This holy action is to be next of all considered as a remembrance,
     or commemoration, with thanksgiving;--and thence it is called by the
     name of Eucharist, i. e. "thanksgiving," according to the phrase of
     ancient times. For as the bread and wine, the breaking and pouring
     out, are representations, so our taking, eating, and drinking,
     express our hearty resentments. . . .

     The Jewish feasts upon their Sacrifices do more plainly instruct us
     in this matter. They that offered peace-offerings unto GOD, were
     admitted to eat some part of them, after they were presented to Him
     and some pieces of them burnt upon His altar. And this is called
     "partaking of the altar" (which was GOD'S table, Ezek. xli. 22. Mai.
     i. 7), where they did rejoice before Him, as those that were
     suffered to eat and drink with Him. . . . But the Psalmist's words
     arc most to be observed to this purpose, Ps. cxvi. 12, 13, where to
     the question, "What shall I return to the LORD for all His benefits
     towards me?" he returns this answer, "I will take the cup of
     salvation," &c. i. e. when I offer swtheria Sacrifices for
     salvation, or deliverance that GOD hath granted me out of trouble, I
     will remember the mercy of GOD with all thankfulness, as I feast
     upon the remains of that Sacrifice. For it was the manner, that the
     Master of the Sacrifice should begin a cup of thanksgiving to all
     the guests that he invited, that they might all praise GOD together
     for that salvation, in consideration of which he paid these vows
     unto Him; and in those words the ancients thought they tasted the
     cup of salvation, which we now drink in the supper of the LORD;
     expounding them, in the analogical sense, to signify twn musthrion
     koinwnian (Chrysost. in Ps. cxvi.) the participation of the
     Christian mysteries.--pp. 20, 21.26,27.

     It may further be observed, that all Churches in the world have
     always used divine praises in this commemoration, and (if we may
     believe ancient records) such as are very conformable to the Jewish
     benedictions at the Passover .... for so we read in Justin Martyr
     and others, that in their times the Church used to praise GOD for
     all things, and particularly for those gifts of bread and wine; and
     so for JESUS CHRIST, His death, passion, resurrection, and
     ascension, beseeching the Father of the whole world to accept of the
     offering they made to Him. And, in after ages, Cyril of Jerusalem
     saith, "We make mention of the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all
     the creatures, reasonable and unreasonable; of the Angels,
     Archangels, and powers of heaven; praising GOD, and saying, Holy,
     holy, holy, LORD GOD of Sabaoth," &c. These do very much correspond
     with those Hebrew forms, which perhaps they were willing in part to
     imitate, for the greater satisfaction of the Jewish Christians, who
     constituted part of their assemblies. ...

     From all which we may discern a further reason why they called this
     Sacrament by the name of a Sacrifice; because they did "offer unto
     GOD thanksgiving" (as the Psalmist speaks, Ps. 1. 14), which is one
     of the spiritual Sacrifices which every Christian is consecrated to
     bring unto Him. . . . Christians, therefore, are not without their
     Sacrifice also, when they keep this feast, and such an one as is
     very befitting GOD, and which no rational man can deny to deserve
     the name.--pp. 33--35.

     But . . . there are Eucharistical actions also whereby we perform a
     most delightsome Sacrifice unto God.

     We must not, when we come to GOD, appear before Him empty; but we
     are to consecrate and offer unto Him some of our temporal goods, for
     the relief of those that are in want, which may cause many
     thanksgivings to be sent up by them to GOD. It hath been said
     before, that our whole selves ought to be offered as an holocaust to
     GOD .... so that the spiritual Sacrifice of ourselves, and the
     corporal Sacrifice of our goods to Him, may teach the Papists that
     we are sacrificers as well as they, and are made kings and priests
     unto GOD. Yea, they may know, that the bread and the wine of the
     Eucharist, is an offering (out of the stock of the whole
     congregation) to this service, according as it was in the primitive
     times.....We pray Him, therefore, in our Communion Service, to
     accept our OBLATIONS (meaning those of bread and wine), as well as
     our ALMS. We still make, as Origen's phrase is,--"a rational and
     unsmoky Sacrifice," for we offer ourselves, and our prayers, and our
     praises, and our goods; so that, if you please, we may call the
     table of the LORD (in Theodoret's style)--"a rational table;" where,
     as GOD provides for us, so we provide for Him, in those that are His
     members, and offer upon it those Sacrifices which are most befitting
     either Him or rational creatures. And that you may see we are
     engaged to this kind of offering, it is to be observed, that the
     eating of the Lamb was not all the solemnity of the Passover; but
     they sacrificed, likewise, offerings of thanksgivings in abundance,
     that there might be provision for the poor.--pp. 36--38.

     Now this bread and wine in the Sacrament is GOD'S, both as it is
     offered by us unto Him, and as it is consecrated to represent His
     SON CHRIST unto us; and therefore we, by partaking of it, do
     solemnly engage ourselves unto, and promise our fidelity in His
     service. . . .

     And that you may see it more fully verified, that this eating and
     drinking is a federal rite between GOD and us, let it be considered
     as a feast upon a Sacrifice (in which notion it is most rarely
     explained by an excellent doctor of our own [Dr. Cudworth]), from
     which it will evidently appear to be intended as a solemn profession
     of CHRIST'S religion, and a renewal of our covenant with GOD.

     For the understanding of this, you must know that, Jerusalem being
     the holy city in GOD'S land, and the temple being the house of GOD,
     where He dwelt, and the priests GOD'S servants, and the altar His
     table (as was said before), there was a constant provision brought
     in for the keeping of GOD'S house, and maintaining of His servants.
     And besides those of the morning and evening, there were a great
     number of occasional Sacrifices (which were His flesh), together
     with their meat and drink offerings (which were His bread and wine),
     that came in to be His food, as the expression is, Lev. iii. 11.
     These common Sacrifices were of three sorts: the first were
     holocausts, or burnt offerings .... The second we may call
     expiatory, because they were to make atonement and reconcile, which
     were of two sorts, sin offerings and trespass offerings; . . . The
     third sort were peace offerings, which were made to GOD for some
     benefits received (which go among the Hebrews under the name of
     "peace") to testify their gratitude unto Him. The fat of these
     offerings being burnt upon the altar to GOD (Lev. iii. 3, 4), and
     one breast with a shoulder being given to the priest, for his
     portion (Lev. vii. 34), the remainders were the owner's share, that
     he might eat of GOD'S meat, and so feast with Him (if he was not in
     any legal uncleanness), as you may see, Lev. vii. 20.

     The examples of such Sacrifices are numerous in the Scripture.

     Now that this eating and drinking was intended as a rite of
     covenanting with that Deity to whom the Sacrifices were offered, or
     else as a profession that they were in the covenant, and did remain
     GOD'S friends (if they were already of the religion), you may
     discern from these two places, which will lead me to that for which
     all this is said. When Moses had rehearsed to the people GOD'S laws
     (Exod. xx. 21--23), which he gave on Mount Sinai, and then came to
     strike the covenant between GOD and Israel, it is said (Exod. xxiv.
     5), that Moses sent young men (i. e. some of the first-born, who
     were the Priests hitherto) to offer burnt offerings and peace
     offerings of oxen, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar,
     which represented GOD, and the other half he sprinkled on the
     people, (ver. 6--8) as a token of the covenant between them; but for
     the completing of the compact, the chief of the people went up
     nearer to GOD, and saw that bright appearance, and did eat and
     drink, (ver. 11) which sure must be understood of their feasting
     upon the peace offerings which had been sacrificed unto GOD, whereby
     they professed to own that covenant He had given to them.

     Not long after, this people made to themselves other gods, and
     offered not only burnt offerings, but also peace offerings to them,
     (Exod. xxxii. C) and then "sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
     play," i. e. to be wanton, and commit uncleanness with each other.
     Now that this was an associating of themselves with the Egyptian
     gods, we may learn from the Apostle, who, reciting of this passage,
     and speaking of their idolatry, makes no mention at all of their
     sacrificing to these new gods, but only of this eating, &c. which
     did conclude the ceremony; as if the idolatry did formally consist
     in this, and that hereby they did devote themselves to that strange
     worship. "Neither be you idolaters, (saith he, 1 Cor. x. 8) as were
     some of them, as it is written, the people sat down to eat and
     drink, and rose up to play." By which words you may see the Apostle
     makes account, that this eating and drinking of the Sacrifices, was
     a renouncing of the covenant of their God, and joining of themselves
     to idols. .. . For just as Israel, by eating of the Sacrifices
     partake of (or have communion with) the altar, ver. 18, i. e.
     profess to be of that religion, and adhere to that way of worship,
     so it is with Christians, when they eat of the Body and Blood of the
     crucified Saviour, which was offered for us. . . .

     From all which discourse we may thus reason, that this holy
     Sacrament is a feast upon the Sacrifice which CHRIST offered, as the
     Jewish feasts were made with the flesh of those Sacrifices which
     they offered to God.--pp. 50--57.

     This eating and drinking is a feast upon a sin offering, and
     therefore, is a greater pledge of remission of sin. That you may
     conceive of this aright, it must be remembered, that, though the
     people of Israel used to feast upon their peace offerings which were
     made at the altar, (as hath been said already) yet they were not
     admitted to eat of any else. . . . Now CHRIST made His soul an
     offering for sin, and such an offering, that with His Blood He
     entered into the holy place, and suffered without the camp, and
     therefore was most illustriously set forth by that Sacrifice, which
     was for the whole congregation. According, then, to the law, none
     was to feed upon the Sacrifice; and yet our LORD hath indulged unto
     us the privilege of feasting upon this great Sacrifice of
     propitiation; according as the very words of the institution of this
     Sacrament do intimate, when our SAVIOUR saith, "This is the Blood of
     the New Testament which is shed for many;" (Mark xiv. 24) i. e.
     which is like to the Sacrifice on the great day of atonement, which
     was not made for one person, but for the whole congregation; and of
     this I give you leave to drink. This was a favour never granted to
     the world before. . . This difference, therefore, is remarkable
     between the legal Sacrifices and the representation of CHRIST'S
     Sacrifice. In them was made anamnhsiV amartiwn, (Heb. x. 3) a
     commemoration of sin every year; they were a plain confession of sin
     that it remained still in force, and that they could not take it
     away, else they needed not to have been repeated. . . . But this
     Sacrifice of which we now take, is an anamnhsiV, a "commemoration"
     of the remission of sins; a remembrance that it is quite taken away,
     and hath lost all its strength; and so, seeing CHRIST hath made a
     perfect satisfaction, though they might not eat, yet we may of the
     Sacrifice of expiation. . . .

     To shut up this, then, you may thus take a very brief sum of it.
     Before the flood, they only offered holocausts, or whole burnt
     offerings, (for then they ate no flesh). After the flood, they
     sacrificed peace offerings also for mercies which they received; and
     these they all ate of. But we read of no sin offering till the law
     was given; and those the priests only ate of, but not of all. Till
     the Gospel came, never did any eat of a sin offering that was
     carried within the vail to reconcile withal; but now both priest and
     people partake of it. We are all made "priests unto GOD, in this
     regard, that" as the priests of old had the favour to eat of the sin
     offering, so have the people of GOD now, by communicating of the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST, who offered up Himself unto GOD for
     us.--pp. 75--80.

     When we take the bread into our hands, it is a seasonable time to do
     that act which I told you was one end of this Sacrament, viz.
     "commemorate, and show forth, or declare the death of CHRIST unto
     GOD the FATHER." Let us represent before Him the Sacrifice of
     atonement that CHRIST hath made; let us commemorate the pains which
     He endured, let us entreat Him that we may enjoy all the purchase of
     His Blood, that all people may reap the fruit of His Passion; and
     that, for the sake of His bloody Sacrifice, He will turn away all
     His anger and displeasure, and be reconciled unto us. . . .
     Themistocles, (they say) not knowing how to mitigate and atone the
     wrath of king Admetus, and avert his fury from him, snatched up the
     King's son, and held him up in his arms between himself and death,
     and so prevailed for a pardon, and quenched the fire that was
     breaking out against him. And this the Molossians (of whom he was
     king) held to be "the most effectual way of supplication," and
     which, of all others, "could not be resisted or denied." Of far
     greater prevalency is this act, the holding up (as it were) the SON
     of GOD in our hands, and representing to the FATHER, the broken Body
     and the Blood of His only begotten. Let us set this between the heat
     of GOD'S anger and our souls; let us desire He would have regard to
     His Dearly Beloved; and the LORD cannot turn back our prayers that
     press and importune Him with such a mighty argument. Say, therefore,
     to Him, "Behold, O LORD, the Sacrifice of the everlasting covenant;
     behold, we lay before Thee the Lamb that takes away the sins of the
     world. Is not Thy soul in Him well pleased? Is not His body as
     realty in the heavens, as the signs of it are here in our hands?
     Hear, good LORD, the cry of His wounds. Let us prevail with Thee
     through the virtue of His Sacrifice. Let us feel, yea, let all the
     world feel the power of His intercession. Deny us not, O LORD,
     seeing we bring Thy SON with us. Hear Thy SON, O LORD, though Thou
     wilt not hear us, and let us and all others know that He lives, and
     was dead, and that He is alive for evermore. Amen."--pp. 265, 6.

                          ID.--Christian Sacrifice.

     In such meditations as these, when we show forth the inestimable
     value of CHRIST'S Sacrifice, we do, as it were, offer it unto God;
     or rather, make before Him a commemoration of this offering. And in
     this sense the ancient Christians did call this Sacrament a
     Sacrifice; and every Christian they looked upon as a priest and a
     sacrificer, when he came to the table of the LORD. Because CHRIST
     not only bade His Apostles "do this in remembrance of" Him; but St.
     Paul requires every one of us to do the same, and to "show forth His
     death till He come."--p. 20.

     As we are partakers of a better Sacrifice, which is of greater
     efficacy and virtue than any of theirs (the Jews) were; so GOD
     receives us into a nearer familiarity with Himself, and, by setting
     before us not only the body of that Sacrifice which was offered to
     Him, but the blood also (which was His own proper food), plainly
     tells us that He intends to make us partakers of the highest
     blessings, even of His own joy and happiness. Of which He gives us
     strong assurance, in that He lets us partake not only of the blood
     of the Sacrifice, in this figure and representation, but of the
     blood of that Sacrifice which was offered for the sins of the world.
     This bids us rest assured of His abundant grace; and not doubt of
     our acceptance with Him, to a participation of His highest favour.
     There is nothing now to hinder it, nor to make us call in question
     His merciful kindness towards us. For we have such a token and
     pledge of forgiveness of our sins by this Sacrifice, as the ancient
     people of GOD had not of the forgiveness of their offences, by the
     blood that was offered at GOD'S altar. They were not admitted to
     taste of that blood, as we are of the blood of Jesus; and so, could
     not have that boldness and access with confidence to GOD, which we
     have through the faith of Him.

     This seems to be one great secret of this Sacrament, as appears from
     the words of St. Luke and St. Paul, (Luke xxii. 20; 1 Cor. xii. 25.
     compared with Matt. xxvi. 28) who tells, that this cup which we
     drink of, is "the new covenant in CHRIST'S Blood, which was shed for
     the remission of sins." .... Which is the import also of the word
     "communion," used by St. Paul to express the effect of this
     Sacrament. (1 Cor. x. 16.) "The cup of blessing which we bless," &c.
     In its full signification, that phrase denotes not merely our being
     made of His society, but our having a communication of His Body and
     His Blood unto us, (so the word koinwnew is rendered in other
     places, Gal. vi. 6; Phil. iv. 16) of which we partake by eating this
     bread and drinking this cup, in remembrance of His death for the
     remission of sins. And so we beseech our merciful FATHER, (in the
     Prayer of Consecration which our Church prescribes) that we
     receiving these, His creatures of bread and wine, according to His
     SON our SAVIOUR'S holy institution, in remembrance of His death and
     passion, may be partakers of His most blessed Body and Blood. For,
     after the bread and wine are deputed by holy prayer to GOD, to be
     used for a commemoration of CHRIST'S death, though they do not cease
     to be what they were before, yet they begin to be something which
     they were not before this consecration. . . All the effects and
     benefits of His Passion are imparted to us by these which in
     themselves are but GOD'S creatures of bread and wine, yet by His
     appointment become to us the Body and Blood of His SON. In short,
     there is nothing which the Body and Blood of CHRIST can be to the
     spirits of men, but by these tokens He exhibits it to us, and gives
     us an interest in it. This is spiritually to eat His flesh and drink
     His Blood; as both our Church and the ancient speak. Our souls
     entertain and feast themselves upon His Sacrifice; being really made
     partakers of whatsoever His Body and Blood can do for them. Which
     St. Gregory Nazianzen meant, I should think, when he saith, that
     "these oblations are the communication of the incarnation of GOD,
     and of the sufferings of GOD."--pp. 45--48.

     It is certain that it was not common bread and wine which the
     ancient Christians prayed might become the Body and Blood of CHRIST
     to them; but bread and wine first sanctified, by being offered to
     GOD with thanksgiving, and presented to Him with due acknowledgments
     that He was the LORD and giver of all things. After which followed a
     thankful mention of the great love of God, in sending His SON to
     redeem mankind by His death, represented by that holy bread and wine
     broken and poured out, in commemoration of His Passion. This was the
     principal thing of all, which our Church therefore expressly puts us
     in mind of, in the words now recited; and distinctly acknowledges in
     the Prayer of Consecration. As for the other, that also is to be
     understood when you see the bread and wine set upon GOD'S table by
     him that ministers in this divine service. Then it is offered to
     GOD; for whatsoever is solemnly placed there, becomes by that means
     a thing dedicated and appropriated to Him.

     And if you observe the time when this bread and wine is ordered to
     he placed there, which is immediately after the alms of the people
     have been received for the poor, you will see it is intended by our
     Church to be a thankful oblation to GOD of the fruits of the earth.
     And, accordingly, all that are there present, when they behold the
     priest thus preparing the bread and wine for consecration to an
     higher mystery, should secretly lift up their souls to GOD in hearty
     thanksgiving, and offer Him the Sacrifice of praise for these and
     all other such like benefits; desiring Him to accept of these gifts,
     as a small token of their grateful sense that they hold all they
     have of Him, as the great LORD of the world. And so we are taught to
     do in that prayer which immediately follows in our Liturgy, "for the
     whole state of CHRIST'S Church," and wherein we humbly beseech Him
     to "accept" not only "our alms," but also our "oblations." These are
     things distinct, and, the former "alms" signifying that which was
     given for the relief of the poor, the latter "oblations" can signify
     nothing else but (according to the style of the ancient Church) this
     bread and wine presented to GOD, in a thankful remembrance of our
     food both dry and liquid (as Justin Martyr speaks), which He, the
     Creator of the world, hath made and given unto us. But, above all,
     we must be sure to offer our devoutest acknowledgments for that gift
     of gifts, the SON of GOD dying for us; without which thanksgiving,
     to speak the truth, we do not do that which CHRIST commanded, and so
     cannot hope for the blessing He hath promised. Hear St. Chrysostom
     (instead of all that treat of this matter) who excellently declares
     the manner and reason of thanksgiving, in a sermon of his upon the
     eighth chapter of St. Matthew. "A perpetual memory," saith he, "and
     thanksgiving for a good turn, is the best way that can be found to
     secure and preserve it to us. And, therefore, the dreadful mysteries
     and full of salvation, which we celebrate in every assembly, are
     called the Eucharist; because they are a commemoration of many
     benefits, and show forth the principal piece of Divine providence,
     and dispose us always to give Him thanks. For if to be born of a
     virgin was a great wonder, what was it to be crucified, to shed His
     blood for us, and to give Himself to us for a feast and a spiritual
     banquet? What shall we call this? Where shall we place it? We can do
     no less than give Him thanks perpetually.. . . And, therefore, the
     priest, when this Sacrifice is in hand, bids us 'thank GOD for the
     whole world; for what is past, and what is present, and for those
     things that are to come.' This sets us free from the earth, and
     translates us to heaven; and of men makes us angels. . .. For that
     Only Begotten SON of His, who was more precious to Him than all
     things besides, hath He given for us enemies;--and not only given
     Him, but, after that gift, set Him before us on our table; doing all
     things Himself for us, both to give, and then to make us thankful
     for His gifts. For, mankind being generally ungrateful, He
     undertakes throughout, and doth all things for us Himself. And what
     He did for the Jews, putting them in mind of His benefits, from
     places, and times, and feasts, that He hath done here; from a kind
     of Sacrifice, casting us into a perpetual remembrance of the good He
     hath wrought for us."--pp. 68--71.

        TOWERSON, PRESBYTER.--Explication of the Catechism, Part iv.

     But because the fore-mentioned Baronius tells us that the Sacrament,
     whereof we speak, had also the name of an "oblation," or
     "Sacrifice," as that too because of the "offering" there made for
     sin, or an expiatory one; therefore it will be necessary for us to
     go on to inquire into that name, and so much the rather, because the
     same author is so copious in his quotations concerning it. And I
     readily grant that this Sacrament is frequently so called by the
     ancients, but that it was called so for the reason alleged is
     utterly denied, neither can there be produced any convincing proof
     of it. The utmost that can be said by those who are the most
     ancient, is, that it is an eucharistical oblation, as that too for
     the blessings of this world, and particularly for the fruits of the
     earth, as well as for the blessings of our redemption. And to that
     purpose, and no other, are the sayings before quoted out of Justin
     Martyr, and Irenaeus, and Origen. Which, how they agree with their
     designs who represent this Sacrament as an expiatory oblation or
     Sacrifice, I shall leave to all indifferent men to judge. And though
     it be true, that some of those who followed, spake in another
     strain, and represented it also as an oblation "for the benefit of
     the offerers" and others, as well as an eucharistical oblation for
     benefits received, yet it is evident, from Mr. Mede, that the
     ancients meant no more by that oblation or Sacrifice, than a
     commemorative one, by that sacred rite of bread and wine
     representing to GOD and the FATHER the expiatory Sacrifice of His
     SON upon the Cross, and, as it were, putting Him in mind of it, that
     so be He would, for the sake of that SON, and the valuableness of
     His Sacrifice, be propitious to them, and to all those whom they
     recommended to His grace and favour. And, indeed, as it is not
     difficult to conceive, that they who meant no more, when they called
     the Eucharist the Body of CHRIST, than its being a figure, and a
     memorial, and a means of its conveyance, meant no more, when they
     entituled it a Sacrifice, than a commemoration of that great one,
     which CHRIST made of Himself upon the Cross; so it is evident, that
     St. Cyprian (with whose authority Baronius begins his proofs) meant
     no more than such a commemorative Sacrifice. . . . And if they who
     insist so much upon its having been entituled a Sacrifice, will
     content themselves with this, and the former sense, we will allow
     that they have the Fathers on their side, but otherwise to have no
     title to them in this affair.--pp. 168, 9.

     Let us go on to inquire, because a question of far greater moment,
     whether he who administers this Sacrament is obliged by the words of
     the institution, or otherwise, to make an "offering to GOD of
     CHRIST'S Body and Blood," as well as to make a tender of the
     Sacrament thereof to men; the Council of Trent, as is well known,
     avowing that to be the importance of the words, "Do this in
     remembrance of Me;" and that the Apostles were, by the same words,
     appointed priests to offer them.---p. 274.

     Yet will not the words touto poieite reach that Sacrifice which is
     intended to be superstructed upon them; because he who commands men
     to sacrifice, or offer, in remembrance of himself, doth rather
     enjoin a commemorative than expiatory one, and, consequently, not
     that Sacrifice which is intended. So little is there in the words
     themselves, how favourably soever considered, to oblige us to
     understand them of such an offering as the Church of Rome advanceth.
     And we shall find them to signify as little, though we take in the
     sense of the Catholic Church upon them, how conformably soever the
     Council of Trent affirms it to be unto its own; because, though the
     ancients did all agree upon a Sacrifice, and, which is more, looked
     upon those words as either directly or indirectly obliging to the
     offering of it, yet, (as hath been elsewhere shown) they advanced
     other kinds of Sacrifices than what the Church of Rome now doth,
     and, consequently, cannot be supposed to give any countenance to it.
     And I shall only add, that though Justin Martyr represented that
     offering of fine flour, which was offered for those that were
     cleansed from the leprosy, as a type of the bread of the Eucharist;
     though he moreover applied the word poiein to that bread, and (if
     any of the fathers, therefore, did,) affirmed CHRIST to command us
     to "make," or "offer" that bread to God; yet he adds, that "He
     commanded us to do so in remembrance of that Passion which He
     suffered for those that were cleansed in their souls;" and again,
     "that we might at the same time give thanks to GOD for His having
     made the world, and all things in it for the sake of man, and for
     His having delivered us, by CHRIST, from that wickedness, in which
     we sometimes were, and dissolved all noxious principalities and
     powers," which shows him not to have thought in the least of our
     being commanded to offer CHRIST'S Body and Blood, under the species
     of bread, or indeed of any other Sacrifice, than a commemorative or
     eucharistical one.--pp. 276, 7.

   BULL, BISHOP AND DOCTOR.--Sermon xiii. Common Prayers, ancient, useful,
                               and necessary.

     St. Paul the Apostle had, in the foregoing chapter, (1 Tim. i.)
     given instructions to bishop (or rather archbishop) Timothy,
     concerning the regulation of preaching and preachers within his
     province, which was the proconsular Asia, of which Ephesus was the
     metropolis. ...

     To this public person, to this great bishop of the Church, is this
     charge given by St. Paul, in my text; "I exhort, therefore, that,
     first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
     thanks, be made for all men," &c. He was to take care that such
     prayers should be made in all Churches and congregations under his
     inspection and jurisdiction. And how could he do this, but by
     providing by his authority, that there should be set forms of
     prayer, framed according to this rule given him by the Apostle, to
     be used in those Churches? Sure I am, the primitive Catholic Church
     understood this to be the meaning of the Apostle. Hence, in all the
     Churches of CHRIST over the world, however distant from each other,
     we find set forms of public prayers, suited and conform to this
     direction of the Apostle. . . .

     And indeed, if we consult all the ancient Liturgies extant at this
     day, we shall find this observation to be most true; they are all
     framed and composed according to this rule of the Apostle.

     And it is observable, that, however those ancient Liturgies have
     been altered and corrupted in after-times by many additions and
     interpolations, yet there are in all of them still remaining many
     excellent and divine forms of prayer and thanksgiving, wherein they
     do all perfectly agree, and which, therefore, cannot reasonably be
     thought to have any other original than apostolical order and
     appointment, delivered to the several nations and people, together
     with the first preaching and plantation of Christianity among them.
     Such, for example, is the Sursum corda in the Office of the
     Communion, the priest saying, "Lift up your hearts;" and the people
     answering, "We lift them up unto the LORD." There is no liturgy in
     any Church of CHRIST to this day, but hath this form. Such is the
     excellent form of thanksgiving in the same Office of the Communion,
     to be performed by the priest and people; the priest saying, "Let us
     give thanks unto our LORD GOD;" and the people answering, "It is
     meet and right so to do." This form also is to be found in all the
     most ancient Liturgies....

     I add, to what hath been already observed, the consent of all the
     Christian Churches in the world, however distant from each other, in
     the Prayer of Oblation of the Christian Sacrifice in the holy
     Eucharist, or Sacrament of the LORD'S supper; which consent is
     indeed wonderful. All the ancient Liturgies agree in this form of
     prayer, almost in the same words, but fully and exactly in the same
     sense, order, and method: which, whosoever attentively considers,
     must be convinced that this order of prayer was delivered to the
     several Churches in the very first plantation and settlement of
     them. Nay, it is observable, that this form of prayer is still
     retained in the very canon of the Mass, at this day used in the
     Church of Rome, though the form doth manifestly contradict and
     overthrow some of the principal articles of their new faith. For
     from this very form of prayer, still extant in their canon, a man
     may effectually refute those two main doctrines of their Church, the
     doctrine of purgatory and that of transubstantiation, as I could
     clearly show you, if I had time, and this were a proper place for
     it. Thus, by a singular providence of GOD, that ancient, primitive,
     and apostolic form of prayer still remains in the Liturgy of that
     Church, as a convincing testimony against the latter innovations and
     corruptions of the Christian doctrine. But this by the way. . . .

     Other instances of the like nature I could give you, if the time
     would permit. But these, I think, are sufficient to show that there
     were set, prescribed offices, and forms of prayer and praise, and
     profession of faith, delivered to all the Churches of CHRIST by the
     Apostles or their immediate successors; many of those forms
     (notwithstanding the manifold corruptions and depravations of the
     primitive Liturgies in after-times) being still retained, and
     unanimously used in all the Churches of Christ to this day.

     What we have said concerning prescribed forms of prayer as always,
     from the days of the Apostles, used in all settled Churches of
     CHRIST, may administer abundant satisfaction and confirmation to all
     that adhere to the communion of the Church of England, and
     consequently to the Liturgy and form of prayer prescribed in that
     Church.

     This may be our comfort, that we serve and worship GOD in the same
     way that the primitive confessors and martyrs, and all good
     Christians in the succeeding ages did.

     We have a Liturgy conform to this law and rule of prayer laid down
     by the Apostle in my text, and observed by the Catholic Church. We
     have good and wholesome supplication, prayers, intercessions, and
     thanksgiving, not only for ourselves, but for all men.

     Those excellent men, our first reformers, took care to retain and
     preserve what was primitive and good in the Liturgies of other
     Churches, and to pare off all excrescences and adventitious
     corruptions of after-times..... We have an entire Sacrament, the cup
     of blessing, in the holy Eucharist, which was sacrilegiously taken
     from us by the Church of Rome, being happily restored to us. The
     ridiculous pageantry and fopperies of that Church are laid aside,
     and we have the holy Sacrament purely, reverently, and decently
     administered. [Compare Nelson's Life of Bishop Bull. "He
     administered the Sacraments of our holy religion with great
     reverence and solemnity. The holy Eucharist, the mysterious rite and
     perfection of Christian worship, was not performed so often in his
     parish, as he earnestly desired, and yet oftener than is usual in
     little villages; for he brought it to seven times in a year. But
     whenever he officiated at the altar, it was exactly agreeable to the
     directions of the rubric, and with the gravity and seriousness of a
     primitive priest. . . .

     "He always placed the elements of bread and wine upon the altar
     himself, after he had received them either from the churchwarden or
     clerk, or had taken them from some convenient place, where they were
     laid for that purpose. His constant practice was, to offer them upon
     the holy table, in the first place, in conformity to the practice of
     the ancient Church, before he began the communion service; and this
     the rubric, after the offertory, seemeth to require of all her
     priests, by declaring, 'That when there is a Communion, the priest
     shall then place upon the Table so much Bread and Wine as he shall
     think sufficient.' "--pp. 52, 53. (ed. Burton.)]

     Let us bless and praise GOD for these His great mercies, and make a
     good use of them. Let us constantly resort to the prayers of our
     Church, and neglect no opportunity of receiving the holy
     Sacrament.--Works, vol. i. pp. 328--334. 343, 4.

                   ID.--Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

     But, alas! these superadded articles of the Trent creed are so far
     from being certain truth, that they are most of them manifest
     untruths, yea, gross and dangerous errors. To make this appear, I
     shall not refuse the pains of examining some of the chief of them.

     The first article I shall take notice of is this; "I profess, that
     in the Mass is offered to GOD, a true, proper, and propitiatory
     Sacrifice for the living and the dead; and that in the most holy
     Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is truly, and really, and
     substantially the Body and Blood, together with the soul and
     divinity of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; and that there is wrought a
     conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the body, and of
     the whole substance of the wine into the blood, which conversion the
     Catholic Church calls transubstantiation." Where this proposition,
     ("That in the Mass there is offered to GOD a true, proper, and
     propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead,") having that
     other of the substantial presence of the Body and Blood of CHRIST in
     the Eucharist," immediately annexed to it, the meaning of it must
     necessarily be this, that in the Eucharist the very Body and Blood
     of CHRIST are again offered up to GOD as a propitiatory Sacrifice
     for the sins of men. Which is an impious proposition, derogatory to
     the one full satisfaction of CHRIST made by His death on the Cross,
     and contrary to express Scripture, Heb. vii. 27; ix. 12. 25, 26. 28.
     and x. 12. 14. It is true the Eucharist is frequently called by the
     ancient fathers prosfora, qusia, an "oblation," a "sacrifice." But
     it is to be remembered, that they say also it is qusia logikh kai
     anaimaktoV, a "reasonable Sacrifice," a "Sacrifice without blood"
     which, how can it be said to be, if therein the very Blood of CHRIST
     were offered up to GOD?

     They held the Eucharist to be a commemorative Sacrifice, and so do
     we. This is the constant language of the ancient Liturgies, "We
     offer by way of commemoration;" according to our SAVIOUR'S words
     when He ordained this holy rite, "Do this in commemoration of me."
     In the Eucharist, then, CHRIST is offered, not hypostatically, as
     the Trent fathers have determined, (for so HE was but once offered,)
     but commemoratively only; and this commemoration is made to GOD the
     FATHER, and is not a bare remembering, or putting ourselves in mind
     of Him. For every Sacrifice is directed to GOD, and the oblations
     therein made, whatsoever it be, hath Him for its object and not man.
     In the holy Eucharist, therefore, we set before GOD the bread and
     wine, as "figures or images of the precious Blood of CHRIST shed for
     us, and of His precious Body," (they are the very words of the
     Clementine Liturgy,) and plead to GOD the merit of His SON'S
     Sacrifice once offered on the Cross for us sinners, and in this
     Sacrament represented, beseeching Him for the sake thereof to bestow
     His heavenly blessings on us.

     To conclude this matter: the ancients held the oblation of the
     Eucharist to be answerable in some respects to the legal Sacrifices;
     that is, they believed that our blessed SAVIOUR ordained the
     Sacrament of the Eucharist as a rite of prayer and praise to GOD,
     instead of the manifold and bloody Sacrifices of the law. That the
     legal Sacrifices were rites to invocate GOD by, is evident from many
     texts of Scripture, see especially 1 Sam. vii. 9; and xiii. 12; Ezra
     vi. 10; Prov. xv. 8. And that they were also rites for praising GOD
     for His mercies, appears from 2 Chron. xxix. 27. Instead, therefore,
     of slaying of beasts, and burning of incense, whereby they praised
     GOD, and called upon His name, under the Old Testament; the Fathers,
     I say, believed our SAVIOUR appointed this Sacrament of bread and
     wine, as a rite whereby to give thanks and make supplication to His
     FATHER in His name. This you may see fully cleared and proved by the
     learned Mr. Mede, in his treatise entitled, "The Christian
     Sacrifice." The Eucharistical Sacrifice, thus explained, is indeed
     logikhn qusia, a "reasonable Sacrifice," widely different from that
     monstrous Sacrifice of the Mass taught in the Church of Rome.

     The other branch of the article is concerning transubstantiation,
     wherein the ecclesiastic professeth upon his solemn oath his belief,
     that in the Eucharist "there is made a conversion of the whole
     substance of the bread into the body, and of the whole substance of
     the wine into the blood of CHRIST:" a proposition that bids defiance
     to all the reason and sense of mankind; nor (God be praised) hath it
     any ground or foundation in divine revelation. Nay, the text of
     Scripture, on which the Church of Rome builds this article, duly
     considered, utterly subverts and overthrows it. She grounds it upon
     the words of the institution of the holy Sacrament by our SAVIOUR,
     the same night wherein He was betrayed; when He took bread and brake
     it, and gave it to His disciples, saying, "This is my body," to
     didomenon, saith St. Luke, [xxii. 19.] to klwmenon, saith St. Paul,
     [1 Cor. xi. 24.] "which is given and broken for you." After the same
     manner He took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them,
     saying, "Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood of the New
     Testament, to ekcunomenon, which is shed for many for the remission
     of sins." Now whatsoever our SAVIOUR said was undoubtedly true: but
     these words could not be true in a proper sense; for our SAVIOUR'S
     body was not then given or broken, but whole and inviolate; nor was
     there one drop of His blood yet shed. The words, therefore, must
     necessarily be understood in a figurative sense; and then, what
     becomes of the doctrine of transubstantiation? The meaning of our
     SAVIOUR is plainly this: What I now do, is a representation of My
     death and passion near approaching; and what I now do, do ye
     hereafter;--"do this in remembrance of Me;"--let this be a standing,
     perpetual ordinance in My Church, to the end of the world; let My
     death be thus communicated and shown forth till I come to judgment.
     See 1 Cor. xi. 26.

     As little foundation hath this doctrine of transubstantiation in the
     ancient Church, as appears sufficiently from what hath been already
     said, concerning the notion then universally received of the
     Eucharistical Sacrifice, It was then believed to be an anamnhsiV, or
     "commemoration," by the symbols of bread and wine, of the Body and
     Blood of CHRIST, once offered up to GOD on the Cross for our
     redemption; it could not, therefore, be then thought an offering up
     again to GOD of the very Body and Blood of CHRIST, substantially
     present under the appearance of bread and wine; for these two
     notions are inconsistent, and cannot stand together. The ancient
     doctors, yea, and Liturgies of the Church, affirm the Eucharist to
     be incruentum sacrificium, "a Sacrifice without blood;" which it
     cannot be said to be, if the very blood of CHRIST were therein
     present and offered up to GOD. In the Clementine Liturgy, the bread
     and wine in the Eucharist are said to be antitypa, "correspondent
     types," figures, and images of the precious Body and Blood of
     CHRIST. And divers others of the fathers speak in the same plain
     language. Fid. Greg. Naz. Apol. Orat. 1. tom. 1. Cyril. Hierosol. 5.
     Cat. Myst. Ambros. de Sacrament, lib. iv. cap. 4.--Vol.ii. p.
     2.50--255.

     STILLINGFLEET, BISHOP.--Conferences concerning the Idolatry of the
                               Church of Rome.

     P. D... . We have all the reason in the world to commemorate, with
     great thankfulness and devotion, that invaluable Sacrifice of the
     Cross; and if you will call the whole Eucharistical office a
     commemorative Sacrifice, as the ancients did, I shall never quarrel
     with you about it. But how the Sacrifice of the Mass comes to be
     propitiatory as the Sacrifice on the Cross was, I understand not. .
     . .

     R. P. But what makes Dr. Stillingfleet so bitter against the
     Sacrifice of the Altar, since the most true and genuine sons of the
     Church of England do allow it? as Mr. Thorndike, Dr. Heylin, and
     Bishop Andrews? And doth not this rather look like betraying the
     Church of England than defending it?

     P. D. 1. Mr. Thorndike, as I have showed already, declares against
     the "true proper Sacrifice" defined by the Counoil of Trent, as an
     innovation and contradiction. And that which he pleads for is, "that
     the Eucharist is a commemorative and representative Sacrifice,"
     about which Dr. Stillingfleet would never contend with him or any
     one else; and immediately after the words cited by T. G. he adds
     these; "It is therefore, enough, that the Eucharist is the Sacrifice
     of CHRIST on the Cross, as the Sacrifice of CHRIST on the Cross is
     represented, renewed, revived, and restored by it, and as every
     representation is said to be the same thing with that which it
     representeth."

     2. Peter Heylin's words are expressly only for a "commemorative
     Sacrifice," as T. G. himself produces them, and, therefore, I wonder
     what T. G. meant in citing them at large; for he quotes the English
     Liturgy for the "Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving;" and St.
     Chrysostom calling it "the remembrance of a Sacrifice;" and many of
     our learned writers, "a commemorative Sacrifice." What is there in
     all this in the least repugnant to what Dr. Stillingfleet had
     delivered?

     R. P. But he quotes Bishop Andrews, saying, "Take from the Mass your
     transubstantiation, and we will have no difference with you about
     the Sacrifice."

     P. D. Bishop Andrews calls the Eucharist a "commemorative
     Sacrifice," and he saith, "it was properly Eucharistical, or of the
     nature of peace-offerings, concerning which the law was, that he
     that offered should partake of them;" and a little after follow
     those words you mention; to which he adds, "We yield you that there
     is a remembrance of CHRIST'S Sacrifice; but we shall never yield
     that your CHRIST being made of bread is there sacrificed." Which is
     the very thing that T. G. is so angry with Dr. Stillingfleet about.
     And have not you bravely proved that Dr. Stillingfleet hath herein
     gone against the sense of the genuine sons of the Church of England
     1--Works, vol. vi. pp. 17G. 179.

       SMITH, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--Sermon on frequent Communion.

     They [the Fathers] did not, under a pretence of exalting the
     mystery, destroy the nature of a Sacrament, as now is done in the
     Roman Church. It must now, no longer, be a representative, but a
     "real propitiatory Sacrifice, for the living and for the dead." And
     CHRIST'S natural Body must be brought down from heaven upon a
     thousand altars at once, and there really broken and offered up
     again to GOD the FATHER, and His blood actually spilt a thousand
     times every day, and mixing itself with ours.--p. 19.

             BEVERIDGE, BISHOP.--Private Thoughts upon Religion.

     And, as Baptism thus comes in the place of the Jews' Circumcision,
     so doth our LORD'S Supper answer to their Passover. Their Paschal
     Lamb represented our SAVIOUR CHRIST, and the sacrificing of it, the
     shedding of His Blood upon the Cross, and as the Passover was the
     memorial of the Israelites' redemption from Egypt's bondage, Ex.
     xii. 14. so is the LORD'S Supper the memorial of our redemption from
     the slavery of sin, and assertion into Christian liberty; or,
     rather, it is a solemn and lively representation of the death of
     CHRIST, and offering it again to GOD, as an atonement for sin, and
     reconciliation to His favour.

     So that I believe this Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper, under the
     Gospel, succeeds to the rite of sacrificing under the law, and is
     properly called the Christian Sacrifice, as representing the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross.--p. 124.

          ID.--Great Necessity and Advantage of frequent Communion.

     "For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show
     the LORD'S death till He come."--1 Cor. xi. 26.

     In which words we may first observe, that every time that the
     Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper is administered, His death is thereby
     shown and declared to all that are there present. As, when the Jews
     ate the Paschal Lamb, the master of the family declared the reasons
     why they ate it with bitter herbs, and why with unleavened bread,
     and the like; so here, when we eat the bread, and drink the cup,
     according to CHRIST'S institution, we thereby declare the reasons of
     it, though not by words, yet by the very act itself, and the several
     circumstances of it. By the breaking of the bread, we declare
     CHRIST'S Body to be broken and wounded to death; by the cup we
     declare His Blood to be shed, or poured out for the sins of the
     world: and by distributing both the bread and cup to each
     communicant apart, we declare to every one, particularly, that
     CHRIST died for his sins, and that he may be saved by CHRIST'S
     death, if he will but receive and apply it to himself, as he ought,
     by a. quick and lively faith.

     In the next place we may here observe, that the Apostle doth not
     say, that CHRIST'S death is repeated, or that He is offered up again
     every time this Sacrament is administered, but only that the LORD'S
     death is shown by it. And, therefore, that this is not, as the
     Papists absurdly imagine, a "propitiatory Sacrifice for the living
     and the dead," but only commemorative and declarative of that one
     Sacrifice, which CHRIST once offered to be a propitiation for the
     sins of the whole world.--pp. 3, 4.

     Again, we may from hence observe, that this was no temporary
     institution, which was to continue only for some time, but to the
     end of the world; or, as the Apostle here expresses it, "till He,"
     our LORD and SAVIOUR, "come." As, from the beginning of the world,
     as often as they offered, according to its first institution, any
     bloody Sacrifice to GOD, they thereby foreshewed the death of
     CHRIST, typified by it, until His first coming into the world to
     save it; so, since that time, "as often as we eat this bread, and
     drink this cup," according to CHRIST'S own institution, "we shew
     forth His death" all along, until His second coming into the world
     to judge it.--pp. 5, 6.

     And, verily, to remember CHRIST and His death, is a thing of far
     greater consequence than people are commonly aware of. The people of
     GOD, under the law, by His own appointment, had it typified and
     represented to them every day in the year, by having two lambs
     offered up for a burnt offering, the one in the morning, and the
     other in the evening, as a type of that "Lamb of GOD which taketh
     away the sin of the world," Exod. xxix. 38. Numb, xxviii. 8. John i.
     29. These were offered every clay, besides the sin-offerings,
     peace-offerings, trespass-offerings, and such like as were offered
     up on particular occasions. Wherefore, these two lambs were called
     the "continual burnt-offering," as being continually offered every
     day in the week. And upon the Sabbath-day there were two more added,
     Numb, xxviii. 9; so that, upon every Sabbath-day in the year, there
     were four lambs offered, that they might be sure, at least upon that
     day, to think upon that grand Sacrifice which was to be offered up
     for them. And it may not be amiss to observe, that every one of
     those lambs had a meat and a drink offering to attend it; a
     meat-offering made of flour, and a drink-offering of wine: which are
     both the same elements which CHRIST Himself instituted, to signify
     His Body and Blood. And besides the burnt-offerings, meat-offerings,
     and drink-offerings, every Sabbath-day, the high priest was to set
     the shewbread upon the holy table, and to put frankincense thereon;
     which was to continue there before the LORD till the next Sabbath,
     when the Priests had eat the bread, and burnt the frankincense "for
     a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the LORD," Lev. ii.
     4, 5. 9, &c. Exod, xxv. 30. All which, as most things in the
     Levitical law, had, doubtless, some respect or other to CHRIST, as
     is intimated in the law itself, where it is said, that this shall be
     done by an "everlasting covenant," Lev. xxiv. 8, even that which is
     founded in CHRIST. The bread, consisting of twelve loaves or cakes
     (according to the number of the tribes of Israel, and of CHRIST'S
     Apostles), was set upon the table in two rows; which might put us in
     mind of the two natures in CHRIST, "the bread of life which came
     down from heaven," John vi. 33. 35. In Hebrew this is called "the
     bread of the face," because it was to be set before the face of GOD
     continually, Exod. xxv. 30, as CHRIST "continually appeareth in the
     presence of GOD for us," Heb. ix. 24. Upon this bread was laid pure
     frankincense, called in Hebrew [], olibanum, from its whiteness; by
     reason whereof it was used in Sacrifices, as a symbol of GOD'S
     pardoning sin, as it was likewise of His acceptance of what was
     done, by the sweet scent it made when burnt. This was laid upon the
     bread, to be to it for a memorial, as the Hebrew words signify, to
     call to remembrance the offering made by fire unto the LORD; that
     is, the death of CHRIST, typified by all such offerings. The bread
     was to be eaten, not burnt; but the pure frankincense that was laid
     upon it, was to be burnt, and by its sweet smell call to mind the
     death of CHRIST, by virtue whereof GOD smells a sweet savour, and
     accepts of the Sacrifices and services we offer and perform to Him,
     1 Pet. ii. 5. And all this was to be done, the bread to be eaten,
     the frankincense burnt, and new put in their places every
     Sabbath-day throughout the year: that upon that day especially men
     might be put in mind of their SAVIOUR, and accordingly act their
     faith on Him, for their pardon and acceptance with GOD.

     There were many such ways, whereby the people of GOD, in those days,
     were constantly put in mind of what the SAVIOUR of the world was to
     do, and suffer for them. All which are now laid aside, and only this
     one Sacrament of His last supper, instituted by Himself, in the room
     of them. This is now our Christian shewbread, whereby we "shew the
     LORD'S death till He come." This is our burnt-offering, our
     sin-offering, our trespass-offering, our thank-offering, our
     meat-offering, our drink-offering, and all the offerings required of
     us, whereby to commemorate our blessed SAVIOUR, and what He hath
     done for us; and, therefore, as the Jews were punctual and constant
     in observing all things prescribed to them, for the same end we
     certainly ought to do this as often as we can; this one thing, which
     answers the end of all their offerings, and yet hath neither the
     trouble, nor the charges, nor the difficulty of any one of
     them,--pp. 19--23.

                      ID.--Church Catechism explained.

     When our ever blessed Redeemer instituted the Sacrament of His last
     Supper, He said, "This do in remembrance of Me." Luke xxiii. 19. 1
     Cor. xi. 24. Whereby He laid His command upon His Apostles there
     present, and, in them, upon His Church in all ages, that they should
     continue this His holy institution in remembrance of Him, or of that
     death which He was the next day to suffer for the sins of the world;
     and that they should do it all along until His coming again. As we
     learn also from His Apostle, saying, "As often as ye eat this bread,
     and drink this cup, ye do show the LORD'S death till He come," 1
     Cor. xi. 26.

     This, therefore, is to be always done, for the continual remembrance
     of His death, as it was a Sacrifice for the sins of the world;
     therefore called here, "the Sacrifice of the death of CHRIST.". . .

     And therefore His death was not only a true and proper Sacrifice,
     but the only true and proper Sacrifice for sin, that was ever
     offered up in the world. For, His being offered up for the sins of
     the whole world, there was no sin for which any other need or could
     be offered up. Or if there had been, no other could have taken it
     away: "for it is not possible that the blood of bulls and goats
     should take away sins," Heb. x. 4. Yet such only were all the
     "Sacrifices," as they were called, under the Law. Which, therefore,
     were not real expiatory Sacrifices in themselves, but only types and
     shadows, appointed by GOD to foreshow, typify, and represent "the
     Sacrifice of the death of CHRIST" then to come.

     And in like manner, the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper is now
     ordained by Him, to set forth and commemorate the same Sacrifice as
     now already offered up for the sins of mankind. Which, therefore, is
     necessary to be continued to the end, as the typical sacrifices were
     from the beginning of the world.--pp. 138, 9.

             ID.--Sermon VIII. Christianity an holy Priesthood.

     But in every temple of the LORD, it is necessary that there be
     likewise a priesthood to offer Sacrifices suitable to such a temple.
     And so there is here: for the Apostle having said [1 Pet. ii. 5.]
     that the Saints are a "spiritual house," or temple, he adds, that
     they are also an "holy priesthood," . . . ordained to "offer up
     spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to GOD by JESUS CHRIST."

     For the understanding of which words, it will be necessary to
     consider what Sacrifices they are which the Saints offer up to GOD;
     wherefore they are called spiritual Sacrifices; and that these
     spiritual Sacrifices are acceptable to GOD by JESUS CHRIST.

     First, therefore, a Sacrifice in general is properly something that
     we give or offer to GOD for our own. For though we have nothing but
     what He first gives to us, yet when He hath given it to us, we have
     a civil right to it; it is our own in respect of all other men: but
     when we give it back again to GOD, divesting ourselves of our own
     right to it, and transferring it wholly to Him, then He looks upon
     it as a Sacrifice offered up to Him, and is pleased to accept of it
     as such. Under the law, GOD commanded that oxen, and sheep, and
     lambs, and such like living creatures, should be offered up in
     Sacrifice to Him; which, being killed by a priest, were consumed,
     either by fire upon the altar, or else by those who waited at it and
     so were fed as it were at GOD'S table, of such things as were
     offered to Him. But these Sacrifices being ordained only to foreshow
     and typify the "Lamb of GOD that taketh away the sins of the world,"
     they ceased in course, when He had offered up Himself a Sacrifice
     for our sins upon the Cross. But now under the Gospel other kinds of
     Sacrifices are required of us: we are now commanded to "present our
     bodies as a living Sacrifice," Rom. xii. 1. not to kill them, but to
     offer them up alive, as a "living Sacrifice," by devoting ourselves
     wholly to the service of GOD.

     Hence all manner of good, pious, and charitable works, that are done
     in obedience to GOD, and for His service and honour, are now called
     "Sacrifices" . . . But sacrificing in general, being a public owning
     of GOD and His sovereignty over the world, whereby we openly testify
     our acknowledgment and belief, that He is the Almighty Creator,
     Possessor, and Governor of all things, and that we are obliged to
     Him for all the blessings we enjoy; therefore, by the Sacrifices
     which are here said to be offered by the holy priesthood here spoken
     of in my text, such duties seem to be more especially understood,
     whereby we now set forth the glory of GOD, by joining together, in
     making our public profession of our dependance upon Him, and our
     manifold obligations to Him.

     Particularly our open or public praying to Him, and to Him alone,
     for all the good things that we want. For hereby we plainly
     discover, that we believe Him to be the Author and Giver of "every
     good and perfect gift." . . . And therefore, under the law itself,
     their public prayers always went along with their daily Sacrifices
     both morning and evening, and were performed at the same time, even
     while the lamb was roasting upon the altar: and this was itself also
     reckoned as a Sacrifice offered up to GOD. "Let my prayer," saith
     David, "be set forth before Thee as incense, and the lifting up of
     my hands as an evening Sacrifice," Psal. cxli. 2.

     Especially considering that prayer always was, and ought to be
     accompanied with praise and thanksgiving to GOD, which is so
     properly a Sacrifice, that it is often called by that name. "I will
     offer," saith David, "to Thee the Sacrifice of thanksgiving," Psal.
     cxvi. 17. "And let them sacrifice the Sacrifices of thanksgiving,
     and declare His works with rejoicing or singing," Psal. cvii. 22.

     But the Sacrifice that is most proper and peculiar to the Gospel is
     the Sacrament of our LORD'S Supper, instituted by our LORD Himself
     to succeed all the bloody Sacrifices in the Mosaic law.

     For though we cannot say, as some absurdly do, that this is such a
     Sacrifice whereby Christ is again offered up to GOD, both for the
     living and the dead; yet it may as properly be called a Sacrifice as
     any that was ever offered, except that which was offered by CHRIST
     Himself: for His, indeed, was the only true expiatory Sacrifice that
     was ever offered. Those under the law were only types of His, and
     were called Sacrifices only upon that account, because they typified
     and represented that which He was to offer for the sins of the
     world. And therefore the Sacrament of CHRIST'S Body and Blood may as
     well be called by that name as they were. They were typical, and
     this is a commemorative Sacrifice. They foreshowed the death of
     CHRIST to come; this shows forth His death already past. "For as
     often," saith the Apostle, "as ye eat this bread, and drink this
     cup, ye do show the LORD'S death till He come," 1 Cor. xi. 26. This
     is properly our Christian Sacrifice, which neither Jews nor Gentiles
     can have any share in, as the Apostle observes; "We have an altar
     whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the tabernacle;" Heb.
     xiii. 10. an altar, where we partake of the great Sacrifice, which
     the eternal Son of GOD offered up for the sins of the whole world,
     and ours among the rest; that ALMIGHTY GOD may be reconciled to us,
     and receive us again into His love and favour, and make us happy in
     the enjoyment of it for ever. Which is so great a blessing, that
     they who really mind their own good and welfare can no more forbear
     to partake of this Sacrament, when they may, than they can forbear
     to eat when they are hungry and have meat before them.

     These are those spiritual Sacrifices which the holy Priesthood, or
     whole body of Saints, offer up to GOD. The Apostle calls them
     "spiritual," in opposition to those carnal Sacrifices that were
     offered by the Levitical priesthood; and because they are of a
     spiritual nature, and performed in a spiritual manner, being offered
     up in the spirits of the Saints as well as bodies; and by the Spirit
     of GOD Himself, dwelling in them, and so consecrating them "a
     spiritual house, an holy priesthood," and enabling them to offer up
     these Sacrifices in the name of CHRIST; and through the merits of
     that Sacrifice which He hath offered up for them; according to that
     of the Apostle in the place before quoted, "By Him, therefore, let
     us offer up the Sacrifice of praise to GOD continually."

    ID.--Codex Canonum Eccles. Prim. vindicatus ac illustratus. Lib. ii.
                              cap. x. §§ 3, 4.

     But greater difficulty, perchance, will arise in regard to the words
     qusiasthrion, "altar," for the table of the LORD, Can. Apost. iii.
     iv. xxi. qusia, "Sacrifice," and prosfora, "oblation," for the
     celebration of the Eucharist, Can. iii. viii. xlvi. It may indeed,
     perhaps, appear so to others, but not to us, who continually find
     these and such like names used concerning these things, in the most
     ancient monuments of the Church. St. Cyprian is wont to designate
     the table of the LORD by no other name, so far as I recollect, save
     that of "altar;" but by that, very often......Before him, Tertullian
     called both the celebration of the Eucharist a "Sacrifice," and the
     LORD'S table "the altar of GOD." . . . Before Tertullian, Ignatius
     himself, in his genuine and uncorrupted epistles, used qusiasthrion
     in the same sense--"If any one be not within the altar, he is
     deprived of the bread of GOD." Ignat. Ep. ad Ephes. and elsewhere:
     "For there is one flesh of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and one cup, in
     the unity of His Blood; one Altar, as there is one Bishop, together
     with the Presbytery and Deacons, my fellow-servants." Id. Ep ad
     Philadelph.

     It is plain, therefore, that the mystical table was, from the very
     times of the Apostles, called qusiasthrion, but not bwmoV. For this
     word is peculiar to Gentiles and idolaters, exclusively; that, to
     ecclesiastical writers; nor is it ever used except of an altar which
     is raised to the true GOD. Hence it is that Origen, Minutius Felix,
     Arnobius, and others, often asserted that Christians had no bwmouV,
     no altars of idols; as also no temples, that is to say, no shrines
     of deities, such as all the temples of the heathen were, or were
     thought to be. But they nowhere assert that they have not
     qusiasthria, that is to say, "altars" of that kind which served for
     the mystical offering of the Body and Blood of CHRIST. For that
     "altars" of this kind were always in use among Christians, is clear
     from what has been said above. And, indeed, that word qusiasthrion,
     or "altar," in a proper sense, is nothing else than agia trapeza, "a
     table consecrated to GOD," or a "holy table," unto which GOD invites
     His faithful people, and makes them partakers of that great
     Sacrifice, which His Only Begotten Son offered for the human race.
     Whence also this same holy action or celebration of the Eucharist is
     often called qusia and prosfora, a "Sacrifice" and "oblation," as is
     clear not only from Tertullian above quoted, but also from other
     commentaries of the same century and that preceding. For so
     Irenaeus. "But CHRIST, giving direction to His disciples to offer
     unto GOD the first fruits of His creatures," &c.... Iren. adv.
     Haereses, lib. iv. cap. 32. and elsewhere. ... In truth, the holy
     Eucharist is a kind of foederal feast, (such as were also the
     ancient Sacrifices) between GOD and men. For men first offer to GOD
     bread and wine, which creatures, offered to Him and consecrated to
     be symbols of the great Sacrifice accomplished by CHRIST, GOD
     imparts again to men: by which means they by faith in very deed
     partake of the great Sacrifice of CHRIST. And, therefore, this great
     mystery can be expressed by no other word more fitly and fully than
     by those qusia, prosfora, "Sacrifice," "oblation," and the like. By
     which words, accordingly, it is called by Justin Martyr also ....
     Dial. cum Tryph. In which book the words qusia and prosfora are
     often used in this sense, namely, for the Eucharist. And, before
     him, Clement of Rome:--"We ought," saith he, "to do all things in
     order, whatsoever the LORD commanded us to perform, performing the
     oblations and liturgies at the appointed times;" and a little
     after,--"they, therefore, who make their oblations at the appointed
     times, are acceptable and blessed." Clem. Ep. i. ad Corinth. Whence
     it is clear that the celebration of the holy Eucharist is called
     qusia and prosfora, and the mystic table, accordingly, whereon it
     was celebrated, qusiasthrion, from the very infancy of the Church.
     And therefore it need not seem wonderful to any, that these words
     are used in that sense in these Canons, which were put forth some
     years later.

    HOOPER, (GEORGE) BISHOP.--Christian Ordinances derived from the Jews.

     I come next to the other Sacrament of our LORD'S Supper, which He
     was pleased to institute at a Paschal Supper; and to borrow thence
     its provisions, the bread and wine.

     The Paschal Lamb was a Sacrifice of a peculiar compounded nature. As
     it was to be roasted with fire, it had something of a
     burnt-offering, and might seem to be expiatory; as it was then, when
     the blood of it was sprinkled upon their doors at the first
     institution. By the same blood it was federal also, the children of
     Israel entering by it into a New Covenant. And as it was to be eaten
     all that night, or burnt with fire, and none left to the morning; so
     it seemed to be as an offering for thanksgiving. Now answerable to
     the kind of the Sacrifice, was the Supper for which it was prepared.
     It was a festival entertainment for joy of the great deliverance:
     but it was to be eaten with unleavened bread and with bitter herbs,
     as memorials of their former afflictions.--p. 204.

     Now to this account the history of our SAVIOUR'S Paschal Supper
     agrees. ... These are the particular correspondencies between the
     Paschal and the LORD'S Supper: and there was, too, another general
     one in their nature; as they were both of them to be memorials of a
     former bloody Atonement; feasts of present joy and thanks, but not
     without some afflictive remembrance for the past.

     Here, therefore, it appears, and from the relation of the Scripture,
     that our LORD thought fit to raise his other Sacrament likewise out
     of festival commemoration, which the Jews were commanded to keep for
     their old deliverance. And hereafter it will appear further, by the
     construction the primitive Church made, that our SAVIOUR, in the
     institution of His feast, did not consider only that single annual
     solemnity of theirs, but their other more frequent sacrificial
     entertainments of praise and thanksgiving.--pp. 206, 7.

     The Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper has plainly appeared to be raised
     by our SAVIOUR from a Paschal supper.--p. 240.

     The sacramental action, as hath been said, was celebrated after the
     morning prayer, beginning with the oblation of bread and wine....
     For those creatures they blessed GOD the FATHER, through JESUS
     CHRIST, and then, after some prayers and hymns, He is invoked to
     send down His Holy Spirit on the offered bread and wine, to sanctify
     it, and that it may become to the worthy receivers the Body and
     Blood of His Son: after which, it was distributed by the Deacons to
     the people, and sent also to the absent.

     This was the Christian practice undoubtedly in the primitive Church;
     nor does it want a Jewish pattern. Our SAVIOUR, as it hath been
     premised, took occasion, from the Paschal memorial of the redemption
     of Israel out of their Egyptian slavery, to institute a
     commemoration of a new and far greater deliverance of all mankind
     from the eternal bondage of Satan and hell. And, whereas it has been
     observed that the first Paschal Lamb of the Jews was a Sacrifice of
     a mixed, extraordinary nature, being in part propitiatory, in part
     federal, and partly Eucharistical; it is likewise manifest, that the
     Sacrifice of our SAVIOUR was also of an eminent extraordinary kind.
     It was a Sacrifice for sin, taken in the most strict acception,
     being perfectly expiatory: it was also federal; for in that Blood
     the New Testament or Covenant was made; and, in that same respect,
     it was in some sort an offering of peace; obtaining not only pardon,
     but favour for men. And further, as the succeeding Paschal
     Sacrifices, though commemoratory of the first, yet varied something
     from it; being chiefly of an Eucharistical nature, and not performed
     with the same ceremony; (for neither was the blood sprinkled upon
     the doors of the offerers, neither was the Lamb eaten with their
     staves in their hands, and in a travelling posture;) so it is not to
     be wondered if the succeeding commemorations of our LORD'S
     Sacrifice, though it was chiefly expiatory, were Eucharistical, and
     differing also from the manner in which the first was celebrated by
     our LORD Himself.--pp. 211, 2.

     This, therefore, seems to have been the construction of the
     primitive Christians, that the Sacrament of our LORD'S Body and
     Blood answered to the Jewish Sacrifices of thanks.--p. 243.

     For, 1st, The name which the ancients gave this Sacrament, seems to
     speak them of the same opinion. For they not only speak of it as of
     a "Sacrifice" and "oblation" at large; but call it determinately and
     expressly the Eucharist, that is, the "thanks" or "praise-offering,"
     as by its proper name; the sacramental bread and wine being as much
     known by that style with Christians, as the "bread of the Eucharist"
     or "praise" was with the Jews. 2ndly, The leavened bread they always
     chose to use, as it evidently declares that there was no further
     regard to the Paschal Sacrifice, so it seems to import a just
     correspondence with those of the Eucharistical kind, in which
     leavened bread was singularly required. And, lastly, the bread,
     which was to represent, and in some manner to become, the Body of
     our LORD, did not unfitly succeed in the place of that "bread of
     thanks," which had been made use of before to stand for the flesh of
     an Eucharistical Sacrifice, and to make up the whole. . . .--p. 246.

     Now, as this feast of our LORD was Eucharistical, so we suppose it
     was celebrated in a suitable manner. . . .

     And so, when afterwards the Sacrament and Supper were divided,
     (about the time, I presume, when the legal Sacrifices were going to
     cease,) the Christian Eucharistical oblation, as the primitive
     Church speaks, began then more distinctly to appear, and was made
     after morning prayer, just as extraordinary Sacrifices, with the
     Jews, were offered after the morning daily Sacrifice: and as, under
     the law, what of the Eucharistical Sacrifice was offered at the
     Altar, the Muram, belonged to the Priest, so that part which had
     been offered by the Christian Priest, being more especially sacred,
     and his portion, was eaten in the morning sacramentally from his
     hands; the congregation being, as it were, his family; while the
     other residual part was kept for the provision of the Love-feast, to
     be held in the evening, its accustomed time.--p. 247.

     It sufficiently appears, I presume, that the Sacrament of the Body
     and Blood of our LORD was understood by the ancient Christians to be
     in the nature of an Eucharistical (not of a propitiatory) Sacrifice
     with the Jews. But, further, that this kind of Sacrifice only should
     remain, when all the rest should cease; this also is consonant to
     the tradition of the Jews, as Kimchi tells us. For, upon this saying
     of the Prophet, (Jer. xxxiii. 11.) that there should be "heard again
     in Jerusalem the voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice
     of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them
     that shall say, Praise the LORD of Hosts, for the LORD is good, for
     His mercy endureth for ever, [and] of them that shall bring [the
     Sacrifice of] praise [or thanks] into the house of the LORD:" he
     comments on the last words in this manner; "The Prophet says not
     that they shall bring sin-offerings, or trespass-offerings; because
     in that day there would be no wicked nor sinners among them: for (as
     he before told them) they should all know the LORD. And so have our
     Masters of blessed memory told us, that in the time to come all
     Sacrifices should cease, except the Sacrifice of thanksgiving."

     This saying of the Masters of Israel is a great truth, and better
     understood by Christians, who . . . know that the Sacrifices for sin
     are not ceased by the ceasing of sin, but superseded by the
     Sacrifice made for them by their LORD and High Priest; and that the
     "Sacrifice of thanksgiving," they are thenceforth to make, is the
     commemoration their LORD has instituted, for that their most
     gracious redemption. This is the Sacrifice of that New Covenant of
     which the Prophet there speaks, and which the author of the Epistle
     to the Hebrews from him alleges. And to this Sacrifice the same
     author, I suppose, refers, when he says, "We have an Altar, whereof
     they have no right to eat, who serve the tabernacle;" for they eat
     not of the oblation made for their sins, as we do of our blessed
     SAVIOUR; "by whom [by whose Body, and in whose Name] we offer the
     Sacrifice of praise [thanksgiving] to GOD continually, that is, the
     fruit [or oblation] of our lips, [or, which our lips have vowed to
     return, as well as what we do return with our lips,] ceasing not to
     do good, and to distribute, [both out of our oblations, and the rest
     of our substance,] for with such sacrifices [such offerings of our
     praise and goods in the general, and at the Eucharist in particular]
     GOD is well pleased."--pp. 248, 9.

      DODWELL, CONFESSOR.--Discourse concerning the one Altar, and one
                                 Priesthood.

     The unity of the Catholic Church, in opposition to the separate
     conventicles of schismatics, is (in the language of the most ancient
     and accurate writers against schism, especially Ignatius and St.
     Cyprian, from whom later antiquity has received the same terms)
     expressed as grounded on the unity of the priest and the altar. In
     which way of reasoning they conclude, that they who partake at the
     same altar, and of the same mystical Sacrifices offered thereon, and
     receive their portions of this sacrificial feast from the ministry
     of the same priest, whose office it is to offer those mystical
     Sacrifices on that same altar, that they, and they alone, are to be
     judged to belong to the same society, confederated by those
     Sacrifices.--pp. 1, 2.

     First, therefore, I observe, that this way of reasoning for unity
     from one altar and one priest, was not first taken up in the later
     ages of the Church, but deduced from the nearest and freshest memory
     of the Apostles.--p. 14.

     Even these very terms are mystically applied to Christianity by
     authors of Ignatius's age, who, notwithstanding, wrote before him;
     and particularly so applied when they had occasion to reason from
     the Levitical patterns to deduce obligations under the Christian
     religion. Thus Clemens Romanus reasons to the Corinthians. . . .

     Yet not St. Clemens only . . . but the Apostle himself allows and
     observes the same reasoning, and in the very same instances for
     which I am at present concerned of priest and altar. So he argues
     for the right of maintenance, that "they who minister about holy
     things, live of the things of the temple; and they which wait at the
     altar are partakers with the altar:" that "even so hath the LORD
     ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
     Gospel." Plainly supposing that our clergy answers the Levitical
     priesthood, our Churches their temple, our Communion table their
     altar: and that what was thought equal in their case in the
     provisions of the Old Testament, is for that very reason to be taken
     for ordained in the case of the Gospel ministry. . . . But . . the
     Apostle . . . allows a higher obligation to this way of arguing from
     the precedent of the Levitical priesthood. He reasons from the
     Aaronical to the Melchizedechian priesthood, from the priesthood of
     mortal men to the immortal priesthood of the SON of GOD. "No man
     took the honour" of the Levitical priesthood "unto himself, but he
     that was called of GOD, as was Aaron. So also CHRIST glorified not
     Himself to be made an High Priest," &c. And "every high priest is
     ordained to offer gifts and Sacrifices. Wherefore it is of necessity
     that this man have somewhat also to offer." And as none had right to
     eat of the Jewish altar but Israelites, so when he is to prove that
     literal Israelitism is not the Israelitism that can challenge
     privileges, he does it by this argument, that "we have an altar,
     whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle."

     Thus customary it was, in those earlier times, to reason from
     Levitical precedents in these very instances.--pp. 21--24.

     Thirdly, therefore, as this way of reasoning from Jewish precedents
     is solid in general, and solid in these very instances of priest and
     altar; so it holds particularly in such inferences as these are, for
     which they are produced by the ancients concerning unity;--That, as
     the one priest and the one altar were the characterisms of unity in
     the Jewish constitution, so that priesthood and altar among the
     Christians, which was shadowed by the Jewish priesthood and altar,
     ought now also, by the same parity of reason, to be taken for the
     characters of Christian unity.--pp. 28, 9.

     For as it was not to be doubted, that GOD designed unity for the
     mystical as well as the literal Israel, so He would, certainly, have
     been more express in the signification of His mind, if He had
     intended any change in the principles of this unity. But seeing
     there appears not the least intimation of such a design, seeing He
     was pleased to continue a mystical priesthood, and a mystical altar,
     in the mystical as well as the literal Israel, who would not thence
     conclude, that He intended the mystical priesthood and altar should
     still be the principles of unity to the mystical Israel, as the
     literal priesthood and altar had formerly been to the literal? And
     seeing the very terms of "priest" and "altar" were not the proper
     language of the New Testament, why should they be used at all, but
     only to signify that they were equivalent, under the New Testament,
     with those things which had properly borne their names under the
     Old, and were to perform the same office?--pp. 35, 6.

     But that which more nearly concerns the design of this present way
     of reasoning is, that these Sacrifices and this high priesthood of
     the Gospel were mystical; and so mystical as not only to signify,
     but also to perform what was, according to the sense of those times,
     to be expected from mysteries.. . . And this also they did believe,
     and had not reason to believe themselves mistaken in believing so,
     that the Eucharist was the mystical Sacrifice, performing the same
     thing under the Gospel as the external bloody Sacrifices under the
     law; . . . And therefore, the public Sacrifices being . . . designed
     as ceremonies of admission to a league and covenant and intimate
     union with GOD, such a kind of Sacrifice was requisite to be
     asserted to our mystical Israelitism, as might engage GOD in
     covenant with us, and admit us to a mystical union with Him.

     This therefore being granted, it was also further plain that this
     mystical Sacrifice was to be expected by positive prescription of
     GOD Himself, and therefore must be found among the positive
     prescriptions of the Gospel. For no external rites could either
     oblige GOD, or unite the worshippers to Him by any natural efficacy
     of the things themselves, and therefore what efficacy soever they
     were conceived to have, must wholly be derived from the divine
     pleasure and appointment, which it is withal impossible for us to
     know without positive and express revelation.--pp. 296--299.

     If, therefore, we can only expect these mystical evangelical
     Sacrifices among the positive institutions of the Gospel, the
     inquiry then cannot be difficult. There are but two institutions of
     this kind pretended, and whether of these was more probably intended
     to supply the office of Sacrifices will easily be known by the
     analogy they bear to the Sacrifices then received. That which came
     nearest them was, in all likelihood, intended by GOD Himself to
     supply their use in this new institution. And this will then be best
     known, if we first remember what kind of Sacrifices were granted by
     the Christians to be really useful, and, therefore, of eternal
     obligation, even under the state of mystical Israelitism. It is
     certain they thought some Sacrifices designed by GOD Himself as
     temporary; and what they thought so, they could not think themselves
     obliged to continue. Now, what they thought so, will best appear by
     these reasonings against the Jews on this very subject concerning
     Sacrifices. Therein they show, that it was "impossible that the
     blood of bulls and goats" could be available for "the expiation of
     sin;" which reasoning does indeed proceed against expiatory
     Sacrifices, such of them especially as were to be of the blood of
     brutes, and needed repetition; which the Apostle makes an argument
     of the imperfection, not only of such Sacrifices themselves, but of
     the dispensation also which was provided of no better Sacrifices;
     and for that reason concludes them not agreeable to the dignity of
     the Gospel. But in Eucharistical Sacrifices no expiation was
     pretended to be made, but only a return of acknowledgments for
     favours received, and among them was the Liba, the meat offering and
     the drink offering, which indeed seems to have been most proper to
     such Sacrifices, almost exactly answering our Eucharist. These are
     the Sacrifices which are there approved where the other Sacrifices
     are rejected, the qusia ainesewV in Psalm 1. 14. In these, no sins
     were commemorated, and therefore they must needs have been thought
     most agreeable with a state of perfect expiation. These are common
     to a perfect as well as an imperfect condition, and, therefore, more
     likely to be of eternal use, and not antiquated with the temporary
     shadows of the law. And, which comes more exactly home to my design,
     these were, according to the customs of all nations who admitted any
     Sacrifices, used on such occasions, when good news were brought
     them, they did quein ta euaggelia, and therefore extremely suitable
     to the very title of the Gospel as an euaggelion, the very Word
     taken up by the Christians from the Hellenistical version of the Old
     Testament, and thence derived by the Apostle himself, in the Epistle
     to the Romans.--pp. 302--304.

     Accordingly I am very apt to think that this is indeed the true
     original of the name of Eucharist as applied by the primitive
     Christians to this very Sacrament, that they intended thereby to
     signify, that this was, among them, to perform the office of a
     "Sacrifice of thanksgiving." The very name was thus commonly applied
     to the bread itself in the time of S. Justin Martyr. So he tells us
     expressly--kai h trofh auth kaleitai par hmin eucaristia. And this
     is indeed a more natural account than that which is there alluded to
     by that blessed person, as if it were called so from the eucaristia,
     the thanksgiving and blessing that was used over it in the Office of
     Consecration.--pp. 305, 6.

     Thus far the Christians might have been led into the substitution of
     the Eucharist as the proper evangelical Sacrifice, even from the
     popular received notions of the Hellenists concerning Sacrifices.
     But yet, in this reasoning from the Old Testament prefigurations
     even of evangelical Sacrifices, they might yet justify a further
     change from the common usages as designed by GOD Himself in that
     sacrifice which He intended should last for ever. Thus, having shown
     that CHRIST'S priesthood was not after the order of Aaron, but a new
     order, that of Melchisedec, to which perpetuity was expressly
     appointed by the Psalmist, the same reasoning would then hold for an
     alteration in the Sacrifice which is used expressly by the Apostle
     himself to prove an alteration of the Covenant. If there be any
     difference, it would rather be here that the reasoning proceeds more
     strongly in the former case. For the notion of Sacrifice is more
     intrinsically involved in the very notion of a priest, who has no
     other relation to a covenant than that of a Mediator, nor mediates
     any otherwise than as the Covenant itself was entered into by such
     Sacrifices wherein it was his office to preside. As, therefore, his
     concernment in Sacrifice is fundamental to his concernment in the
     covenant, so also the change of the covenant must necessarily
     suppose a change in the Sacrifice as antecedent to it. And this
     would bring the reasoning yet more close to the materials of our
     Christian Sacrifice) as consisting of the very elements of bread and
     wine. For if our SAVIOUR'S Priesthood was to be of the order of
     Melchisedec, then His Sacrifice must also be of the same kind as
     those of Melchisedec. And if we may again reason concerning the
     Sacrifice of Melchisedec from what is mentioned concerning it in the
     story, as the Apostle concludes his being without father, or mother,
     or genealogy, or beginning of days, or end of life, because the
     history of Genesis mentions neither his father, nor mother, nor
     genealogy, &c. then, for the same reason, we may conclude that he
     had no other Sacrifice but that of bread and wine, because no other
     is mentioned in that place. Which inference will the rather hold,
     because of the connexion of that action with the mention of his
     priesthood. So it is in the text, "Melchisedec, king of Salem,
     brought forth bread and wine; and he was the priest of the most high
     GOD." The vulgar reads it, erat enim, with a causal particle. And
     unless some such thing be understood, it will not be easy to give
     any tolerable account of the pertinency and connexion of the former
     part of the verse with the latter. For what relation could his
     bringing forth bread and wine have with his priesthood, if not as
     the proper Sacrifice which concerned him as a priest? Why should
     this mystical priesthood be mentioned as a precedent of a future
     priesthood, (as it was supposed to be by those who used this
     reasoning,) unless it were also known what Sacrifice was to be
     proper to him, seeing that, in the same reasoning, it was also
     granted that every priest ought to have something to offer?--pp.
     307--309.

     It hence appears, how naturally this reasoning, so agreeable to the
     principles then granted by the Christians, does proceed on this
     supposition, that the Eucharist was their mystical Sacrifice. I
     might now proceed to show, that not only the reasoning, but the
     conclusion itself, was also owned by them, that they did own the
     continuance of sacrifices under the times of Christianity, and
     particularly that they took the Eucharist for the Sacrifice proper
     to those times, if this had not been a common place usually debated
     between us and the Romanists, where our writers, and our Church too,
     do usually grant as much as I am concerned for, that it is indeed an
     Eucharistical Sacrifice, and that this is the true sense of those
     passages of antiquity which are produced for this purpose. And I
     have shown that their principles of reasoning were against the
     repetition of propitiatory Sacrifices, which is that which is denied
     by our writers. I am unwilling to enlarge on things already commonly
     observed, especially when what I am concerned for is already granted
     me on all hands, as it is here. I only observe now that this
     particular reasoning is the reasoning of St. Cyprian.... I mention
     this the more particularly, because St. Cyprian is our principal
     author in the whole argument from one priesthood and one altar, that
     the reader may see how accurately what is said concerning it, is
     agreeable to his mind. Now these things being put together, that
     this whole reasoning, both premises and conclusion too, were owned
     by them, and that they were withal taken up from such originals as
     could not fail them, it plainly follows, that the whole reasoning
     was solid, as urged against the ancient schismatics, at least as to
     this particular, that the Eucharist is a mystical Sacrifice.--pp.
     311--313.

      HICKES, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR.--The Christian Priesthood asserted.

     The new Covenant is better than the old, and the house of CHRIST
     much more excellent than that of Moses, in as much as the Christian
     is the full improvement and perfection of the Mosaic religion and
     worship; and therefore it would be strange if either the Liturgical
     ministrations of the Christian worship for men should be less holy,
     or pertain less to GOD for them, than those of the Jewish Church; or
     the Christian Liturgies, or ministers, should either not at all be
     priests, or priests in a less proper sense than those of the
     Levitical order and institution, who were ministers by fire and
     immolation under the first Testament. . . . For as there have been
     different churches and religions, so there have been different rites
     and services in them; and vet the ministers of those different holy
     rites and services for the people to their GOD, have all been
     counted priests, as agreeing in the common notion of priesthood,
     which is the function or office of a person separated or taken from
     men, and ordained proV to ierourgein or qeourgein, as human authors
     speak, to minister for the people in holy services pertaining to
     GOD.--pp. 25, 26.

     And therefore ... it is far from being true that Bishops and
     Presbyters are not proper priests, upon supposition that the
     Christian religion hath neither altar nor Sacrifice of any sort, as
     the Jewish neither now hath, nor formerly in the captivity had.

     I say, "upon supposition," which, for argument sake, I am willing to
     grant your "late writer," though in reality it hath both, as I now
     proceed to show, from the writings of the New Testament; and thereby
     prove that the ministers of CHRIST are so far from not being proper
     priests, that they are proper altar ministers, or sacrificing
     priests, ta erga ergazomenoi, as the Apostle calls the Jewish
     priests.--pp. 41, 2.

     I will begin with the twenty-third and twenty-fourth verses of the
     fifth chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel: "If thou bring thy gift," &c.
     The original word for "gift," is a sacrificial term of a general
     signification, and denotes a material Sacrifice, or offering of any
     sort, as may be seen in the margin, [Lev. i. 2, 3; ii. 17, &c.] and
     therefore it is to be taken here in that sense in which it is to be
     understood in Matt. viii. 4. "Show thyself to the priest, and offer
     the GIFT (or oblation) that Moses commanded." So in chap, xxiii. 18.
     "Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing, but whosoever
     sweareth by the GIFT that is upon it, he is guilty." . . . And as
     the primitive Church conceived this precept of reconciliation to be
     intended for a Gospel precept, so they always applied it to the
     Eucharist, as the Gospel Sacrifice, or oblation, not thinking (as
     Mr. Mede well observes) that our LORD would make a new law, or, let
     me add, enforce an old one concerning legal Sacrifices, which he was
     presently to abolish, but that it had reference to that oblation
     which was to be instituted by Him for the Gospel dispensation, and
     to continue with and under it for ever. Thus, in the Apost. Const
     ... St. Clement ... Irenaeus ... Tertullian ... St. Cyprian ...
     Eusebius ... Cyril of Jerusalem ... St. Chrysostom ... Jerome ...
     and Augustine...--pp. 42, 4--53.

     The next Scriptural proof which I shall produce in order, for the
     Eucharistical oblation of the bread and wine, is taken from the
     words of the institution, Matt. xxvi. 26. Mark xiv. 22. Luke xxii.
     19. recited by the Apostle in these words: "The LORD JESUS, in the
     same night that He was betrayed, took bread, and when He had given
     thanks, He brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is
     broken for you; this DO in remembrance of Me. After the same manner
     also He took the cup, when He supped, saying, This cup is the New
     Testament in my Blood; this DO ye, as oft as you drink it, in
     remembrance of Me." That the ancients believed that our LORD made an
     oblation of the bread and wine at His" institution of this
     Sacrament, and commanded His disciples so to do, is past all doubt,
     from the 63. Epist. of St. Cyprian to Cecilius. . . So in the
     Eucharistical Office, Const. Apost. . . The same may be proved from
     the testimony of Irenaeus. . .--pp. 53--56.

     It is plain from these testimonies, how the primitive Church
     understood the words of the institution of the LORD'S Supper, and
     what was their sense of them, which is very agreeable to the
     signification of the word poiein, which, in profane as well as
     sacred writers, signifies to "offer.".. . But more especially, it is
     so used in the Septuagint translation, which, all learned men know,
     is followed by the writers of the New Testament, even where they
     recite the words and speeches of our blessed SAVIOUR. In that
     translation of the Old Testament, poiein signifies the same as
     ieropoiein or ierourgein to "offer" or "sacrifice," as [ashh] does
     in the Hebrew, and FACERE in the Vulgar translation. So Exod. xxix.
     36. kai to moscarion POIHSEIS, &c. . .--p. 58.

     To these testimonies out of the Old Testament, to show that "do"
     signifies "offer," I think fit to add one more out of a Jewish
     Hellenistical writer, Baruch i. 10. ... The verb poiein, as I have
     elsewhere observed, is used for to "offer," in the New Testament as
     Heb. xi. 28. Pistei pepoihke to pasca . . . So 1 Tim. ii. poieisqai
     may very well be rendered "offered." "I exhort, therefore, that
     first of all prayers, &c. be offered for all men," as it is in the
     Syriac version.

     The verb poiein is also used in the Hellenistical sense, to signify
     "offer," in the Greek writers of the Church, particularly where they
     have occasion to speak of the holy Eucharist. We find it so used in
     St. Clement's first Epistle to the Corinthians, §. xi. . . In the
     same sense Justin Martyr useth the word. So in the Epistle which
     Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, wrote to Fabius, Bishop of Antioch. . .
     So St. Chrysostom upon the words of the institution, Matt. xxvi. .
     .--pp. 62, 3--65.

     According to this sacrificial signification of the verb poiein,
     facere, and in particular from the signification of it "to offer" in
     the Paschal Sacrifice, we may justly observe, that the words touto
     poieite, hoc facite, either relate to the whole action and
     ministration of the holy Eucharist, as [], in the Hebrew, and touto,
     in the Greek, relate to the whole service of the Passover, Exod.
     xii. 27; and then it proves the celebration of the LORD'S Supper,
     (in which the oblation of the bread and cup to GOD the FATHER was a
     principal part,) to be ieropoia or ierourgia, a sacrificial
     service:--or else they relate more especially to the bread and wine;
     and then, by a natural and easy interpretation, they may be
     translated thus: "Take, eat, this is my body, offer this in
     remembrance of Me;" and "This is my blood, offer this, as oft as ye
     shall drink it, in remembrance of Me." Either of these senses of
     touto poieite, hoc facite, give us a good account of the reason why
     the ancient fathers, treating of this mystery, affirm it to be the
     "oblation of the Church, which CHRIST appointed to be offered."--pp.
     67, 8.

     The next places of the New Testament from which I shall prove, that
     the Christian religion hath a Sacrifice, are those which imply, or
     express that it hath an altar. For if it hath a Sacrifice or
     oblation, as I have showed, then it must have an altar, at which to
     offer that oblation; and if it have an altar, as I am going to show,
     then it must have an oblation to be offered at, or upon it; and then
     by consequence, the ministers of the Gospel must be altar ministers,
     as well as offering priests. I will begin with that text, 1 Cor. ix.
     "Do ye not know, that they who minister about holy things live of
     the things of the temple, and they who wait at the altar are
     partakers with the altar". . .--p. 68.

     I should from hence return to Matt. v. 23. "When thou bringest thy
     gift to the altar," &c. But having said enough upon that place, I
     proceed to Heb. xiii. 10. where the Apostle saith expressly, "We
     have an altar whereof they have no right to eat who serve the
     tabernacle." In the original whereof is EX OU, which may be rendered
     in a literal and proper sense, EX QUO or DE QUO,--"of which," or
     "from which, they have no right to eat.". . . But because the
     generality of learned men have taken ALTAR here in the metonymical
     sense, for the altar-offering, as the Latin translation and ours
     take "temple" (1 Cor. ix. 13.) for the holy provision of the temple,
     I am therefore content to take it in the same sense; which will not
     in the least abate the force of my argument from the place; because,
     if altar there be put for the Sacrifice, or oblation of the altar,
     that metonymical use of the word proves the first and proper sense
     of it, as much as the use of trapeza in Greek, and mensa in the
     Latin tongue, for the meat or entertainment upon the table, proves
     it to be a "table" the primary, proper, literal sense.

     But, perhaps, sir, your "late writer" will say, the apostle doth not
     mean a proper material altar, upon which offerings were made, and
     then eaten, but an improper metaphorical altar, by way of allusion
     arid similitude; and so, sir, if he pleases, he may say the Apostle
     meant only an improper metaphorical High Priest, where he says in
     the same epistle, "We have a great High Priest," &c. . . The phrase
     is the same, ecomen qusiasthrion, and toiouton ecomen arcierea and
     ou gar ecomen arcierea mh dunamenon sumpaqhsai. . . And since the
     High Priest we have is a more proper High Priest than the Jewish
     high priest, who was but His shadow, it would be very arbitrary in
     him to assert that the altar we are said to have is not a proper
     altar, especially considering that the Jerusalem altar, for the
     reason hereafter given, is several times called "the table of the
     Lord;" in Malachi i. 7. 12. and Ezekiel xli. 22; xliv. 16. as the
     offerings upon it are called His "food," which He consumed by fire.
     And that the altar we are said to have is such an altar, of which,
     that is, of the Sacrifices of which, neither the priests who were
     ministers of the tabernacle, nor their people had any right to eat,
     but the Christian ministers and people have, the Apostle proves, by
     an argument taken from their own law. For if they could not eat of
     the Sacrifices of atonement and expiation, which prefigured the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross, how could they partake at the
     Christian altar, of the Christian Sacrifice, which was the mystical
     Flesh and Blood of CHRIST, by which the Sacrifice of Himself upon
     the Cross) was represented according to His own institution, under
     the new law, as it was under the old, by the Sacrifices of
     Expiation, whose bodies were burnt without the camp? . . . Here is
     altar answering to altar, and Sacrifice to Sacrifice; the Sacrifice,
     which was a figure of CHRIST'S Sacrifice upon the Cross, before His
     suffering, to that which is the figure of it after. . . . For the
     farther explication of which, it is to be observed, that, as the
     great altar at the temple of Jerusalem was so called, with respect
     to the Sacrifices which were offered there, but, with respect to the
     consumption of them upon it by fire, was called also the LORD'S
     table; so the LORD'S table, in Christian Churches, was considered in
     a double respect, first, with relation to the offering of the bread
     and wine upon it; and secondly, with relation to the consumption, or
     participation of them in the sacrificial feast at it; and as, in the
     latter respect, the Apostle called it the LORD'S table, so, in the
     former, it is an altar; and therefore the Apostle, by a usual
     metonymy of the "altar" for the Sacrifice of the altar, said, "We
     have an altar whereof they have no right to eat who serve at the
     tabernacle."--pp. 70--75.

     I hope I have now made it appear in this paragraph, that the
     Communion table, in respect of its different uses, is an "altar" as
     well as a "table;" an altar upon which the elements are presented,
     and offered up by the minister to GOD the FATHER, and a table at
     which, after they are consecrated into the symbols of CHRIST'S dead
     Body and Blood, they are consumed by the offerers in the holy
     sacrificial banquet.--p. 79.

     Having showed, from one place of the New Testament, that the
     ministers of CHRIST are proper altar ministers, because they
     minister at a proper altar, I now proceed to show, from another
     place, 1 Cor. x. 20, 21. that they offer Sacrifice, and by
     consequence that they are proper offering, or sacrificing priests.
     These are the words, "But the things which the Gentiles sacrifice,"
     &c. For the devils had their tables for their sacrificial feasts as
     well as the true GOD. And, I need not observe, that to "drink the
     cup of the LORD, and the cup of demons" or "devils," and to "be
     partakers of the LORD'S table and the table of devils," are
     metonymical expressions, which properly signify to drink of the wine
     offered to the LORD, and of the wine offered to devils, and to be
     partakers of the Sacrifices of the LORD'S table, or altar, and of
     the Sacrifices of the tables, or of the altars of devils. . . . For
     first, oblations or Sacrifices were offered to both; to the former,
     only upon the holy table altar, but to the latter both upon their
     altars and their tables. Secondly, it is plain those oblations to
     both were eaten by the offerers at tables. And thirdly, that the cup
     was offered at the LORD'S table, as well as at the table of devils;
     and by consequence, in the fourth place, that they were qutai or
     sacrificing Ministers, as Pollux calls Priests, who offered upon the
     LORD'S table, as idolatrous Priests did upon the altars or tables of
     the devils, and thence and there feasted their people in the name of
     their false gods. I say, the whole parallel between eating and
     drinking at the table of the LORD and the table of devils supposes,
     that they ate and drank of things which had been offered, and by
     consequence, that the Ministers of the LORD'S table, upon which the
     bread and wine were first solemnly offered, and then consumed in the
     sacrificial banquet, are sacrificing Priests; such as, in the ninth
     chap. 13th ver. of this Epistle, the Apostle, speaking of the Jewish
     Priests, calls ta iera ergazomenoi, tw qusiasthriw prosedreuonteV,
     sacra operantes, or sacra procurantes, altari deservientes, or
     altari operam dantes, "ministers about holy things" pertaining to
     GOD, "waiters at the altar;" without whom there could have been no
     Sacrifices or offerings, or any partaking of the offerings at the
     holy table, in which the act of communion doth consist.--pp. 80.
     85--87.

     From this I proceed to another place of the New Testament, to show
     that it is a Sacrifice, viz. Rom. xv. 15, 16. where, alluding to the
     ministration of the Christian Sacrifice. . . he said, ver. 15, 16,
     "Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly to you in
     some sort, as putting you in mind of the grace that is given to me
     of GOD, that I should be the Minister of JESUS CHRIST to the
     Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of GOD, that the offering up of the
     Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost."
     The words in the original for "the offering up of the Gentiles" are
     prosfora twn eqnwn, "the offering of the Gentiles," as the Eucharist
     is called by Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue Trypho. . . So Irenaeus.
     . . St. Cyprian. . . Const. Apost. . . Now if, according to this
     primitive notion of the Eucharist being the "Sacrifice of the
     Gentiles" in all places, prosfora twn eqnwn signified their offering
     or Sacrifice, not as offered, but as offerers, this text would be a
     direct and express proof. But although the ancients always spoke of
     the Eucharist as the Sacrifice, or oblation of the Gentiles, in
     opposition to those of the Jews, when they argued against them from
     the prophecy of Malachi, yet, because they understood the words of
     the Apostle for "the offering up of the Gentiles," I think we ought
     to take them in that sense. But then, I think that in mentioning
     that offering of his, as "being sanctified by the Holy Ghost," he
     plainly alludes to the ministration of the Christian Sacrifice, in
     which they solemnly prayed unto GOD "to send down His Holy Spirit
     upon the oblations." ... In the ancient Liturgies nothing is more
     common than the prayers of the Priest to GOD, to send down His Holy
     Spirit upon himself, and the communicants, and the oblations... . I
     cannot, from considering all this, but think it very probable that
     the Apostle alluded to the common notion the Christians had of the
     Eucharistical oblations being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, in
     saying that the oblation he made of the Gentiles, was "acceptable to
     GOD, being [like the Eucharistical bread and wine] sanctified by the
     Holy Ghost."--pp. 92--97.

     I believe no man in the world, that was of any religion where
     Sacrifice was used, and that by chance should see the Sacrament of
     the holy Eucharist administered among Christians, as it was
     administered in the primitive times, or as it is administered
     according to the order and usage of the Church of England, but would
     take the bread and wine for an offering or Sacrifice, and the whole
     action for a sacrificial ministration; and the eating and drinking
     of the holy elements for a sacrificial entertainment of the
     congregation at the table of their GOD. To see bread, and wine mixed
     with water, so solemnly brought to the table, and then a loaf of
     that bread and a cup of that wine brought by the Deacon in manner of
     an offering to the Liturg, or Minister, which lie also taking in his
     hands, as an offering, sets them with all reverence on the table;
     and, then, after solemn prayers of oblation and consecration, to see
     him take up the bread, and say, in a most solemn manner, "This is my
     Body," &c. and then the cup, saying as solemnly, "This is my Blood,"
     &c. and then to hear him, with all the powers of his soul, offer up
     praises, and glory, and thanksgiving, and prayers to GOD, the FATHER
     of all things, through the name of the Son, and Holy Spirit, which
     they beseech Him to send down upon the bread and cup, and the people
     with the greatest harmony and acclamation, saying aloud, "Amen;"
     after which also to see the Liturg first eat of the bread, and drink
     of the cup, and then the Deacon to carry about the blessed bread and
     wine, to be eaten and drunk by the people, as in a sacrificial
     feast; and lastly, to see and hear all concluded with psalms and
     hymns of praise, and prayers of intercession to GOD, with the
     highest "pomp-like celebrity" of words;--I say, to see and hear all
     this, would make an uninitiated heathen conclude that the bread and
     wine were an offering, the whole Eucharistical action a sacrificial
     mystery, the eating and drinking the sanctified elements a
     sacrificial banquet, and the Liturg who administered, a Priest. I
     have here used the term "sacrificial mystery," because there was no
     federal Sacrifice but what was a religious mystery, exhibiting one
     thing to the sense, and another to the understanding of the votist,
     or what was not an outward sign of an invisible inward grace of the
     GOD, true or believed to be true, to whom the Sacrifice was
     offered;--I say, every federal Sacrifice is an out-ward sign of an
     invisible grace, and by consequence is a mystery, or Sacrament; for
     "Sacrament" in the Latin Church, from which we borrowed the word,
     signifies the same, as "mystery" in the Greek; and, therefore, the
     Eucharistical Sacrifice is also a Sacrament, or, to speak more
     properly of it, it is a Christian Sacrament or mystery, as a federal
     commemorative Sacrifice, in which as CHRIST represents unto GOD His
     Passion and the merits of it, as our High Priest in heaven, so, in
     this Sacrifice, the Priests upon earth, in conjunction with it,
     present and commemorate the same unto Him, by setting before Him the
     symbols of His dead Body and Blood effused for our sins.

     I speak this to let the reformed world see, that they need not be
     afraid of believing the holy Eucharist to be a proper Sacrifice, or
     offering, in which the bread and wine are offered in a proper and
     literal sense; and that by consequence the ministers of it are,
     properly and literally speaking, "offering Priests," as the
     primitive Christians, and all Churches before the Reformation taught
     and believed. For the holy Eucharist is so very like a Sacrifice, or
     sacrificial mystery, in all its rites and manner of ministration,
     that if it be not a Sacrifice, no man can well tell what the common
     notion of a Sacrifice is, or easily distinguish it from the nature
     of any Sacrifice, upon which the votists used to feast in the
     temple, and at the altar of their GOD. The primitive Christians, who
     were as afraid of idolatry as any of the Protestants, were so far
     from not having this notion of it, or being afraid to own it as
     such, that, as they believed Melchisedec was a type of CHRIST, so
     they believed the bread and wine, which he brought to Abraham, when
     he blessed him, to have been a type of this commemorative Sacrifice
     by bread and wine, which CHRIST instituted for His Church. They
     believed it to be that mincha purum, that "pure offering" foretold
     by the Prophet Malachi, which should be offered in every place, and
     not in one, as among the Jews, unto the name of GOD among the
     Gentiles, from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the
     same.--pp. 103--109.

     But to return to the Christian oblation, or Sacrifice in the holy
     Eucharist, I cannot but observe, that the "offering" of the bread
     and wine was of old esteemed so special a part of that most holy
     service, that the administration of the holy Communion, and the
     Communion itself, was signified by prosferein, and prosfora in the
     Greek, and by offerre, and oblatio in the Latin Church.--p. 113.

     In the second place, I cannot but observe, that the ancient Church
     made a plain and accurate distinction between the oblation of bread
     and wine upon the altar in the Eucharist, and the oblation of other
     things thereupon--p. 115.

     But thirdly, it is evident from one argument, which the orthodox
     Fathers used in the second Council of Nice, against the worship of
     images, that the bread and wine were solemnly offered in the
     Eucharist, and that the oblation of them was esteemed a Sacrifice of
     Divine institution. That argument was to this purpose, viz. that the
     Catholic Church of us Christians agreed with the Jewish and Gentile
     religion, being a medium between both, as having a new mystical
     Sacrifice instituted by GOD, but without the rites and ceremonies of
     either, not admitting the bloody Sacrifices and burnt-offerings of
     Judaism, and abhorring the idols and idol-worship in the Sacrifices
     of Gentilism, which was the author and inventor of that abominable
     art (of making and worshipping idols).... From this way of reasoning
     against the use of images in divine worship, it is plain, that these
     holy Fathers thought the Christians had a Sacrifice of Divine
     institution, though not a bloody Sacrifice, as the Jews had, nor
     polluted with image-worship, after the manner of the Gentiles, but a
     pure unbloody Sacrifice in the holy Eucharist, which was a medium of
     negation from both, as being neither a bloody nor an idololatrical
     oblation.

     In the fourth place, the ancients asserted that Melchisedec, who was
     the type of CHRIST, offered bread and wine; and that the bread and
     wine which he offered, prefigured the oblation of it in the
     Eucharist. . . And as they believed that Melchisedec first offered
     the bread and wine, with which he entertained Abraham; so they
     taught, as I have already showed from many authorities, that CHRIST,
     the antitypal Melchisedec, as really offered bread and wine to the
     Father at the institution of the holy Eucharist. From those and
     other authorities cited in this letter, it is plain, that the bread
     and wine were really offered in the Eucharist, and were, in the
     opinion of the ancient Church, as properly an external material
     oblation in that pure unbloody Sacrifice, as any other thing could
     be that was offered by any priest upon the altar of any god.

     Indeed there were two oblations of the elements in the Eucharist;
     one before the consecration, in which they were presented to GOD the
     FATHER upon the altar, as the first-fruits of His creatures, to
     acknowledge Him for our sovereign LORD and Benefactor; the other at
     the consecration, when they were offered to Him as the symbols of
     CHRIST'S Body and Blood, or as the mystical Body and Blood of
     CHRIST, to represent that oblation He made of both upon the Cross,
     and to obtain the benefits of His death and passion; who, by the
     oblation of Himself once so offered, made a full and perfect
     satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.

     These two oblations are distinguishable in Justin Martyr's short
     account of the celebration of the Eucharist: the first at the
     offering of the bread, and the cup of water and wine, "which," saith
     he, "the Bishop (or Priest) receiving, offers up (ainon kai doxan)
     praise and glory to GOD the Father of all things, through the name
     of His Son and the Holy Spirit; and also offers up thanksgiving for
     deeming us worthy of these His creatures". . . . This long action of
     praise and thanksgiving may be seen at large in Const. Apost. lib.
     viii. cap. 12, ... Then after a short introduction, in which are the
     words of the institution, follows the second oblation of the
     elements, beginning at Memnhmenoi oun wn di hmaV upemeinen, &c.
     which I shall hereafter transcribe. This second Eucharistical
     oblation, in which the elements were offered as the mystical Body
     and Blood of CHRIST, and wherein they prayed GOD the FATHER
     graciously to accept them, is implied by Justin in the word eucaV,
     in the sentence next to that which I have cited,--"when the Bishop
     (or Priest) hath finished the prayers, all the people present
     conclude with an audible voice, saying, Amen." These two forms of
     oblation of the bread and wine, though then in one continued prayer,
     are plainly distinguished by St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Catechis.
     Mystag. V. where the first is described § iv. v., and the latter in
     § vi., and the description of them in both places exactly agrees
     with the large account of ministering the holy Sacrament in the
     Apost. Const, cited above: and they are also to be found in all the
     ancient Liturgies. In our present Liturgy, the first oblation is
     made in the beginning of the Prayer for the whole state of CHRIST'S
     Church, immediately after the Priest hath placed the bread and wine
     upon the table, in these words, "Almighty and everliving GOD ... we
     humbly beseech Thee to accept our alms and oblations." And the
     latter is made, in substance, and according to the intention of the
     Church, in the Prayer of Consecration to GOD the Father, where,
     after the commemoration of CHRIST'S offering Himself upon the Cross,
     and His institution of the perpetual memorial of His precious death,
     GOD the FATHER is implored to hear us, while, according to the same
     institution, we receive His creatures of bread and wine, in
     remembrance of His Son our SAVIOUR'S death and passion: and then,
     while the Priest recites the words of the institution, he is to take
     the bread into his hands and break it; and at the words, "This is My
     Body," to lay his hand upon all the bread: and at the words, "He
     took the cup," he is to take the chalice into his hands; and at the
     words, "This is My Blood of the New Testament," &c. he is to lay his
     hand upon every vessel, in which there is wine to be consecrated.
     These are the solemn rites which attend "our Sacrifice of praise and
     thanksgiving," (as it is truly called in the Prayer of the
     Post-Communion,) at the consecration, as the placing the bread and
     wine upon the table by the priest in order to be consecrated by him
     is also to be observed. And, therefore, those Bishops and Priests
     who can satisfy their consciences in the total neglect of this rite,
     may as well satisfy them in the total omission of the other; and
     then take upon them to say, as some lately have done, that "the
     general neglect of the clergy to observe them, vacates them;" a way
     of arguing, which were it true, might vacate all the other rules and
     rubrics of the Church.

     But to return to the Christian oblation or Sacrifice; the next
     argument I shall produce to prove that the bread and wine were
     really offered in the holy Communion, is taken from the primitive
     manner of the administration of it, as set forth in the viiith Book
     of the Apost. Const, cited in the last paragraph. In this liturgical
     account of the holy Sacrament we read, that the catechumens and
     audients, &c. being gone out of the Church, the Deacon began the
     office of the holy Eucharist, with that general admonition,--"Let
     none that is not in charity, let no hypocrite come hither." After
     pronouncing these admonitions, he said,'--" In sincerity towards our
     LORD, let us, standing, offer, with fear and trembling '" which
     being done, (saith the rubric, for so I call the direction,)--"let
     the Deacons bring the offerings unto the altar to the Bishop." Then
     the Bishop, standing in his priestly robes before the altar, began
     the Sacramental Office with this blessing: "The grace of ALMIGHTY
     GOD, and the love of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the communication of
     the Holy Spirit, be with you all." To which the people answered,
     "And with thy spirit." Then the Bishop, "Lift up your hearts:" to
     which the people: "We lift them up unto the LORD." Then the Bishop,
     "Let us give thanks unto our LORD:" to which the people, "Axion kai
     dikaion, "It is meet and right," &c. Then the Bishop, "It is truly
     meet and right," &c. And then after a long and noble hymn of praise
     and glory to GOD the FATHER, and the SON, abbreviated in after-ages,
     in which is the hymn Ter Sanctus, and after an introduction, in
     which die words of the institution are recited, he proceeds to the
     Consecration, the most special part of the sacrificial action,
     beginning with the Prayer of Oblation, in the words which follow;
     Memnhmenoi toinun. ..."Wherefore, remembering His passion, and
     death, and resurrection from the dead, and His return (ascension)
     into heaven, and His second appearance, in which He will come in
     glory and power, to judge the living and the dead, and to reward
     every one according to their works: We offer this bread, and this
     cup to Thee, (our) King and GOD, according to His institution;
     giving thanks to Thee through Him, that Thou hast thought us worthy
     to stand in Thy presence, and execute the priest's office to Thee;
     and we beseech Thee, that Thou wouldest look with complacency on
     these offerings lying before Thee, O GOD, who standest in need of
     nothing, that Thou wouldest accept them for the honour of Thy
     CHRIST, and send Thy Holy Spirit, the witness of the sufferings of
     our LORD JESUS CHRIST, upon this Sacrifice, that He may (make) show
     forth this bread to be the Body of Thy CHRIST, and this cup to be
     Thy CHRIST'S Blood, that the partakers thereof may be confirmed in
     godliness, &c. . . . Thou, O LORD ALMIGHTY, being reconciled to
     them. Furthermore, we pray unto Thee for Thy holy Church, dispersed
     from one end of the world to the other, which thou hast purchased
     with the precious Blood of Thy CHRIST, that Thou wouldest preserve
     it unshaken and unmolested, to the end of the world. (We pray)
     likewise for the whole episcopate, rightly dividing the word of
     truth. We pray also for my worthless self, who am making this
     oblation, and for all the Presbyters, for the Deacons, and the
     Clergy, that Thou wouldest instruct them, and fill them with the
     Holy Spirit. Furthermore, O LORD, we offer unto Thee for the
     Emperor," &c.

     This is as plain a description of a Sacrifice, and a sacrificial
     action, as is in any author sacred or profane; and mutatis mutandis
     may be said of any Sacrifice offered upon any altar, or to any god.
     And we find the Bishop, in the xiiith chapter, saying, "Let us also
     pray unto GOD, through His CHRIST, for the offering which has been
     offered to the LORD GOD, that our merciful GOD, through the
     mediation of His CHRIST, would receive it up unto His holy, heavenly
     altar, for a sweet smelling savour." In the same chapter, the rubric
     calls the consecrated bread to be distributed, "the offering."
     Answerably to all which, in the lviith chapter of the 2d book, in a
     short account of the manner of administering the holy Sacrament, the
     administration of it is called "the oblation of the Eucharist." "Let
     some of the Deacons attend to the oblation of the Eucharist,
     ministering to the Body of the LORD with fear, and let others look
     after the congregation, and enjoin them silence. . . . After this,
     let the Deacon pray for the universal Church, &c. Then let the
     Bishop, having given the peace of GOD to the people, bless them, as
     Moses commanded the priests, and praying, say: 'The LORD bless thee
     and keep thee.' After this, let the Sacrifice be done (offered) all
     the people standing and praying in silence; and when it is offered
     up, let every order by itself orderly partake of the LORD'S Body,
     and precious Blood with reverence and fear."

     This account of the Eucharistical service is, as I have before
     observed, most agreeable to the accounts we have of it, and of the
     administration thereof, both in the first apology of Justin Martyr,
     and also, to the doctrine of it in his dialogue with Trypho, and I
     do not doubt, but it is most conformable to the primitive and
     apostolical form. And now let any candid reader judge, whether the
     bread and wine are not the [DWRA] "offerings," in a proper literal
     sense, which were brought by the Deacons to the altar unto the
     Bishop, that he might place them on the holy table, to be
     consecrated in the service of the holy Eucharist; the [PROKEIMENA
     DWRA] proper material "offerings," that lay upon the altar, and upon
     which the Bishop prayed GOD to look down in mercy; the "offerings,"
     of which the Bishop or priest only was the "offerer;" the
     "offerings," which he took in his hands, and offered in the name of
     the people; the "offerings," of which God has no need, the
     "offerings," or the [QUSIAN] "Sacrifice," upon which he prays GOD to
     send down His Holy Spirit, that it might show forth the bread to be
     the Body, and the cup, the Blood, to the receivers: lastly, the
     "offerings," of which the Oblation and Consecration was called the
     "Sacrifice," and of which they said in the ancient Offices, Sancta
     sanctis, and Tibi ex tuis offerimus. And if all this be true, then
     let the reader also judge, whether the celebration of the holy
     Eucharist was not a sacrificial action or administration, and the
     bread and wine, the materials of that Sacrifice, which were first
     presented, and then by solemn consecration offered up unto GOD, and,
     last of all, distributed to the faithful, for the favour of GOD, the
     remission of their sins, the benefit both of their bodies and souls,
     the confirmation and increase of their faith, and preserving of them
     in all godliness, and unto the life of the world to come. In a word,
     it is evident, that according to the ancient Church, the bread and
     wine were the matter which the people brought, and the Bishop
     received, to be spent or consumed in the celebration of the
     Eucharist; the matter which the Bishop solemnly offered up to GOD by
     consecration, for the heavenly banquet of the LORD'S Supper; and
     which, as they were, in the literal sense, a proper, external,
     material offering or Sacrifice, which succeeded in the place of the
     legal Sacrifices, so, in the Sacramental or mystical, they were the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST, of which they were the representatives,
     and whereof the one was broken with wounds, and the other shed upon
     the Cross. To this Liturgical testimony in the Apost. Const. I shall
     . . . produce the testimonies of the ancient Liturgies, which
     suppose the Eucharist to be a Sacrifice, in which the bread and wine
     were solemnly offered in a proper literal sense, by prayer and
     thanksgiving to GOD.

     I begin with the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom, of which there are two
     editions . . . both which begin with this secret prayer of the
     priests, in the beginning of the ministration; "Send down, O LORD,
     Thy assistance from Thy holy habitation, and strengthen me in Thy
     service, which I am going to perform, that I may stand, without
     blame, before Thy tremendous altar, and minister the unbloody
     Sacrifice," &c. So in the prayer at the proqesiV, or table where the
     people's oblations of bread and wine were set, before they were
     brought to the altar; "of Thy goodness and love for mankind,
     remember those who have offered, and those for whom they have
     offered." ... So in the prayer after the oblations are placed upon
     the altar; "O LORD GOD ALMIGHTY, who only art holy, and who
     receivest the Sacrifice of praise from those who call upon Thee with
     their whole heart, receive the prayer of us sinners, and bring it to
     Thy holy altar, and make us worthy to offer up these gifts and
     spiritual Sacrifices for our sins and the errors of the people, and
     grant we may find grace in Thy sight, to have this our Sacrifice
     made acceptable to Thee." Then after the Sursum corda, and the
     "Prayer of thanksgiving," mentioned by Justin Martyr, and the words
     of the institution, the priest saith, as in the Consecration before
     cited, out of the Apost. Const. "Wherefore, remembering this
     salutary commandment, and all the things that are done for us, His
     death, burial, resurrection on the third day, His ascension into
     heaven, His sitting at thy right hand, and His second and glorious
     coming, we offer Thy own [gifts or creatures] unto Thee. We also
     offer up unto Thee this reasonable and unbloody Sacrifice, and we
     pray and beseech Thee to send down Thy Holy Spirit upon us, and upon
     these gifts. Amen."...

     So in the Liturgy of St. Basil, in the prayer at the Prothesis, upon
     which the oblations were set; "Bless this table, and the oblations
     thereupon, and receive them up unto Thy altar in the highest
     heavens; and, of Thy goodness and love towards men, remember the
     offerers, and those for whom they have offered". . . So in the
     prayer of the priest, after the offerings are set on the holy table
     or altar; "May it please Thee, O LORD, as we are ministers of the
     New Testament and Liturgs of Thy holy mysteries, according to the
     multitude of Thy mercies, to receive us, who are approaching to Thy
     holy altar; that we may be worthy to offer unto Thee this reasonable
     and unbloody Sacrifice for our sins, and the errors of the people,
     which Thou having received up for a sweet savour to Thy holy and
     intellectual altar, send down for it the grace of Thy Holy Spirit
     upon us. Look upon us, O LORD, and upon this our Sacrifice, and
     receive it, as Thou didst receive the oblations of Abel; the
     Sacrifices of Noah; the holocausts of Abraham; the
     consecration-offerings of Moses and Aaron; the peace-offerings of
     Samuel; even as Thou didst receive this Eucharistical oblation, the
     verity of them, from thy holy Apostles:--let us stand as becomes us,
     with reverence, and take heed that we offer this holy offering in
     peace. Wherefore, most holy LORD, ... we approach to Thy holy altar,
     and having set [thereupon] the figures [or symbols] of the holy
     Body, and Blood of Thy CHRIST, we pray and beseech Thee, O Most
     Holy, by the pleasure of Thy goodness, that Thy Holy Spirit may come
     upon us, and upon these gifts lying before Thee, to bless them, and
     sanctify them, and make them the Body and Blood of CHRIST." . . .

     I could add more such passages out of this Eucharistical Office, but
     because they are the same with those in that of St. Chrysostom, or
     almost the same, I thought fit to pass over them, and proceed to the
     other Greek Liturgies. ... I shall begin with the Liturgy of St.
     James ', i. e. of the Church of Jerusalem, of which he was the first
     Bishop. There, in the beginning of the Sacramental Office, the
     priest prays, "O ALMIGHTY GOD, who gives us access to the holy of
     holies; . .. fearing and trembling to approach Thy holy altar, we
     implore Thy goodness: Send down Thy grace upon us, and sanctify our
     souls, bodies, and spirits, ... that we may offer these gifts,
     presents, and Sacrifices, with a pure conscience," &c. 'O iereuV
     eisagwn ta agia dwra, &c. "The priest who brings in the holy gifts
     shall say this prayer: 'O episkeyamenoV, &c. O LORD, who hast
     visited us in mercy and pity, and given us poor sinners, and Thine
     unworthy servants, leave to come unto thy holy altar, and offer this
     tremendous and unbloody Sacrifice for our sins, &c. . . . And of Thy
     goodness receive me, who approach to Thy altar, and grant that these
     gifts, offered by my hands, may be made acceptable to Thee," &c. And
     then in the Prayer of Consecration, Memnhmenoi oun, &c. "We sinners,
     therefore, being mindful of His sufferings, offer unto Thee, O LORD,
     this tremendous and unbloody Sacrifice; Have mercy upon us, O LORD,
     and send down Thy most Holy Spirit upon these gifts which are set
     before Thee, that, descending upon them," &c.

     So in the Liturgy of St. Mark, or the Church of Alexandria, at the
     beginning of the Oblation: "O LORD our GOD, who art our Sovereign
     LORD, . . . who hast made all things by Thy Wisdom, the true Light,
     Thy Only Begotten Son, our LORD and GOD and only SAVIOUR JESUS
     CHRIST, through whom, giving thanks to Thee, and with Thy Holy
     Spirit, we offer this reasonable and unbloody Sacrifice, which all
     nations offer up unto Thee from the rising of the sun unto the
     setting thereof, from the North to the South, because great is Thy
     name among all people, and incense, and Sacrifice, and oblation, is
     offered unto Thee in every place. Kai doV hmin merida, &c. And grant
     that we may have our part and lot with all Thy Saints, who bring
     unto Thee sacrificial oblations. And, O GOD, receive up these
     Eucharistical gifts into Thy heavenly and intellectual altar, Kurie,
     &c. . . . O LORD our GOD, we have set what are Thine of Thy own
     gifts before Thee; and we pray," &c. . . .

     So in the Liturgy of St. Peter, that is, of the Latin Liturgy of the
     Church of Rome, translated into Greek; Qusian, Kurie, Soi, &c. "O
     LORD, sanctify this Sacrifice, which is to be offered to Thee, and
     receive us graciously, &c. Se toinun, &c. We therefore pray, and
     beseech Thee most merciful FATHER, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
     that Thou wouldest please to accept and bless these gifts, this
     oblation, this holy and pure Sacrifice, which we offer up to Thee in
     the first place for Thy holy Catholic Apostolic Church, Tauthn
     toinun thn prosforan, &c. O LORD, we beseech Thee, mercifully to
     receive this offering of our [bounden duty and] service which we
     offer to Thee. . . . Thy own of Thy own; this pure Sacrifice, this
     holy Sacrifice, this spotless Sacrifice, this holy bread of eternal
     life and cup of everlasting salvation, we offer of Thy gifts and
     benefits unto Thee, upon which we beseech Thee that Thou wouldest
     look with a propitious and serene countenance, and to accept as Thou
     wast pleased to accept the gifts of Thy righteous child Abel. And
     command," &c. . . .

     So in the Lent Office of administering the Eucharist, ex
     praesanctificatis, translated by Genebrard....

     I might, sir, from the Greek Liturgies as now extant, return to the
     ancient Greek writers, and cite many more authorities out of them
     for the Eucharistical oblation, especially that in the margin, [In
     the Prayer of Consecration of a Bishop, Apost. Const, lib. viii.
     cap. 5.] to which I refer my reader; but from the Liturgies of the
     Greek Churches it is time to lead you to those of the Latin, among
     whom I shall begin with the Sacramentary of Gregory the Great, where
     the Canon of the mass, (for "mass" of old . .. was a word of good
     and harmless signification) . . begins with this prayer: "Wherefore,
     O most merciful FATHER, we humbly pray, and beseech Thee through
     JESUS CHRIST Thy Son our LORD, that Thou wouldest accept and bless
     these gifts, these presents, these holy pure Sacrifices, which we
     offer up to Thee for Thy holy Catholic Church." . . in the present
     Canon of the Roman Mass,. . "Wherefore, O LORD, we Thy servants, and
     Thy holy people," &c.

     So in the Codices Sacramentorum. . . which are ancient Offices
     written about the latter end of the eighth century. . . To this I
     might add the canon of the Eucharistical action in the ancient
     Gallican Liturgy, published by Mabillon, but because it is almost of
     the same with the former, I omit it. Many collections and
     observations of the same kind might also be extracted out of the
     elaborate and useful volumes of the learned Benedictine, Edmund
     Martene, de Antiquis Ecclesiae Ritibus. But having produced enough
     out of the ancient Liturgies, to prove the Sacrifice of the holy
     Eucharist, from the harmonious agreement of them all in that point,
     I forbear to collect any more. Sir, I say "the harmonious agreement"
     of them all, to prevent cavil from such men as your "late writer:"
     for in whatsoever they all agree among themselves, and every one of
     them with the account we have of the Eucharist, in Justin Martyr's
     Apology, and in the 12th, 13th, and 14th chapters of the Apostolic
     Constitutions, (which answer so exactly to the celebration of it, as
     described by Justin,) that must needs be primitive and apostolical,
     and the consenting suffrage, i. e. the consentient doctrine and
     practice of the ancient Catholic Church.--pp. 116--140.

     Thus, sir, I have gone through the Fathers and Councils, and ancient
     Liturgies, to prove the Eucharist to be a real oblation or
     Sacrifice, and by consequence, that the ministers of it are proper
     Priests, as the Bishops and Presbyters of the ancient Catholic
     Church thought, and taught themselves to be, according to that of
     St. Cyprian de Orat. Dom. Quando in unum cum fratribus convenimus,
     et sacrificia divina cum Dei sacerdote celebramus. But, as men
     biassed by preconceptions are apt to object, so such men as your
     "late writer," taking the notion of a Sacrifice from Dr. Outram, who
     is a great author with them, object his definition of a Sacrifice to
     the sacrificial notion of the holy Eucharist, which they truly say
     do not agree together. And therefore I must acknowledge, that either
     he is mistaken in his definition, or that the ancient Church hath
     erred in the sacrificial conception they had of the holy Eucharist,
     which must be false if the Doctor's definition or description of a
     Sacrifice be strictly true,--p. 146.

     But, sir, there yet remains another objection to be answered, taken
     also from the opinion of another of our learned divines, Dr.
     Cudworth, who, in a discourse concerning "the true notion of the
     LORD'S Supper," asserts, that it is not a Sacrifice, but epulum ex
     oblatis, a "feast upon a Sacrifice;" or in other words, not oblatio
     Sacrificii, but, as Tertullian excellently speaks, (saith he)
     participatio Sacrificii; not "the offering of something up to GOD
     upon an altar, but the eating of something which comes from GOD'S
     altar," and is set upon our tables. And then, in contradiction to
     all antiquity, he asserts, that the notion of a Sacrament's being a
     Sacrifice is a mistake for what is the true notion of its being "a
     feast upon a Sacrifice," and that it grew up by a degeneration of
     this truth, as he expresseth himself. .... In a word, from analogy
     to this ancient rite of feasting upon things sacrificed, and eating
     of those things in person, or proxy, which they had offered up to
     GOD, he takes this new notion of the LORD'S Supper being a feast
     upon a Sacrifice, and not a Sacrifice itself.--pp. 165, 6.

     Now, sir, in answer to the objection taken from this learned man's
     new notion of the LORD'S Supper, it will be convenient to
     distinguish, in this Sacrificial feast of Christians, between the
     matter or entertainment of it, and the eating and participation
     thereof in the holy feast; that it may appear in what this opinion
     agrees, and how it differs from the ancient and common notion of it
     which the Church had of it in the primitive and purest times. First,
     then, as to the matter of it, the bread and wine; it must be
     granted, that by CHRIST'S own institution, they are symbols of His
     natural Body and Blood, and by His appointment are to be deemed,
     reputed, and received as His natural Flesh and Blood, in the holy
     feast. And secondly, it must be granted, that the participation of
     them is a federal rite, and hath all the moral effects between GOD
     and the faithful communicants, as if they did eat and drink of His
     natural Body and Blood, which was sacrificed for us upon the Cross.
     Those moral effects are the solemn and comfortable commemoration of
     His all sufficient Sacrifice upon the Cross, and representing it
     before GOD on earth as He represents it before Him in heaven;
     together with a confirmation and ratification of the covenant
     between GOD and the communicants; and the signification and
     assurance of GOD'S pardon, and of peace, reconciliation, and
     fellowship between GOD and the worthy partakers, who eat and drink
     the mystical and vicarious Body and Blood of CHRIST. . . . Thirdly,
     it must be acknowledged, that the one great Sacrifice upon the Cross
     is the only true and proper Sacrifice of the Christian religion, as
     by "one" true Sacrifice is understood the one great Sacrifice of
     propitiation for sin, which was the truth and completion of all
     typical Sacrifices: but then his opinion, that there is no other
     "external 'material oblation" in the Christian religion, no
     "offering at GOD'S altar, but only eating something that comes from
     it;" and that the mystical or sacramental Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     of which we partake at the LORD'S table, "are not there offered up
     unto GOD," if there were no other reason, is to be rejected, as of
     no authority, because it is new, and contrary to the consentient
     belief and practice of all Churches for above fifteen hundred
     years.--pp. 167--169.

     I could say more to refute this learned man's opinion, were it
     needful or convenient to enter into a theory of the Jewish
     Sacrifices, but I think it is time to dismiss this cause, and
     therefore to conclude, as this notion of the LORD'S Supper being
     only a feast upon a Sacrifice, is new and singular, and as I have
     showed, contrary to Catholic traditions, both in belief and
     practice; so it is a nice notion, and of no use or service, that I
     know of, to religion. First, It is a very nice notion, and vain
     imagination, thus to separate the table from the altar, the
     Sacrament from the Sacrifice, and the outward offering of the one
     from the federal feast of the other, in the LORD'S Supper. This is
     to put asunder what GOD hath joined together, and in effect to
     declare that if the bread and wine be first made an oblation to GOD,
     they cannot become the mystical Flesh and Blood of His SON.
     Secondly, As this is a nice and new notion, so it is of no use or
     service to the Church. On the contrary, it disserves religion, and
     is of dangerous consequence to this holy Sacrament itself; for by
     the same liberty, this author, I am sure, without any ill intention,
     hath taken away this solemn offering of the bread and wine from the
     holy mystery, others, after his example, have presumed to take away
     the solemn consecration of them. ... So dangerous it is for learned,
     though never so good men, to remove the old landmarks, and advance
     new notions destructive, or tending to the destruction of the old. I
     believe this author might really intend by this notion to sever the
     holy Eucharist from the Popish notion of it; but if it is not a real
     Sacrifice at all, most certainly it cannot be such a Sacrifice, as
     the Papal Church defines it to be. ... But this is running from one
     extreme to the other without any reason, because the ancient notion
     of this holy Sacrament's being a commemorative Sacrifice, in which
     we represent before GOD the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross,
     perfectly secures the holy mystery from that corrupt and absurd
     notion, it being impossible that a solemn commemoration of a fact or
     thing, should be the fact or thing itself; or to speak otherwise,
     with respect to the holy symbols by which we make the commemoration,
     that what represents should be the thing represented,--the figure,
     the verity itself, or the sign, that which is signified thereby.

     Sir, I have said all this in defence of the old, against the
     Doctor's new notion of the holy Eucharist, much more out of love to
     that old truth, than to prove Christian ministers to be proper
     priests,--pp. 174, 5.

     To the modern testimonies I have cited for this doctrine in my first
     letter, I beg leave to add two or three more out of the writings of
     our learned divines, who have wrote of the holy Sacrament of the
     LORD'S Supper as of a Sacrifice, altogether as plainly as I have
     done. Dr. Dan. Brevint, late dean of Lincoln, in his excellent
     little book entitled, "The Christian Sacrament and Sacrifice," to
     use his own words, hath endeavoured, as he speaks, "to set this holy
     Sacrament at liberty, without regard to Papists or Protestants, and
     rescue it out of the hands of such as have not treated rightly of
     it, and to restore it to the full meaning and institution of
     CHRIST."..... I forbear to transcribe any more, referring the reader
     to the discourse itself, which I wish were reprinted for the honour
     of GOD, and the benefit of the Church. Dr. Taylor plainly asserts
     this holy Sacrament to be a Sacrifice. The bishop of Sarum [Burnet]
     on Article XXXI., writes of the holy Eucharist in these words:--

     "In two other respects it may also more strictly be called a
     Sacrifice. One is because there is an oblation of bread and wine
     made in it, which, being sacrificed, are consumed in an act of
     religion. To this many passages in the writings of the Fathers
     relate. This was the oblation which was made at the altar by the
     people. And though at first the Christians were reproached, as
     having a strange sort of religion in which they had neither temples,
     altars, nor sacrifices, because they had not those things in so
     gross a manner as the heathens had, yet both Clemens Romanus,
     Ignatius, and all the succeeding writers of the Church, do
     frequently mention the oblations that they made; and in the ancient
     Liturgies they did with particular prayers offer the bread and wine
     to GOD, as the Creator of all things. These were called the gifts
     and offerings, which were offered to GOD in imitation of Abel, who
     offered the fruits of the earth in a sacrifice to GOD. Both Justin
     Martyr, Irenaeus, the Constitutions, and all the ancient Liturgies,
     have express words relating to this. Another respect in which the
     Eucharist is called a Sacrifice, is because it is a commemoration,
     and representation to GOD, of the Sacrifice that CHRIST offered for
     us upon the Cross. Upon these accounts we do not deny but that the
     Eucharist may be well called a Sacrifice. But still it is a
     commemorative Sacrifice, and not propitiatory." [The Bishop means,
     not propitiatory in itself or by its own virtue, as the Papists
     assert their Sacrifice of the Mass to be.] ... I wish his lordship
     had been pleased to add expressly, what is implied, that the
     Eucharist was also called a Sacrifice by the ancients, because the
     oblation of bread and wine, which they compared to other external
     Sacrifices, was always brought to the priest, to be presented by him
     as Sacrificial gifts to GOD upon the holy table or altar, and after
     the prayer of thanksgiving, to be consecrated by him in a second
     solemn oblation. . . .

     It is plain that Bishop Andrews thought the holy Eucharist to be the
     Christian Sacrifice, by this prayer in his Greek and Latin devotions
     'O anw k.t.l. . . .

     Dr. Heylin ..... cites a noble testimony out of Eusebius, De
     Demonstratione Evangelica, about the priesthood, altar, and
     Sacrifice of the Christians. ...

     Bishop Stillingfleet saith, "It is the peculiar honour of the
     Christian religion, to have an order of men set apart, not merely as
     Priests to offer Sacrifices (for that all religions have had) but as
     preachers of righteousness, to set good and evil before the people
     committed to their charge." . . . Those who desire more authorities
     may consist the Appendix, to which I refer the reader. [In which are
     cited Laud, Hammond, Dodwell, Patrick, Wake, Bull, &c.]

     And to these authorities of learned men in print I shall add others
     of no less moment out of an interleaved Book of Common Prayer, with
     notes, which I happened to meet with, and value very much ....

     And now I hope, by these additional authorities, and those cited in
     my book, and in the Appendix to it, I shall convince the "late
     writer" I have spoken of in the beginning of my first letter, that
     the Eucharist is a proper Sacrifice, and that we, who offer if, are
     proper Priests, and that there can be no danger in this doctrine,
     which was taught and practised by all the ancient Catholic-Church. I
     hope also what I have said here, and in that letter, will
     sufficiently refute and expose the incomparable presumption of the
     author of the "Rights," who represents the whole notion of the
     LORD'S Supper, as I have shewed it was taught in the primitive
     times, for priestcraft, saying that "they made it a mystery in the
     heathenish sense of the word." . . . All serious Christians among us
     believe it to be a mystery, though not to be a "Sacrifice," a
     sacrificial mystery, as the Passover to which it answers, and in
     whose place it did succeed, by our Saviour's institution,
     was.--Prefatory Discourse, pp. xxxvii--lii. lxiii.

     It hath been my endeavour, especially in the first of the following
     letters, to revive this ancient, true, Catholic doctrine, which hath
     accidentally grown into disuse, and almost utter oblivion in this
     Church, by the alterations that were made in the Office, or order of
     administering the Lord's Supper in the first Liturgy of the Church
     of England, which in the Appendix I have presented to the view of
     the world.

     In the changes made in that Office, the word "Altar," which had been
     used in all ages of the Church before, even in the purest as well as
     the most corrupt, was left out of the rubrics. And the Prayer of
     Oblation, which had been ever used before the delivering of the
     Sacrament, in which we pray GOD "mercifully to accept this our
     Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving," was put in the Post-Communion
     after the Lord's Prayer; of which I read thus in my interleaved
     Common Prayer Book: "This prayer," &c. '

     In the alterations made in the Office for administering the Lord's
     Supper, in king Edward the Sixth's Service Book, that Rubric was
     also left out which commanded the minister to "set the bread and
     wine upon the altar," as an offering. But this Rubric was restored,
     in the Office for the Church of Scotland, and likewise in the Office
     of the Holy Communion of our present Liturgy, established by the Act
     of Uniformity after the Restoration, with an intention undoubtedly
     to oblige the Priest to place the elements, as an offering, with
     reverence upon the LORD'S Table. But as the disuse of this practice
     had taken deep root from the fifth year of king Edward VI., when the
     first Service Book was altered, to that time, and helped to
     obliterate the notion of the Christian Sacrifice in the minds both
     of priests and people; so this restored Rubric, to the great
     reproach of the Clergy, was almost never since observed in cathedral
     or parochial churches. I say almost never, because I never knew or
     heard but of two or three persons, which is a very small number, who
     observed it; but the bread and wine was still placed upon the table
     before the office of the Communion began, without any solemnity, it
     may be by the clerk or sexton, or any other, perhaps, unfitter
     person, to the great derogation of the reverence due to the holy
     mystery; and I hope, for the sake of my good intentions, no worthy
     clergyman will be displeased at me for taking notice thereof.

     This practice of the officiating priests setting the bread and wine
     in the sight of the people with reverence upon the holy table, was
     so inviolably observed in ancient times, that they had in their
     churches a buffet, or side table, on the right or left hand of the
     altar, upon which a priest or deacon set the bread and wine, from
     whence they were carried by the deacon, or other priest, when there
     were two, to the officiating priest, who reverently placed them as
     an offering on the LORD'S table. This side-table, for the elements
     and holy vessels, was called in the Greek Church ProqesiV, because
     they were first set in public view upon it; and in the Latin Church
     Paratorium, because they were prepared, and made ready upon it, for
     the Holy Communion; and in Italy it is called Credenza, in France
     Credence. . .

     I have made these remarks for three reasons; first, to move the
     clergy of cathedral and parochial Churches to put the aforesaid
     rubric in practice, which in the Communion enjoins the priest to
     place the bread and wine upon the LORD'S table. Secondly, To
     persuade them to restore the ancient use of the Paratorium, or table
     of preparation, which that rubric plainly implies; for the priest is
     supposed, either to fetch them from some place, or else to have them
     brought from some place to him, that he may set them on the altar;
     and I cannot tell why that should not be another table in some part
     of the Church or chancel, to set the bread and wine, and holy
     vessels upon, especially where there is no sacristy or vestry, where
     they may be conveniently set till they are brought unto the priest.

     In cathedrals it seems to be most proper for the deacon, or another
     priest, as the sacrist commonly is, to bring the elements to the
     Bishop, or officiating priest; but in parish Churches, where there
     is neither deacon nor second priest, the churchwarden, or other fit
     person, might reverently bring them from the Credence, wheresoever
     placed, to the rail, where the minister might receive them of him,
     to place them upon the altar. This practice would conciliate a
     greater measure of reverence than is often seen, to the holy
     Sacrament, and help the people to conceive how the bread and wine is
     their oblation, and how it is made a Sacrifice by the ministry of
     the priest.--pp. lxiii--lxviii.

              ID.--Second Collection of Controversial Letters.

     In this the reader will find the Holy Eucharist asserted to be a
     commemorative Sacrifice . . . that doctrine which so many of our
     greatest men have asserted to be the doctrine of the purest ages of
     Christianity, without seeing any danger in it, or any consequence
     from the old commemorative representative Sacrifice to the new
     Popish Sacrifice of the Mass.

     Wherefore, to the eminent writers, which I formerly cited for that
     doctrine, ... I beg leave to add the authority of others. .. . p.
     277.

     I shall begin with a book entituled, "A Discourse concerning the
     worship of GOD towards the holy table, or altar." Printed at London,
     1682. But as I understand it was printed from a MS. copy, which a
     learned clergyman, since deceased, somewhere met with, so is it
     plain from the book that it was written about the year 1637. . . Who
     was the author of this little book, I cannot tell, but thus he
     writes . . . . "Having proved an altar by your own consequence we
     must have a Sacrifice too, and a priesthood, for these you say infer
     one another, as correlates. But I will not be beholden to you to
     make this my argument, but will prove it out of Scripture the word
     "Sacrifice" to be applied to our Sacrament. GOD by His prophet
     foretels the Jews, that whereas they had polluted His altars, He had
     also rejected them and their Sacrifices, and would appoint Himself a
     new people and a new Sacrifice. In every place (that is, not in
     Jerusalem only, and in one place) incense should be offered unto His
     name, and Sacrificium purum, a pure Sacrifice, or offering, for so
     the word signifies in the Hebrew. Now what other incense have we but
     prayer? What other Sacrifice but the LORD'S Supper? which he calls a
     pure Sacrifice or offering; which GOD hath appointed to commemorate
     the death and Sacrifice of His SON, instead of the Jewish
     Sacrifices, which only typified it. This is the interpretation of
     the most ancient fathers; for among all the ancient fathers, both
     Greek and Latin, there is nothing more frequent than the use of the
     words Sacrifice, priest, altar, when they speak of the Sacrament,
     holy table, and ministers of the Gospel. No man can deny this, that
     hath but cast his eyes upon their writings, which are every where
     full of these expressions." . . .

     The next authority shall be that of Archbishop Bramhall . . .

     To the Archbishop's authority let me add that of Dr. Brough, in his
     tract, printed in the appendix: "In the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
     a Sacrifice commemorative both grant, but a propitiatory we
     disclaim." ["'Sacred Principles, Services, and Soliloquies, or a
     Manual of Devotion made up of three parts, &c. The third edition,
     with some additions. London, printed by T. S. for John Clark, 1656.'
     The worthy author, who then only styled himself Philo-Christianus,
     was Dr. William Brough, who, for his piety and learning, as well as
     great sufferings and loyalty, was promoted by King Charles I. to the
     deanery of Gloucester, and, after the restoration of king Charles
     II., had other preferments conferred upon him, which upon many
     accounts he deserved."--pp. xiii, xiv.]

     In the next place let me produce the testimony of Mr. Thorndike that
     of Dr. Beveridge, late Bishop of St. Asaph... &c... [Citing Johnson,
     Potter, (vid. inf.) Bingham, &c.]

     Reflecting upon what I have now written, did I not consider the
     power of prejudice in men, I should wonder how "Sacrament" came to
     jostle "Sacrifice," not only out of so many Reformed Offices of the
     LORD'S Supper, but out of the writings of divines who have treated
     on that subject; as if now we were to know the holy institution but
     by halves, which the ancient apostolic Churches knew in whole and so
     taught and learned it, though we teach and learn but half of it, as
     the papists administer and receive it but in one kind. This,
     perhaps, was the pious reason why Mr. Nelson endeavoured to retrieve
     this primitive word and notion, by bringing the one into the title
     page, and the other into the devotions of his book. For he that knew
     Id verum quod prius, might think he could not more honour GOD, or
     better serve His Church, or more benefit his readers in writing on
     that subject, than by restoring the Sacrifice to the Sacrament,
     which had kept possession in the Churches of GOD for fifteen hundred
     years, and was a notion so proper to explain the special nature of
     that mystery, as also to inflame the devotion of the faithful, and
     increase their veneration for the Sacrament and the whole
     ministration thereof. . . . And if I should ever write a book of it,
     as I think I now never shall, I would first treat of it as a
     Sacrifice, and then, as it is a Sacrament; and, with all due regard
     to many learned men, who have written of the LORD'S Supper only as a
     Sacrament, I take the freedom to say, that, how useful and excellent
     soever their books may otherwise be, yet, excluding the doctrine of
     the Sacrifice from their subject, I think they are deficient and
     imperfect works.

     I have hitherto been showing, that it is no fault, but, on the
     contrary, what becomes a Christian writer, to bring this primitive,
     common, and consentient doctrine of the Catholic Church into books
     of devotion, and but that I foresee it would swell my preface beyond
     its bounds, I should show the same from the admirable prayers in the
     ancient Offices, which relate to the LORD'S Supper as a Sacrifice.
     But this, I hope, may be clone by another hand. I shall, therefore,
     only proceed to show, that the notion of the Sacrifice in the
     Eucharist is no stranger to the Communion devotions of the Church of
     England; for, as it was in the first Common Prayer Book of Edward
     the VIth. so is it now in her present liturgy . . . the old rubrick
     for the priest to set the bread and wine upon the holy table is
     restored, and the order of doing it is directed in this manner:
     "While the sentences" &c.... This is one sort of offering, which may
     be made when there is no Communion. But, "when there is a Communion
     (saith the rubric) the priest shall then place upon the table so
     much bread and wine as he shall think sufficient;" which is the
     other offering proper for the Communion, as being offered to be
     consecrated, and consumed in the celebration thereof. These two
     offerings being set in order upon the holy table, the priest is
     directed to say, "ALMIGHTY and ever living GOD ... we humbly beseech
     Thee, most mercifully to accept our alms and oblations." I have
     already observed the difference that is, and is accordingly made by
     the Church, between these two material offerings, whereof the one is
     given, and presented upon the altar for pious and charitable uses,
     especially for the maintenance of the poor, but the other are
     dedicated and offered for the service of GOD in the holy Eucharist,
     and to that end to be consecrated into a memorial of the sufferings
     and Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross, in remembrance of His death
     and Passion, and thereby become in the mystery, or Sacrament, the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST to the faithful receivers. This
     consecration of the OBLATIONS for the use of GOD'S table and to be
     made His entertainment, is performed by solemn prayer, [Called in
     the Rubric the "Prayer of Consecration"] and rehearsing the words of
     the institution, at which the priest first takes the patin into his
     hands, and breaks the bread, and then lays his hand upon all the
     consecrated bread, which by consecration, as St. Ignatius calls it,
     becomes "the bread of GOD." Then, in like manner, he takes the cup
     into his hand, and lays his hand upon every vessel in which there is
     wine to be consecrated for the heavenly entertainment; and then
     receiving in both kinds himself, proceeds to deliver the same in
     order to the Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and the people, who are all
     entertained as guests at the LORD'S table with the consecrated
     oblations, and, in partaking of them, are made partakers of the Body
     and Blood of CHRIST, which they represent. In the Post-Communion,
     after the LORD'S Prayer, the priest desires GOD of His fatherly
     goodness, "mercifully to accept this our Sacrifice of prayer and
     thanksgiving:" which hath the same signification it had before when
     it was the Prayer of Oblation, out of which that Prayer is taken; I
     mean, the same special, and I may say technical signification it
     hath in the ancient Eucharistical Offices, to denote the Sacrifice
     of the bread and wine offered to be spent in that divine service.
     After this I need not say more in defence of the Eucharistical
     Sacrifice of bread and wine, nor of Mr. Nelson, or any other person
     for bringing the notion thereof into books of devotion, as I find
     Bishop Beveridge hath done in his Devotions at the end of his
     treatise of the "Necessity and Advantage of the Holy Communion."
     Where, after having declared the holy Eucharist not to be a
     "propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead," but only a
     Sacrifice "commemorative" and "declarative" of the Sacrifice which
     CHRIST once offered upon the Cross, and that it succeeded in the
     room of all the Jewish types, and representations of the death of
     CHRIST, and is our shew bread, our burnt offering, our sin offering,
     &c. . . . and all the offerings required of us, whereby to
     commemorate our LORD, and what he hath done for us; I say, after all
     this, among the private Devotions there is this prayer: "Be pleased,
     O GOD, to accept this our bounden duty and service, and command that
     the prayers and supplications," &c. I must also take notice, that
     the Bishop, in these Devotions, calls the holy table the "altar," as
     in these inscriptions for his several Prayers: "Before going to the
     Altar;" "At going to the Altar;" "At prostrating before the
     Altar."--pp. Ivii--Ixiii.

     Before I conclude, I cannot but observe how disingenuous those
     writers are, who misrepresent this doctrine of the Eucharistical
     Sacrifice as dangerous; and as such endeavour to render it
     scandalous and odious to the people, as if it were the ready way,
     and so intended by the teachers of it, to introduce the Popish
     Sacrifice of the Mass, and bring the Church back to it again. Those,
     who have read "Canterbury's Doom," and the Charge of the Scottish
     Commissioners, will know very well, that I have just cause to make
     this reflection, and particular reason to put my adversaries in
     remembrance of it. But this is a most uncharitable and unjust
     charge, and where it is not the effect of ignorance, or insuperable
     preconception, it is the pure effect of malice: for there is no more
     alliance between the ancient doctrine of the "commemorative," or
     "representative Sacrifice" of the bread and wine in the Eucharist,
     and that of the "expiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead" in the
     Mass, than betwixt "reward" and "merit," or between the superiority
     of one Bishop over many Presbyters, and the supremacy of one chief
     universal Pontiff over all the Bishops of the Christian world. On
     the contrary, it is so far from being true that there is any
     consequence of this from that, that of the two, that is a bar to
     this, and neither is, nor can be, any more the same Sacrifice which
     CHRIST offered upon the Cross, than an ambassador is the king he
     represents, or a picture its prototype, or the representation of
     things, and persons, and actions, upon a stage, the things, and
     persons, and actions themselves. Wherefore the right understanding
     of the commemorative and representative Sacrifice in the Eucharist,
     is so far from reducing us to the Sacrifice of the Mass, that it
     secures us like a bulwark against it, and it is as impossible for
     men rightly instructed in it, to misconceive or mistake the one for
     the other, as it is for any donotory to imagine the deed of gift is
     the land which the donor gave him, or for a spectator of any
     dramatic action to think it the very history or reality which it
     represents. The Church, then, can receive no damage or prejudice by
     this doctrine, as some men, and in particular my adversaries, seem
     to fear: on the contrary, it is a great benefit and advantage to her
     to be thought so primitive as to teach and practise it. For it is
     one of the objections which the Papists bring against us, that we
     have no Sacrifice, as may be observed from what I have before cited
     out of Archbishop Bramhall. And I can assure my adversaries, from
     good authority, that there is now a person of great quality in
     France, who is kept back by no other cause from coming to the Church
     of England, but that he is told "she hath no Sacrifice:" to which
     his learned correspondent here, who is one of the French ministers,
     in answer hath assured him, that the Bishops and Clergy of the
     Church of England freely teach the doctrine of the Eucharistical
     Sacrifice, as it was taught and practised in the purest ages of the
     Catholic Church, which, I may presume, from the gentleman's
     objection, he understands very well.--pp. lxxi--lxxiii.

     I must here say . . . that there is no reason why the Reformed
     should be afraid of believing the holy Eucharist to be a Sacrificial
     service, or the bread and wine to be the proper oblations of it,
     forasmuch as, according to the ancients before the eighth century,
     we teach them to be not the "real," but only the "mystical," or
     "sacramental" Body and Blood of CHRIST. There is, therefore, a very
     plain and intelligible difference between the Eucharist's being the
     Sacrifice of the real Body and Blood of CHRIST, and its being a real
     Sacrifice of His mystical Body and Blood. They are inconsistent and
     incompossible one with the other, because mystical and real differ
     as much as the substance and its shadow, the verity and its type, or
     a thing of any sort or kind from the thing that is its image. All
     this is comprehended in the distinction betwixt "mystical" and
     "real;" the one as I have said is a contradiction and bar to the
     other, and therefore great must be their ignorance or prejudice who
     cannot distinguish the pure Primitive from the Popish doctrine of
     the Eucharist, and where ignorance or prejudice is not in the case,
     it must be evil designs and passions that make divines especially
     inveigh against their brethren, who teach the Sacrament of the
     LORD'S Supper to be the representative Sacrifice of CHRIST'S
     mystical Body and Blood. Whether or no my adversaries be men of the
     latter sort, I leave it to their readers to judge ... In the mean
     time, I shall believe the holy Eucharist to be an unbloody
     Sacrifice, and of a sacrificial nature for the seal and sanction of
     the new Covenant, in the whole ministration, and all the parts and
     rites of it, from presenting the bread and wine to GOD upon the
     Altar, to the consumption of them in the holy, federal, and
     sacrificial feast; and that this notion of it is most suitable to
     the Evangelical Covenant, as a seal and sanction thereof, and
     altogether worthy of the New and royal Law, and of its one Lawgiver,
     the antitypal Moses, our LORD JESUS CHRIST. And as I believe it to
     be a doctrine and institution most agreeable to Christianity, as the
     mystical Judaism, to have one Sacrifice succeed in the room of all
     the Jewish Sacrifices, so I think it very proper not only to
     illustrate the nature of the holy Eucharist as a Sacrament, but to
     render the mystery more tremendous and adorable, and the Christian
     priesthood more venerable, and the devotion of the faithful more
     flaming both before, at, and after the holy Communion, as furnishing
     them with special and proper matter not only for holy and
     comfortable meditations, but for prayers and praises to the FATHER,
     and intercessions with Him in the name of His Son JESUS CHRIST, and
     of the Holy Ghost, to whom with the FATHER in the unity of the
     Trinity, be all honour, worship, and glory, now and ever. Amen.--pp.
     lxxx--lxxxiii.

     I hope I have now said enough to make it appear, that all the
     ancient Churches believed the bread and wine to be the proper
     subject matter of the Christian oblation in the holy Eucharist, or
     the sensible things which they really offered and believed, ought to
     be really offered to GOD in that holy service, for the sacrificial
     feast, and by consequence, that they thought it to be an outward
     Sacrifice properly so called.--"Account" prefatory to the third
     edit. pp. iv, v.

     It hath the honour above all the Sacrifices that ever were, to be
     the representative of the Sacrifice of the Cross; and the value and
     dignity of it above all other Sacrifices, consists in being the
     representative of that propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the
     whole world. It was instituted by our LORD for that noble and
     adorable purpose; and, therefore, were I to define the Eucharistical
     Sacrifice, it should be in these forms: The Eucharistical Sacrifice
     is an oblation of bread and wine, instituted by JESUS CHRIST, to
     represent and commemorate His Sacrifice upon the Cross. Wherefore,
     to represent and commemorate the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross,
     being the great end of its institution, and the special part of its
     definition, by which it differs from, and is dignified above all
     other Sacrifices, it may be said of it in this respect, "We offer a
     Sacrifice, or rather the remembrance of a Sacrifice;" without
     meaning that it is not a proper Sacrifice, but only intending to set
     forth its super-eminent dignity above all other Sacrifices, in being
     instituted for a remembrance of the Sacrifice of CHRIST.--pp.
     xxxiii. xxxiv.

     I have been necessitated to write all this upon mentioning the
     additions which I have made in this edition of my book, to what I
     had said, in the former, of the Eucharistical Sacrifice, but now I
     have done for ever with that subject, and with all others that will
     require such labour and study as, through age arid infirmities, I am
     no longer able to endure. If it meets with any more opposition, I
     leave the further defence of it to those learned younger divines, or
     students of Divinity, who are conversant in the ancient writers of
     the Church. GOD, of His mercy to it, increase the number of
     them.--p. xxxv.

                 COMBER, PRESBYTER.--Companion to the Altar.

     Whatsoever benefits we now enjoy, or hope hereafter .to receive from
     ALMIGHTY GOD, they were all purchased by the death, and must be
     obtained through the intercession of the Holy JESUS. And for a
     perpetual memorial thereof, we are not only taught to mention His
     Name in our daily prayers, John xiv. 13. and xv. 16. but are also
     commanded by visible signs to commemorate and set forth His Passion
     in the LORD'S Supper, 1 Cor. xi. 26. wherein, by a more forcible
     rite of intercession, we beg the divine acceptance. That which is
     more compendiously expressed in the conclusion of our prayers,
     "through JESUS CHRIST our LORD," is more fully and more vigorously
     set out in this most holy Sacrament; wherein we intercede on earth
     in imitation of, and conjunction with the great intercession of our
     High Priest in heaven; pleading here in the virtue and merits of the
     same Sacrifice which He doth urge there for us. And because of this
     sympathy and near alliance between these two offices of praying and
     communicating, we find the Eucharist in the purest ages of the
     Church, was a daily companion of their Common Prayer.--Introd.

     As the people of Israel were wont to bring their gifts and
     sacrifices to the Temple, and by the hands of the priest to present
     them to ALMIGHTY GOD, so are we appointed to give our oblations into
     the hands of the Minister of CHRIST, who by virtue of his office may
     best recommend them with prayers and praises to the Majesty of
     Heaven; and yet we must not neglect to join with him in these
     supplications, both to beg the acceptance of our offering, and to
     shew that our charity extendeth farther than our alms can reach, for
     the benefit of these is received only by a few of our neighbours,
     but we ought to love all the world, especially our Christian
     brethren, even those who do not need, or cannot have profit by our
     gifts. And how can we express this better, than by recommending them
     all to the mercies of GOD, who is able to relieve them all, and of
     whose bounty all have need? Which excellent duty, though it be to be
     done daily, yet at this holy Sacrament it is most proper, because we
     here behold the universal love of JESUS, and are declared lively
     members of His mystical body, and conjoined in the strictest bonds
     of union with all our fellow Christians. Besides, when can we more
     effectually intercede with GOD for the whole Church, than when we
     represent and shew forth that most meritorious Passion on earth, by
     the virtue whereof our great High Priest did once redeem, and doth
     ever plead for His whole Church even now that He is in heaven? This
     Sacrament, therefore, hath been accounted the "great intercession;"
     and accordingly all the ancient Liturgies did use such universal
     intercessions and supplications while this mystery was in hand, and
     in the time of St. Cyril there was a prayer used, exactly agreeing
     with this of our Church. St. Chrysostom also saith, that the priest
     standing at the altar, did "offer prayers and praises for all the
     world, for those that are absent, and. those that are present, for
     those that were before us, and those that shall be after us, while
     that Sacrifice is set forth." Hom. 26. in Matt. For which cause our
     Communion Office in the Rubric before this Prayer, appoints the
     bread and wine to be set upon the table first, and then stirs us all
     up with that solemn "Let us pray for the whole estate of CHRIST'S
     Church," &c. And if, as we are worshipping without, we remember Him
     that is praying within the vail, and, by imitating His general
     charity, do unite our supplications to His all powerful
     intercession, we may no doubt obtain the largest and the choicest
     blessings in the treasures of heaven.--pp. 78, 9.

     Let us then, with all possible devotion, offer up this Sacrifice,
     and delight in this pious and prudent intercession, which is
     enjoined by Him that purposes to grant it, and presented by
     charitable souls, who will infinitely rejoice in the success
     thereof, viz. the prosperity of the whole Church.--p. 83.

     "Beseeching thee to inspire continually the universal Church with
     the spirit of truth, unity, and concord:"] Among the several prayers
     which were made at the holy table, it was particularly enjoined that
     they should pray for "the holy Catholic Church, extended from one
     end of the earth to the other, which the LORD had redeemed with the
     precious Blood of Christ," saith the author of the Apostolical
     Constitutions; for the Sacrifice here commemorated was offered for
     the Church, Acts xx. 28. which is called the body of Christ, Eph. v.
     23. Col. i. 24.--p. 85.

     "Grant this, O FATHER, for JESUS CHRIST'S sake, our only Mediator
     and Advocate; Amen."] This general conclusion of all our prayers we
     should not remark particularly here, but that the Mass hath thrust
     in the names of the Blessed Virgin, and other Saints into this
     supplication, through whose merits and prayers they intercede, even
     in this place, where there is a lively commemoration of the death of
     CHRIST our only Mediator, which is not only the holding a candle to
     the sun, but seems to intimate, that to plead in the virtue of our
     LORD'S Passion is not sufficient; and that His intercession, by
     which the Holy Virgin, and all other Saints, became accepted by GOD,
     was not alone forcible enough. But we desire no other Mediator, nor
     need no other Advocate (1 Tim. ii. 5) but our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who
     is here represented; nor do we doubt to ask all these mercies for
     all these persons, since we approach our heavenly FATHER with His
     dear and only beloved SON in our arms. Wherefore let us bless the
     Name of GOD, who hath chosen such a Master of Requests to present
     our prayers, and put such an argument in our mouths, when we
     approach unto Him. Let us look to the holy symbols, and remember our
     great High Priest, while we offer up the intercessions with a great
     humility, and a sprightly devotion, because our GOD will not, nay,
     cannot deny those that thus come unto Him.--p. 100.

     The nearer we approach to these mysteries, the greater reverence we
     must express. The very heathen could say, men should be always best
     when they came to the gods, and therefore so much better, by how
     much they come nearer; our late rejoicing might savour of too much
     confidence, if it were not allayed with this act of humility, which
     is the immediate address to this holy Feast: ["We do not presume,"
     &c.] There is somewhat agreeable to this, some apology, or
     acknowledgment, in all ancient Liturgies, but that of St. James
     comes the nearest to this of ours. "I come to this divine and
     super-celestial mystery, unworthy, indeed, but relying on thy
     goodness." And afterwards: "Turn not away from us sinners, who are
     celebrating tin's dreadful and unbloody Sacrifice, for we trust not
     in our own righteousness, but in Thy bountiful mercy," &c.--p. 243.

     After all this preparation, we need not ask with Isaac, Gen. xxii.
     7. "where is the lamb for the burnt offering?" for GOD hath provided
     his own dear SON, whose Blood, being already spilt, is so
     efficacious and all-sufficient that there is now no need of any
     other but this unbloody Sacrifice to be offered, and that in
     memorial of that great sin-offering which taketh away the sins of
     the world, 1 Pet. ii. 5. And for this purpose CHRIST Himself hath
     appointed these creatures of bread and wine, ordaining that, because
     they are designed to express so great a mystery, they shall have a
     peculiar consecration......The Jews would not eat of the Sacrifice
     till Samuel came to bless it, 1 Sam. ix. 13.

     How much more then ought we to expect the prayers of the priest over
     this mysterious food of our souls, before we eat thereof! especially
     since JESUS Himself did not deliver this bread and wine until He had
     consecrated it by giving thanks.--pp. 252, 3.

     "And thus by thine own appointment, dearest JESUS, we do shew our
     thankfulness for Thy Passion, our faith in Thy resurrection, and our
     hope of Thy second coming. We will commemorate Thy all-sufficient
     Sacrifice before the ALMIGHTY to pacify His anger against us; before
     the world, to testify our hope in a crucified SAVIOUR; and before
     ourselves, to renew our sense of Thy inexpressible love."--p. 274.

                 COLLIER, BISHOP AND CONFESSOR--Reasons, &c.

     The oblatory prayer goes upon this ground, that the holy Eucharist
     is a proper Sacrifice; and that our blessed SAVIOUR, at His last
     Supper, offered the bread and wine to GOD the FATHER, as the symbols
     of His Body and Blood, and commanded His Apostles to do the same.
     And since this truth is not contested amongst us, since 'tis plainly
     proved from Scripture, by Dr. Hickes, since the subject is exhausted
     to the utmost satisfaction by the learned Mr. Johnson , we need only
     touch upon this argument--p. 27.

       NELSON, CONFESSOR.--The great duty of frequenting the Christian
                                 Sacrifice.

     First, I shall inquire into those obligations that lie upon all
     Christians to receive the holy Communion, and to frequent the
     Christian Sacrifice.

     The first argument for the performance of this Christian duty arises
     from the positive command of our SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST, the Author of
     our Religion. . . . Now that our SAVIOUR has made it the duty of all
     Christians to frequent this commemorative Sacrifice, is plain from
     the history of its institution, in the close of which our SAVIOUR
     adds this positive injunction, "Do this in remembrance of Me;" by
     which, as the holy Apostles were obliged to do to others as our
     SAVIOUR had done to them, viz. to bless, break, and give the bread
     to all that joined with them in these holy Services; so were all
     Christians hereby engaged to receive from them and their successors,
     these symbols of CHRIST'S Body and Blood. By this precept,
     therefore, the Communion of CHRIST'S Body and Blood, as represented
     by bread and wine in the holy Sacrament, is made the standing
     memorial of His death and sufferings in all Christian assemblies to
     the end of the world.--pp. 4--6.

     The second argument for the performance of this Christian duty
     arises from the nature of the duty itself. It is a piece of worship
     appropriated to the Christian religion, by which in a peculiar
     manner we profess ourselves followers of the Blessed JESUS. The
     Heathens and Mahometans offer up prayers and praises to GOD, and by
     the light of nature apply themselves to infinite Power for the
     relief of their necessities, and return their thanks to infinite
     Goodness, as the source from whence they receive all their
     blessings. The Jews, by slaying of beasts, and by burning incense,
     invocated GOD, and praised and blessed Him for those mercies of
     which they partook. But Christians only set before GOD bread and
     wine in the Eucharist, "as figures or images of the precious Blood
     of CHRIST shed for us, and of His precious Body," as it is expressed
     in the Clementine Liturgy. And, therefore, we cannot be said so
     properly to worship as Christians, as when we join in those sacred
     mysteries that CHRIST has made peculiar to His own religion; and it
     cannot be imagined, that it should be at our own disposal, whether
     we would perform it or no, when it was ordained as the peculiar
     service of Christians, to distinguish them from all other
     worshippers of the Deity; and as the principal act whereby we
     partake of the Sacrifice of CHRIST made upon the Cross, and without
     which our public service wants its due perfection. Upon which
     account the primitive Christians (at least for a time in some
     places) on no day held their public assemblies without this
     Christian Sacrifice.--pp. 7, 8.

     The third argument for the frequent performance of this Christian
     duty arises from the great benefits that are annexed to the worthy
     participation of this holy Ordinance. By the nature of our
     circumstances in this world, we are surrounded with variety of
     temptations, no condition of life being free from the assaults of
     our spiritual enemies; so that it but too frequently happens, that
     we become a prey to their attempts, and are prevailed upon to
     transgress our duty. Now when we are brought to a sense of our
     follies, and our souls are pierced with an unfeigned sorrow for
     having committed them; what surer method have we to procure our
     pardon from GOD, than by showing forth the LORD'S death, by
     representing His bitter Passion to the FATHER, that so He would, for
     His sake, according to the tenour of His Covenant in Him, be
     favourable and propitious to us miserable sinners?--pp. 10, 11.

     Secondly, I shall show what preparation is necessary to perform this
     duty after an acceptable manner. . . .

     The first part of preparation consists in the informing ourselves
     carefully in the nature and end of this sacred institution,
     enquiring what is meant by this holy action, and to what purpose
     this blessed Sacrament was ordained. This necessary knowledge, once
     attained, is a standing qualification in all our future Communions;
     and, therefore, we ought to take the pains to settle right notions
     in our minds concerning this matter, because they will be
     serviceable to us in all the remaining part of our lives. In order
     to this purpose it will be necessary to read over the history of the
     institution of this Christian Sacrifice, as recorded by the
     Evangelists, and by St. Paul in his epistle to the Corinthians, who
     received what he taught in this matter by a divine revelation.
     [Matt. xxvi. 17. 26. Mark xiv. 12. 22. Luke xxii. 7. 19. 1 Cor. xi.
     24.].....From which places it will appear, that when our SAVIOUR
     JESUS CHRIST celebrated the Jewish Sacrifice of the Passover, with
     His disciples, a little before His sufferings, He substituted the
     Sacrament of His Body and Blood, as the true Christian Sacrifice, in
     the room of the Passover; and ordained it as a rite to invocate His
     FATHER by instead of the manifold and bloody Sacrifices of the Law,
     and to be a means of supplication and address to GOD in the New
     Testament, as they were in the Old. To which end our SAVIOUR first
     offers up the creatures of bread and wine to GOD, as an
     acknowledgment of His sovereignty, by taking the bread and wine into
     His sacred hands, by looking up to heaven, and giving thanks, and
     then by blessing the elements, He makes them the symbols of His Body
     and Blood, and distributed them to His disciples, to eat and drink
     them in commemoration of Him. So that the design of instituting the
     Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper, was to constitute a Christian
     Sacrifice, wherein GOD mystically entertains man at His own table,
     in token of amity and friendship with Him; which that He might do,
     the bread and the wine are offered to God, to acknowledge Him Lord
     of the creatures; and accordingly, in the ancient Church, they were
     laid on the table by the priest (as they are still ordered to be
     done by the Rubric in the Church of England) and tendered to GOD by
     this short prayer, "Lord, we offer Thy own out of what Thou hast
     bountifully given us;" which by consecration being made symbols of
     the Body and Blood of CHRIST, we thereby represent to GOD the FATHER
     the Passion of His SON, to the end that He may, for His sake,
     according to the tenour of His Covenant in Him, be favourable and
     propitious to us miserable sinners; that, as CHRIST intercedes
     continually for us in heaven, by presenting His death and
     satisfaction to His FATHER, so the Church on earth, in like manner,
     may approach the throne of grace, by representing CHRIST unto His
     FATHER in these holy mysteries of His death and Passion; that what
     every Christian does mentally and vocally, when he recommends his
     prayers to GOD the FATHER through JESUS CHRIST, making mention of
     His death and satisfaction, that, in the public service of the
     Church, is done by this rite, which our SAVIOUR commanded in
     commemoration of Him.--pp. 14--19.

     The second part of preparation consists in those pious dispositions
     of mind, which qualify us to receive this Sacrament after a worthy
     manner, and make us fit guests at the LORD'S table. And therefore
     when we plead the merits of CHRIST'S death and Passion before GOD
     the FATHER in this Christian Sacrifice, it ought to be accompanied
     with a most thankful acknowledgment of those great blessings our
     SAVIOUR has purchased for us by His sufferings, and with a public
     proclaiming to all the world the great sense we have of such
     invaluable kindness... with a readiness of mind to be reconciled to
     all those that have offended us, because "when we were enemies we
     were reconciled to GOD by the death of His SON." Rom. v. 19;--with
     hearty and sincere love and charity to our brethren..... Indeed
     charity, and good will towards all men, was always thought so
     necessary a qualification for the celebration of this Christian
     Sacrifice, that, in the ancient Church, at the very entrance
     thereunto, the Deacon was wont to proclaim, "Let no man have ought
     against his brother:" and this practice was founded upon our
     SAVIOUR'S ordinance, in His divine Sermon upon the mount, "If thou
     bringest thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy
     brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the
     altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
     come and offer thy gift." Which Scripture, in the sense of the
     primitive Church, was taken to be an evangelical constitution,
     implied by way of anticipation, that our SAVIOUR would leave some
     rite to His Church, instead and after the manner of the Law, which
     should begin with an oblation, as they did; and that, to require
     this proper and peculiar qualification in the offerer, to be at
     peace, and without enmity with his brother; insomuch that Irenaeus
     seems to place that purity of the evangelical oblation, prophesied
     of by Malachi, principally in this requisite.--pp. 31--35.

     They that are acquainted with Ecclesiastical history, know very well
     that the Eucharist, in the purest ages of the Church, made a part of
     their public service; and when the devotion of Christians began to
     decline, they yet always upon the LORD'S day celebrated the
     Christian Sacrifice. Our Second Service at the altar seems defective
     without a conformable practice to antiquity in this point, and the
     holy exercises of the LORD'S day appear to want their due perfection
     without these Eucharistical devotions....

     To this holy end and purpose I have endeavoured by proper arguments
     to press the duty of frequent communion upon the consciences of men;
     for all those motives that persuade us to communicate at all, ought
     to prevail upon us to do it often; and it appears to me very plain,
     that no sincere Christian, not otherwise lawfully hindered, can
     justify going out of the Church when the Christian Sacrifice is
     celebrated; nor is there any pretence or excuse sufficiently valid
     for a man that is in earnest with religion, to turn his back upon
     the holy table, when the heavenly banquet is there prepared....

     I have particularly taken care to show that this Christian
     institution was ordained not only to put us in mind of those great
     blessings which our SAVIOUR purchased for us by His death,--for what
     man, that reflects upon his Christianity, can easily forget
     them?--but that it was also established as a sacred rite to
     supplicate GOD the FATHER by the merits of our SAVIOUR'S Passion,
     representing to Him the images of His Body and Blood, that thereby
     He may become favourable and propitious to us. This sense of it is
     agreeable to Scripture, as it was understood by those who lived
     nighest to the times of the Apostles; and has been evidently proved
     by the learned, judicious, and pious Mr. Mede. Preface.

    A Prayer to prepare our minds for the devout celebration of the Holy
                                 Mysteries.

     Almighty GOD, by whose great bounty and infinite goodness I have now
     an opportunity offered me of approaching Thy altar, and of pleading
     before Thee the prevailing merits of the death and Passion of Thy
     SON JESUS CHRIST; I am sensible, O LORD, of my great unworthiness to
     partake of this Christian Sacrifice; but the positive command of my
     blessed SAVIOUR, when He was about to lay down His life for my sake,
     has made it absolutely necessary; and the many spiritual wants I
     labour under, oblige me to apply to this sovereign remedy to repair
     those breaches my sinful follies have made in my soul.

     Assist me, therefore, O LORD, with Thy Holy Spirit, in the duty and
     service I am about to perform. . . .

     That I may have .... such a faith in that full perfect oblation and
     satisfaction made upon the Cross for the sins of the world, that I
     may so importunately plead the merit of it in this commemoration of
     that Sacrifice, as to render Thee gracious and propitious to me a
     miserable sinner. . . .--pp. 74--76.

     When the offertory is finished, the priest desires GOD to accept of
     our alms, and of those oblations of bread and wine which he is now
     about to consecrate, whereby they may become to us the Body and
     Blood of CHRIST; in which we are to join with the greater fervour,
     because we are so particularly concerned in the acceptance of the
     holy gifts. And at this time it is that we exercise another sort of
     charity, by offering up our intercessions for the Church militant,
     for all estates and conditions of men, that GOD would be pleased to
     hear us for them, by virtue of the Sacrifice of His SON, which we
     are about to commemorate. And we now thank GOD for all His servants
     departed this life in His faith and fear, because it is by virtue of
     the same Sacrifice they will obtain their perfect consummation and
     bliss. How conformable this is to the practice of the ancient
     Church, is well known to those who are skilled in Ecclesiastical
     history.--pp. 91, 92.

     --After this comes the Prayer of Consecration, the most ancient and
     essential part of this Eucharistical worship, because it is by the
     prayer and authority of GOD'S lawful minister, that the offerings of
     bread and wine become to us symbols of the Body and Blood of CHRIST.
     . . .

                  A Prayer immediately after Consecration.

     Accept, O Eternal GOD, of that representation we make before Thee,
     of that all-sufficient Sacrifice which Thy SON our SAVIOUR JESUS
     CHRIST made upon the Cross; let the merit of it plead effectually
     for the pardon and forgiveness of all my sins, and render Thee
     favourable and propitious to me, a miserable sinner...--pp. 97--99.

     Having finished those devotions that relate to ourselves, this is a
     proper season to be mindful of the wants and necessities of our
     brethren, and we cannot better exercise our charity, than by
     recommending the whole state of mankind to the mercy and goodness of
     GOD, and by interceding with Him, by the virtue of this Christian
     Sacrifice, for a supply of whatever they shall stand in need of.
     Such intercessions always made a part of the public Liturgies of the
     ancient Church, as is well known to those that are conversant in
     antiquity, and no part of the prayers exceeded more in length than
     that which related to this subject; so that we cannot do better,
     than to follow the ancient model for our direction in this
     particular.

                  A Prayer for the whole State of Mankind.

     Accept, O LORD, of my prayers and intercessions, as a testimony of
     my charity for the whole race of mankind, and let the virtue and
     efficacy of this Christian Sacrifice, procure for them comfort and
     relief in all those wants and necessities they labour under.....

     That thus commemorating His all-sufficient Sacrifice upon earth, we
     may receive the benefit of it in Thy heavenly kingdom, and bless and
     praise Thee for it to all eternity. Amen.--pp. 128, 129. 133.

     WAKE, ARCHBISHOP.--Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
     England.

     When GOD delivered the children of Israel out of Egypt, He
     instituted the Passover to be a continual remembrance of that great
     deliverance. In like manner, our blessed SAVIOUR being now about to
     work out a much greater deliverance for us, by offering up Himself
     upon the Cross for our redemption, He designed by this Sacrament to
     continue the memory of this blessing; that, "as often as we eat of
     this bread and drink of this cup, we might show forth the LORD'S
     death till His coming."

     That this Sacrament, instituted for the like end which the Passover
     had been, and now for ever to succeed in its place, might be both
     the better understood, and the easier received by them, it pleased
     our blessed LORD to accommodate Himself, as near as was possible, to
     the ceremonies and phrases they had before been used to. He retained
     the symbols, and even the expressions they had so long been
     acquainted with; only He changed the application of them to a new
     and more excellent remembrance,--p. 49.

     And, 1, We desire it may be observed, that the peace offerings under
     the law, were designed as an acknowledgment on the people's part for
     those temporal blessings which it pleased GOD to bestow upon them.
     And because, after the sacrifice of Isaac, GOD first entered into
     the covenant with Abraham, and promised him His blessing, and to be
     his GOD, and the GOD of his seed after him; it seems to have been
     further their intention, in all these Sacrifices, to call to
     remembrance that offering of Isaac, as a foundation of all those
     blessings for which these sacrifices were appointed, as a testimony
     of their gratitude.

     2. That though the Passover, like the Sacrifice of the Cross, was
     offered as a sin-offering for the delivery of the first-born in the
     land of Egypt, yet that yearly remembrance of it, which GOD
     afterwards established, was always esteemed a peace offering; and
     indeed the perpetual order of their Sacrifices clearly demonstrates
     that it could be no other.

     So that the parallel, therefore, for the explaining the nature of
     the holy Eucharist, must be this:--

     1. That as the Jews ate of their peace-offerings in general, to call
     to mind the Sacrifice of Isaac, and give GOD thanks for those
     blessings they received by it, and of that of the Passover in
     particular, in memory of GOD'S delivering them out of Egypt; so the
     Christians partake of this blessed Sacrament, in memory of that
     deliverance which the Sacrifice of the Cross of CHRIST, whom both
     Isaac and the Paschal lamb typified, has purchased for them.

     2. That as the peace offering which the Jews ate, was not changed
     into the substance of that first Sacrifice whereof it was the
     remembrance, but was eaten as a figure or commemoration of it; so
     the Christians in their Sacrament are not to think the bread and
     wine, which CHRIST has appointed to be our peace offering, should be
     changed into the very substance of that Body which was offered for
     us upon the Cross, but to be received only as types of it. For thus
     was the peace offering in general a type of Isaac, and the Passover
     in particular the type of that first Iamb which was slain for their
     deliverance in the land of Egypt.

     When, therefore, Monsieur de Meaux tells us, that the Jews ate the
     proper flesh of their peace offering, we answer, that so do we the
     proper substance of ours; we eat the bread which CHRIST appointed to
     be the remembrance of that deliverance which He has purchased for
     us, as the body of the Lamb was commanded by GOD to be the
     remembrance of theirs.--pp. 51, 52.

     A third consequence of the corporeal presence of CHRIST in the holy
     Eucharist, is the Sacrifice of the Mass; in which we ought to
     proceed with all the caution such a point requires as both makes up
     the chiefest part of the Popish worship, and is justly esteemed one
     of the greatest and most dangerous errors that offends us.

     Monsieur de Meaux has represented it to us with so much tenderness,
     that, except perhaps it be his foundation of the corporeal presence,
     on which he builds, and his consequence, that this service is a true
     and real propitiatory Sacrifice, which his manner of expounding it
     we are persuaded will never bear, there is little in it besides, but
     what we could readily assent to.

     We distinguish the two acts which he mentions, from one another. By
     the consecration, we apply the elements, before common, to a sacred
     use; by the manducation, we fulfil our SAVIOUR'S command; "we take,
     and eat, and do this in remembrance of Him."

     This consecration, being separately made, of His Body broken, His
     Blood spilt for our redemption, we suppose represents to us our
     blessed Lord in the figure of His death, which these holy symbols
     were instituted to continue the memory of. And whilst thus with
     faith we represent to GOD the death of His SON, for the pardon of
     our sins; we are persuaded, that we incline His mercy the more
     readily to forgive them.

     We do not, therefore, doubt, but that this presenting to GOD
     ALMIGHTY this Sacrifice of our blessed LORD, is a most effectual
     manner of applying His merits to us. Were this all the Church of
     Rome meant by her propitiatory Sacrifice, there is not certainly any
     Protestant that would oppose her in it.

     Where is that Christian, that does not by faith unite himself to his
     SAVIOUR in this holy Communion?--that does not present Him to GOD as
     his only Sacrifice and propitiation?--that does not protest that he
     has nothing to offer Him but JESUS CHRIST, and the merits of His
     death?--that consecrates not all his prayers by this divine
     offering? and, whilst be thus presents to GOD the Sacrifice of His
     SON, does not learn thereby to present also himself a lively
     Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable in His sight?

     This is, no doubt, a Sacrifice worthy a Christian, infinitely
     exceeding all the Sacrifices of the law; where the knife is the
     wood, the blood not shed but in a figure, nor is there any death but
     in representation; a Sacrifice so far from taking us off from that
     of the Cross, that it unites us the more closely to it, represents
     it to us, and derives all its virtue and efficacy from it.

     This is, if any other, truly the doctrine of the Catholic Church,
     and such as the Church of England has never refused; and except it
     be our doubt of the corporeal presence, Monsieur de Meaux had
     certainly reason to expect that there was nothing in this we could
     justly except against.--pp. 62--64.

      JOHNSON, PRESBYTER.--Propitiatory Oblation in the Holy Eucharist.
                          [Published anonymously.]

     The impartial reader will not entertain any prejudice against this
     treatise for coming abroad without a name, if he do but consider how
     dangerous it is for any man openly to plead on that side of the
     cause, for which I have declared in my title-page. A very learned
     divine [Dr. Hickes.] has been sometimes slily pointed at, sometimes
     in words at length reproached, for being inclined to Popery, because
     he had freely declared his mind to this purpose. His adversary is
     not content to hint his suspicion once, or twice, but repeats it
     almost twenty times in one book, consisting of little more than two
     hundred pages; and I do not think it necessary to give opportunity
     to such men, to mark me out for destruction, by branding me with
     that infamous character.--p. 1.

     But the judicious reader will give me leave to observe, that the
     learned Bishop Taylor and the incomparable Mr. Mede could see no
     Popery in this doctrine, and those books of theirs wherein they
     expressly assert it, have maintained their reputation to as high a
     degree as most others written in that age..... And that this opinion
     is consistent with a very extraordinary degree of zeal against the
     Church of Rome, appears by the example of Mr. Mede, who was not more
     remarkable for his industry in asserting the Christian sacrifice,
     than in his laborious proofs that the Church of Rome is the
     Anti-christian Church. And I think no divine has more distinguished
     himself on this subject, than this admirable man.

     But that I may clear not only these great men, but the doctrine
     itself from all just imputation of Popery, I shall first show the
     erroneous judgment of the Church of Rome as to this particular, and
     then lay before the reader that doctrine concerning the oblation in
     the Eucharist, which I think deserves to be embraced and defended by
     all that have any regard to antiquity, or even the institution of
     CHRIST JESUS himself.

     1. The Papists hold, That, in the sacrifice of the Mass, the whole
     CHRIST, GOD and Man, is offered up hypostatically to the FATHER in
     the Eucharist, and is to be worshipped there by men under the
     species of bread and wine. This doctrine is utterly renounced by all
     Protestants; by those who assert the Eucharistical oblation, as well
     as those who deny it.

     2. The Papists assert the substantial presence of CHRIST'S body and
     blood, under the species of bread and wine in the Holy Eucharist;
     and that the Sacrifice of the Cross and Altar are substantially the
     same. But this is peremptorily denied by those who declare for the
     oblation of the Eucharist in the Church of England.

     3. The Papists do maintain, That the sacrifice of the Mass is
     available for remission of sins to the dead, as well as to the
     living. And as this is not asserted by any of our Church, so it is
     heartily detested by the Author of this Treatise.

     4. The Papists have private masses, in which the Priest pretends to
     make the oblation without distributing either the Body or Blood to
     the people; nay, without any people attending: and they have many
     hundred such masses to one communion, and all this is expressly
     justified by the Council of Trent, Sess. xxii. c. vi., though it be
     contrary to Scripture, and the practice of the primitive Church, and
     to several expressions even in their own Mass Book, which suppose
     the people to be present. All this is condemned by those who defend
     the Eucharistical Oblation here in England.

     I need not tell the learned reader, that the opinions here
     renounced, are they which make the Mass a Sacrifice so odious in the
     sight of GOD, and of all well-informed Christians. On the other side
     it will appear by the following discourse,

     1. That not the divinity and human soul of CHRIST JESUS, but his
     Body and Blood only, are offered in the Eucharist.

     2. That not his substantial, but sacramental Body and Blood are
     there offered.

     3. That the oblation of the Eucharist is a representer of that of
     the Cross, and therefore can be only for the sins of the living; for
     the representer cannot have a greater efficacy than the principal.

     4. That the Eucharist is a Feast as well as a Sacrifice, and that
     the symbols are to be eaten and drunk, as well as offered to GOD;
     and this is what needs no other proof, hut the words of institution,
     "Take, eat, this is my body," and "Drink ye all of this."

     As what is here laid down makes a wide difference between the
     sacrifice of the Mass, and the primitive Oblation, which I am now
     defending; so I cannot but say, that the approbation of this
     doctrine is so far from being for the interest or service of Popery,
     that it may be a very proper means to bring over the more sensible
     and judicious part of the Papists to the Communion of our Church.
     For the Eucharistical oblation is so clearly to be demonstrated from
     the most primitive antiquity, and so well grounded on Scripture,
     that men who have senses exercised, and are capable of perusing the
     ancient records of Christianity, cannot but discern it, and are
     therefore averse from communion with that church, which is by some
     unwarily represented as an enemy to this doctrine.--pp. 4--6.

     I shall explain and defend this notion,

     I. By showing, that propitiation was of old made by offering other
     material things besides animals.

     II. I shall give some proofs from Scripture, that the Eucharist was
     intended to be such a propitiatory oblation.

     III. That the primitive Church did understand the Eucharist to be a
     propitiatory oblation.

     IV. And that our Church may very aptly be understood to mean the
     same.

     V. I shall answer the objections against this doctrine.

     I. Propitiation was of old made by other material things, as well as
     animals. By propitiation, I do not only mean pardon of sin; but in
     general, rendering the Divine Majesty more propitious to us. ...

     1. That sin might be expiated by other material things, under the
     law, besides animals, appears from Numb. xvi. 46, 47, where Aaron at
     Moses's command makes an atonement for the sins of the people with
     incense only; and the table for incense is always called an altar,
     Exod. xl. 5. and all the parallel texts. Philo (De Victim.
     offerend.) does not only prefer the altar of incense to the altar of
     burnt-offering, but even the oblation of incense before that of
     bloody sacrifices....

     2. Oblations were made, not only for the expiation of sin, but in
     general, to make the Divine Majesty more propitious. . . . The
     shew-bread was a continual mincha, though renewed every week. It was
     to "be set in order before the LORD continually by an everlasting
     covenant, by a perpetual statute." Lev. xxiv. 8, 9. . . . . . They
     were to be placed before the LORD, and not before the Israelites.
     And further, the memorial was made by burning the frankincense,
     which was put upon them "for an offering made by fire unto the
     LORD." Lev. xxiv. 7. And it would be strange indeed, if the priests
     should burn incense, and make offerings to the people. And here I
     may very seasonably desire the reader to observe the use and nature
     of a "memorial." The Greeks render it here AnamnhsiV, which is the
     very same word that our SAVIOUR was pleased to use in the
     institution of His Supper. Whenever a mincha was offered, some part
     of it was burnt, and this part was called the "memorial," as Lev.
     ii. 2, 9, 16. .. .--pp. 11--13. I proceed to show,

     II. That the Eucharist is such a propitiatory oblation; and this
     will appear probable in the highest degree from the Scriptures of
     the New Testament. And here, to take away all just occasion of
     dispute, I declare, that I mean not, that the offered bread and wine
     have any propitiatory virtue of themselves to take away sin, or to
     confer grace. 'Tis true, all gifts and offerings are designed in a
     larger sense to procure the divine favour, to be an euwdia, an
     oblation of a sweet smelling savour to GOD; not only those offered
     under the law, but those Sacrifices offered by Noah, Gen. viii. 20.
     But the bread and wine, in the Sacrament, are not only a mincha, but
     by consecration made a representation of the great Sacrifice on the
     Cross, and on that account propitiatory in the most proper sense,
     and may therefore be called a Sacrifice, as a representative may
     justly be called by the name of its principal.

     1. The bread and wine in the Sacrament are an oblation. Now the
     solemn placing them on the holy table, and in vessels set apart for
     that only use, doth sufficiently show, that they are separated for
     divine service. Further, to "eat and drink," in a religious manner
     and with solemn rites, "before the LORD," is a phrase equivalent to
     the making an oblation. Thus Deut. xv. 19, 20. the Israelites are
     commanded "to eat the firstlings of the flocks and of the herds
     before the LORD;" and this is called, "giving," or "offering them to
     GOD," Exod. xxii. 29, 30. And perhaps no better account can be given
     of the elders "eating and drinking," when they "saw the GOD of
     Israel," Exod. xxiv. 10, 11, than that they did solemnly eat of
     those oblations, which they had brought with them to present by
     Moses to their King and their GOD..... And when 'tis said of the
     idolatrous Israelites, that they "eat upon the mountains," Ezek.
     xviii. 11. no one doubts but the meaning of it is, that they there
     made their oblations to their false gods. And since it is, I think,
     allowed on all hands, that the Eucharist is a service performed to,
     or before God, and is of right attended with a solemn eating and
     drinking in the Divine Presence, this, according to the notions of
     those countries in which the Eucharist was instituted, does imply it
     to be an oblation made to GOD. And further, 'tis most likely, that
     the bread and wine in which CHRIST first celebrated the Eucharist,
     had been actually offered in the Temple. For it has already been
     proved, that the Passover which our SAVIOUR and his Apostles had
     just before been eating, was a Sacrifice; and it is clear, that
     every sort of Sacrifice had a meat and drink-offering of course
     attending it.--pp. 14--16.

     2. Another proof, that the Eucharist is a proper oblation, we have
     from the prophet Malachi. . . . Mal. i. 11. and there is no prophecy
     more unanimously applied to the times of the Messias by the
     primitive teachers of Christianity.--p. 16.

     2. A third argument to prove the Eucharistical oblation, is taken
     from the words of our Saviour, Matt. v. 23, 24. "If thou bring thy
     gift to the altar," &c.

     Confiding in the strength of Mr. Mede's reasons for proving that
     this is an evangelical precept, I need not use many words to show,
     that our Christian oblation, or mincha, may from hence be fairly
     concluded to be intended by CHRIST JESUS himself.

     1. Our SAVIOUR supposes His disciple's bringing some material gift,
     or something to be offered on the altar, and which he could leave
     behind him, while lie went to be reconciled to his brother.

     2. It must denote a gift to be presented to Almighty GOD, and
     thereby dedicated to His service in a special manner;

     3. And therefore unquestionably the oblations made by Christians at
     the holy table; except our adversaries can show us any other
     material oblation any where else made in the primitive Christian
     Church.

     The learned reader need not be told, that Christians, in the
     Apostolical times, made their oblations for public uses every time
     they met for worship, and that out of these oblations the bread and
     wine for the sacrament were taken ....... and this is a clear
     demonstration that the bread and wine, among the rest of the gifts,
     were offered up to GOD, before they were consecrated for symbols of
     the Body and Blood of CHRIST, and that the practice of the primitive
     Church is the best gloss on these words of our blessed SAVIOUR.

     Nay, further, we have here a clear account why the Christian
     oblation is by Malachi styled "a pure mincha," viz. because, as Mr.
     Mede has long ago observed, it is to be offered with purity of
     conscience, and freedom from malice, which is that singular purity,
     by which the Christian oblation differs from that of the Jews, who,
     as has been observed, were not prohibited to offer Sacrifices, and
     other gifts, though they were at enmity with one another.--pp.
     18--23.

     II. Having proved that the Eucharistical bread and wine are an
     oblation to be offered upon the Christian altar, I proceed to show
     that they are a propitiatory oblation. And

     1. This will, I think, evidently follow from the very nature of an
     oblation presented upon the altar; unless our adversaries can make
     it appear that there ever was any Sacrifice or oblation so offered,
     which was not propitiatory. I do not say, that every Sacrifice and
     oblation so offered was expiatory, and had a power of atoning for
     sin; but that it was intended to procure the Divine favour, to avert
     evil and punishment, and to move the Divine Majesty to bestow such
     blessings as the worshipper stood in need of, and was therefore in
     all respects propitiatory, excepting that it was not expiatory; for
     this last quality was peculiar to the Sacrifices and offerings for
     sin, and the trespass offerings......We have the propitiatory nature
     of all Sacrifices and oblations at the altar represented to us,
     Ezek. xlv. 13--17. "This is the oblation (Heb. heave-offering) that
     ye shall offer. . . and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah of
     an homer of barley.... And one lamb out of the flock, out of two
     hundred. ... for a meat offering, (Heb. a mincha) and for a
     burnt-offering, and for peace offerings, to make reconciliation
     (propitiation, or atonement, Heb. kapper) for them, saith the LORD
     God. All the people of the land shall give this oblation for the
     prince in Israel ... he shall prepare the sin-offering, and the
     meat-offering (Heb. mincha), and the burnt-offering, and the
     peace-offerings, to make reconciliation (Heb. kapper) for the house
     of Israel." More need not be said to show, that all sacrifices and
     oblations on the altar had a propitiatory nature.

     2. Further, If the Eucharistical elements be considered not only as
     an oblation, but as symbols and figures of CHRIST'S crucified Body
     and effused Blood, it will from thence appear, that they are a
     propitiatory offering. That by them "we show forth CHRIST'S death,"
     (1 Cor. xi. 26.) the Apostle affirms; and if they are an oblation,
     as has been proved, then this oblation is directed to GOD, and shows
     forth CHRIST'S death to Him, as well as to the communicants; and if
     the holy Eucharist be an oblation, in which we show forth CHRIST'S
     death to GOD, then, I think, no more need be said to show, that it
     is a propitiatory oblation.

     Hitherto I have been showing, that the holy Eucharist is an
     oblation, whereby we do in general render GOD propitious to us; but
     I have before hinted, that there is a more ancient sense of this
     word ("propitiation") whereby it especially denotes "expiation," or
     "atonement for sin." Now I proceed to show,

     3. That if the holy Eucharist, as it is an oblation of bread and
     wine, and as that bread and wine are types and symbols of CHRIST'S
     death, do not expiate, and atone [for] sin; yet that it does this as
     it is a full and perfect representation of the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S
     Body and Blood.

     I here think it necessary to declare, what I mean by its being a
     representative; and I persuade myself that they of the ancients arid
     moderns, who have called it a "commemorative Sacrifice," did really
     intend the same thing with me; but they have not, I suppose, been
     rightly understood by those who have been of a contrary judgment.
     Now I rather choose the word "representative," as being known to
     denote, in our language, not only that which resembles, and puts us
     in mind of something else; but what is deputed or substituted in the
     stead of another, and is to us what the principal would be if it
     were present. And such a representative of CHRIST'S Body and Blood
     are the consecrated bread and wine in the Sacrament. They were
     instituted by CHRIST, not only to call Him and His sufferings to
     remembrance, but to be to us all that His natural Body and Blood,
     crucified and poured out for us, could be, if we had them actually
     lying on our altars. Nor can I conceive how the words of St. Paul
     can otherwise be understood, in their full scope and latitude, when
     he says, "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
     communion," &c. 1 Cor. x. 16. He supposes that the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST are communicated to us by the bread and wine in the holy
     Eucharist. He tells us, what was sacrificed is communicated to
     us--and not the effects of that Sacrifice only. And when St. Paul
     saith, that ignorant and profane communicants "do not discern the
     LORD'S Body" in the holy Eucharist, (1 Cor. xi. 29.) and that "they
     are guilty of" (an indignity toward) the Body and Blood of our
     LORD," v. 27, he surely takes it for granted, that the Body and
     Blood are actually there, whether they discern it or not.--pp.
     25--28.

     'Tis universally acknowledged, that the Sacrament is a
     "representative" of CHRIST'S Body and Blood; but then, some seem to
     understand by that word no more than a type, a figure, or "shadow,"
     such as the Passover and all the Sacrifices were, and not "the very
     image of the things." By the "very image," I understand, "true
     representative," by which are meant the Sacraments of the New
     Testament, if we may believe Gregory Nazianzen and Theophylact. (See
     Theoph. on Heb. x. 1.) Such a representative is every rainbow we now
     see of that which GOD "set in the clouds," in the time of Noah. Gen.
     ix. 13. ... And though the Covenant was ratified, and unalterably
     established by the appearance of the first rainbow, yet GOD thought
     fit to renew this covenant frequently every year, by causing this
     bow to be seen in the clouds. So, though the evangelical covenant
     was effectually confirmed by CHRIST'S death on the Cross, yet GOD
     has thought fit, for the supporting our faith and hope, to have the
     representative Sacrifice of His Body and Blood often repeated, and
     the Gospel Covenant by this means renewed. ... I have already
     declared against the personal presence or Sacrifice of CHRIST in the
     Eucharistical elements. Nor do I suppose that the bread and wine
     represent His whole Person, as He is GOD and Man, but only His
     sacrificed Body and His effused Blood. His Soul was separated from
     the Body before the Sacrifice was consummated. We have in the
     Sacrament His Body and Blood consecrated and administered apart,
     which is a demonstration that we have not there His entire living
     Person. . . .

     Now since it appears, that the Eucharistical elements are not only
     types, but representatives, and that not only to man, but to GOD;
     and since they are representatives of the only truly propitiatory
     and expiatory, Sacrifice of the Cross; I suppose it clearly follows,
     that they also are a propitiatory and expiatory Sacrifice; for,
     otherwise, they are no true and perfect representation. But that
     this may more distinctly appear to the reader's view, I will
     particularly consider those texts of the New Testament wherein, I
     suppose, we have this truth clearly proved to us.

     1. I shall make use of the words of institution; because I think
     that an argument drawn from them will be of the greatest weight; and
     I am persuaded that the propitiatory nature of the holy Eucharist is
     as plainly contained in those words, as any rational man can desire.
     When our SAVIOUR says, "This is My Body given for you," He must
     mean, given to GOD. For, to whom did CHRIST give His natural,
     crucified Body? Not to us, but for us: "He gave Himself, for us an
     offering, and a Sacrifice to GOD." Eph. v. 2. And if the bread in
     the Sacrament be His Body given, offered, sacrificed for us by a
     true and proper representation, then I cannot see how the
     consequence can be avoided; namely, that the consecrated bread and
     wine are a representative oblation, or Sacrifice of His Body and
     Blood; for it would be a poor representative indeed, if it fell
     short of its principal or original in the main point of all; if it
     represented CHRIST only as dead, not as sacrificed; only as
     crucified, not as offered to GOD for us. As sure as it is His Body,
     so sure it is, that it is His Body sacrificed for us. St. Paul,
     instead of "given," says, "broken for you;" 1 Cor. xi. 24. which can
     scarce, in propriety, be understood of His natural Body, "one bone
     of which was not broken:" not His natural, but His sacramental Body
     is broken for us; and the same body which is broken is also given
     for us; which is to me an unanswerable proof, that His
     representative, sacramental Body is also His Body offered for us.
     And the very same may, and must, in justice, be said of the
     Eucharistical wine, viz. that it is His blood poured out, offered
     for us.

     Further, it is justly observed by some, that when our SAVIOUR says,
     "Do this," &c. the true meaning most probably is, "Offer this"...

     Further, our SAVIOUR'S words are, "Do," or, "offer this" eiV thn
     emhn anamnhsiV, "for a memorial of Me," as I should rather choose to
     render it than "in remembrance of Me." I have before observed, that
     anamnhsiV; is a sacrificial term, and denotes that part of the bread
     offering which was burnt in the fire, where with the atonement, or
     propitiation was made under the law. And therefore, what can be more
     congruous than to suppose, that our SAVIOUR, when He was going to
     yield Himself a Sacrifice for us, should by these words design this
     institution to be a perpetual representation of this Sacrifice to
     His FATHER? For to Him all these memorials under the law were
     offered, and by them the oblation itself was rendered beneficial to
     the offerers.--pp. 30--35.

     Thus I have showed from the words of institution, that it is in the
     highest degree probable, that our SAVIOUR intended the holy
     Eucharist to be a perfect representation of His own Sacrifice to His
     FATHER.--p. 39.

     . . . The bread and wine are divinely authorised substitutes for the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST JESUS, and therefore may justly have the
     names and titles of their principals; and by being presented apart,
     they are clear proofs, that the Sacrifice by them represented is
     just now ready to be offered, and the propitiation to be made;
     CHRIST cannot be represented as actually dead, but He must be
     represented as actually sacrificed. He was not sacrificed whilst
     alive; that is inconsistent; but when His Blood was poured out, then
     the Sacrifice was offered; for it was the blood of Sacrifices with
     which the atonement was made; . . . . Therefore, the bread and wine
     represented Christ as just now dead, and fit to be offered. And it
     is scarce to be conceived how our SAVIOUR could have expressed
     Himself more clearly, when He says, "This is My Body given,"
     didomenon, just now given, "for you." By this representation, our
     SAVIOUR offered Himself in effigy, as I may say, before He offered
     Himself on the Cross; and by this representation, what passed near
     one thousand seven hundred years ago, is set forth, and exhibited to
     us, as if it were but now done.

     There never was anything so memorable as the death of the SON of
     GOD. If we turn over all history, both sacred and profane, we shall
     find nothing that can justly be compared to it; there never was
     anything done so acceptable to GOD, and so beneficial to mankind;
     nothing that deserves so much to be remembered both by GOD and man.
     This death of His was but short; He remained in that state not above
     thirty-eight hours: but, the effects of it being so very great, the
     benefits so lasting, the merits so infinite, no wonder if He who was
     pleased to suffer so much for our sakes, thought fit to have the
     memory of it recorded in the most indelible manner. And how could
     this be better done, than by providing, that it should be frequently
     and solemnly commemorated; nor only commemorated, but represented;
     not only to man, but to GOD; not only that it might be done in the
     most serious and affecting manner, but that, by the benefits to be
     received from GOD by this representation, we might be the more
     encouraged still to repent, and perpetuate this representation, and
     to live like a people that have received such blessings from this
     Sacrifice, and expect much greater still?

     And having thus at large explained the propitiatory nature of the
     oblation in the holy Eucharist, I need not any more than hint to my
     reader, that this shows the purity and excellence of the
     Eucharistical oblation beyond all other whatsoever; and that this
     therefore is the "pure Mincha" foretold by the prophet Malachi, as
     being the most perfect representation of the Sacrifice of that "Lamb
     of GOD without spot and blemish, that takes away the sins of the
     world."--pp. 44, 45.

     II. I now proceed to the second argument from Scripture, whereby I
     shall prove, as I have in my last, that the holy Eucharist is a full
     representation of the Sacrifice on the Cross, and therefore
     propitiatory.

     The Apostle expressly says, "We have an altar, from which they have
     no right to eat, who serve the tabernacle," Heb. xiii. 10. From
     which words, with those going before and after, I shall prove these
     three things:

     1. That it is an oral eating that the Apostle here speaks of.

     2. That the oblation here understood, is, that of the Body and Blood
     of CHRIST in the Eucharist.

     3. And that consequently, by the "altar," he means the Communion
     table.

     1. That it is an oral eating that the Apostle here speaks of, will
     appear, both from what goes before, and what follows. In the
     foregoing verse the Apostle had said, "It is a good thing that the
     heart be strengthened," or, "refreshed with grace," that is, with
     evangelical mercies and blessings, "not with" such "meats" as the
     Jews used to eat in their festivals, and their peace offerings,
     which had "not profited them that had been occupied therein," so as
     to purge their consciences from dead works. These meats were without
     question orally eaten; to these meats he opposes what Christians
     receive from their altar; for the Apostle seems to speak, as if he
     would not have the Jews think that they were the only people whom
     GOD feeds from His altar. "We also," says he, "have an altar," and
     what we receive from thence is such as cannot be eaten "by those who
     serve the tabernacle." The least that can be said of this sense, is,
     that the Apostle's connexion will by this means be most apparent,
     and his arguing most apposite. But the following words make this
     more clear still, in which he proves what he had here laid down,
     viz. that neither priest nor people, so long as they served the
     Jewish tabernacle or temple, had any right to eat from the Christian
     altar. "For," says he, "the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is
     brought into the sanctuary, are burnt without the camp," and,
     therefore, could not possibly be eaten orally by those who were in
     the temple or tabernacle; and he proves that our SAVIOUR'S was such
     a Sacrifice, because He "suffered without the gate." v. 12. Now this
     does apparently prove, that the Jewish priests and people could not
     orally eat from off the Christian altar, upon supposition we have
     there a Sacrifice for sin, "whose blood has been carried into the
     sanctuary;" but it does not prove that they might not eat of the
     Christian Sacrifice in a spiritual manner; for they might by faith
     eat even of those sin-offerings whose bodies were burnt; that is,
     they might sincerely believe, that the blood of the Sacrifice made
     an atonement for their sin: so that I think it very evident that the
     Apostle here cannot be understood of spiritual manducation; and he
     that is of that opinion, let him reduce the Apostle's argument into
     mood and figure, and he will see his own error; nay, let him but put
     "cross" for "altar," and see what sense he makes of the Apostle's
     words; "We have a cross from which they have no right to eat," &c. .
     .

     2. And if the Apostle speak of eating orally, then it will easily be
     granted, that the Sacrifice here understood must be the Sacrifice of
     the Body and Blood of CHRIST in the Eucharist; for we have no other
     which can be so eaten. . . .

     3. That by the "altar" here mentioned, the Apostle means the
     Communion Table. . . . The preposition ex or ek may signify "at" or
     "off from." ... When the Apostle says, "They who eat the Sacrifices,
     are partakers of the altar," by "altar" he cannot mean the
     Sacrifice, for then the sense of those words must be, He that eats
     the Sacrifice, eats the Sacrifice. But the plain meaning is, that
     "he who religiously eats the Sacrifice, is a guest of the altar;"
     though he do not sit or stand at the altar, as at a table. By parity
     of reason, in this place, "to eat of," or "from the altar," is "to
     be a guest at the altar."..... The Sacrifice of the Cross cannot be
     meant in this place; because that was a Sacrifice without an altar,
     and therefore could not in all probability be intended by the word
     "altar." In a word, I think one of the best rules for understanding
     Scripture, is never to depart from the common literal sense of the
     words, unless for some violent reason indeed; but here I can see no
     reason at all. The question is, What is the common meaning of the
     word "altar," when used by Christians in relation to the Christian
     Church? And here all antiquity, from CHRIST JESUS Himself down to
     the present age, does unanimously affirm, that the most usual and
     received signification of that word in relation to the Christian
     Church, is that of a Communion Table; this, therefore, must be the
     meaning of it here as well as elsewhere, unless some inconsistence,
     or absurdity do from thence follow; but when that sense fits this
     place better than any other, as has been showed, we cannot depart
     from it but that we must, at the same time, take the liberty of
     fixing such signification to words as best fits our present terms,
     without any regard to truth, or the intention of the writer. And
     since all do and must agree, that either the oblation of CHRIST on
     the Cross, or of His Body and Blood in the holy Eucharist, must be
     here alluded to; 'tis left to the reader to determine, whether it be
     not most reasonable to understand it of the latter, since 'tis an
     oral manducation is here spoken of, and consequently the oblation
     must be such an one as is capable of being orally eaten; especially,
     since 'tis an oblation, or Sacrifice on an altar, and the most
     received signification of the word "altar," determines us to take it
     for the holy Table, on which this mystery is performed; and if the
     representative Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Body and Blood be here meant,
     there is, I suppose, no occasion for me to repeat my former
     arguments, whereby to prove that it is propitiatory.--pp. 45--50.

     But before I pass to my third argument, I shall endeavour to wipe
     off those exceptions of our doctor against giving the name "altar"
     to the Communion table,--I mean, in a strict and proper sense. If it
     could not be proved that the holy Table on which we perform our
     mysteries, was ever called an Altar in Scripture, or antiquity, yet
     the holy Eucharist might be a proper oblation; for the board on
     which the shew-bread was placed, is never called an altar, always a
     "table;" yet it is certain, the "memorial" of the shew-bread offered
     upon that table, was as proper an oblation as any other; 'tis
     expressly called "an offering made by fire unto the LORD," Lev.
     xxiv. 7. But the Communion board is never called simply a "table,"
     or "holy table" in the Scripture; but "the LORD'S table," or (which
     is the same thing) an "altar."--p. 51.

     . . . The books of Ezekiel and Malachi are the only books in which
     we meet with this expression, "the table of the LORD," "the table of
     God;" and they, by this phrase, do, beyond all reasonable doubt,
     mean an altar. And from hence I form my

     3rd Argument for the propitiatory oblation in the holy Eucharist,
     which proceeds thus. If the holy Board, on which the sacred
     mysteries are performed, be on that account an altar, then the Body
     and Blood of CHRIST there represented are an oblation; but the holy
     board on which these mysteries are performed is an altar, and
     therefore the representative Body and Blood of CHRIST must be an
     oblation; and if an oblation, then certainly propitiatory and
     expiatory, because the principal was so in the most perfect manner.
     Now that the holy board is an altar on account of the representation
     there made, appears from those words of St. Paul, "Ye cannot be
     partakers of the table of the LORD, and the table of devils," 1 Cor.
     x. 21. For it has already been shewed that by "the LORD'S table," or
     "God's table," we are always to understand an altar; for no other
     utensil, or thing, has that name given it in the holy Scripture; and
     we are to take the meaning of words in the Bible, not from our
     fancies, or from vulgar prejudices, but from the Bible itself; and
     since we find it has no other signification in any other place in
     the Old Testament, we must be extremely partial indeed, if we allow
     it any other in the New.--p. 56.

     III. I proceed to show, That the primitive church did thus
     understand the Scriptures, and believe the holy Eucharist to be a
     propitiatory oblation.--p. 57.

     1. The citations from antiquity which Mr. Mede gives us, do to a
     demonstration prove, that the primitive Church believed the bread
     and wine to be an oblation made to ALMIGHTY GOD.--p. 59.

     2. I proceed to show, That they thought the Eucharist a propitiatory
     oblation; and to show that the ancient Liturgies give their evidence
     to this truth, I shall mention the Clementive, in which after the
     last words before cited, viz. "We beseech Thee look graciously on
     these gifts laid before Thee," it presently adds "and be Thou well
     pleased with them for the honour of Thy CHRIST, . . . that so they
     who are partakers hereof, may be established in piety," &c. This is
     a form of full propitiation in behalf of the receivers: the
     remainder of the prayer is a propitiation for the Church, and all
     orders of men..... And it is owned, that all the ancient Liturgies
     have forms to this effect, though not in the same words: and it was
     for this reason, that the ancient Church used the Eucharist upon all
     extraordinary occasions, upon a marriage, or a death, I mean, just
     on the decease of any Christian, and upon any great calamity or
     affliction, it being supposed to be a proper means to avert the
     wrath of GOD, and conciliate His favour; and indeed to what other
     intent or purpose should it be offered to the Divine Majesty?--pp.
     67, 8.

     IV. I proceed to show, that our Church may very aptly be understood
     to mean the same. And,

     1. I can see no reason to doubt, but that as the Bread and Wine are
     by the Rubric ordered to be placed on the table, just before the
     Prayer "for the whole state of CHRIST'S Church," so those words,
     "accept our oblations," are to be referred to the Bread and Wine
     just before placed on the table. And what confirms me in this
     opinion, is, that the Rubric and those words were inserted at the
     same time, and by the same hands; there was no Rubric ordering the
     Bread and Wine to be so placed, before the Restoration, and before
     that time there was no such word as "oblation" in the following
     Prayer; before that time the words were only these, "to accept our
     alms, and to receive our prayers." And lest any one should apply the
     word "oblations" to the offerings due to the minister, the Rubric
     relating to these offerings, which formerly stood just before this
     Prayer, is now put after the whole Communion Office. It is well
     known that the writings of Mr. Mede were greatly admired by most of
     our Clergy at the time of the Restoration; and he had publicly
     declared his judgment, that our Liturgy was defective in this
     particular, and many great men had shown themselves of the same
     mind, and therefore we might justly wonder if, upon a review of the
     Liturgy, nothing had been done to supply this defect. All this
     considered, I think it is in the highest degree probable, that by
     "oblations" there, we are to understand the bread and wine. And I
     think no one can reasonably doubt, but that they who added
     "oblations" in the Prayer 'for the whole state of CHRIST'S Church,"
     and the Rubric immediately going before, had the very words of Mr.
     Mede in their eye.--pp. 82, 3.

     Some think that the oblation of the Eucharistical Bread is lessened
     by being placed after that of the alms-money; whereas, if they be
     looked upon as several oblations, I rather suppose that the climax
     rises than falls; I mean, that we proceed upwards, first offer the
     alms, next the Eucharistical elements, and last of all exhibit them
     to GOD, as representatives of the great Sacrifice; and indeed the
     thing speaks for itself, we must begin with the lowest, because we
     end with the highest.--pp. 84, 5.

     There are two considerable points determined by this Rubric, which
     before were uncertain, viz.

     1. Who shall place the Bread and Wine on the holy Table? And this
     office is assigned to the Priest; and why to the Priest, unless it
     were to show that the placing them there was a very solemn action,
     not to be performed by any common person? And I suppose there can no
     reason be given, why this should be done by the priest, rather than
     any one else, but only this, that he is the only person authorized
     to tender an oblation to the ALMIGHTY.

     2. The other point determined by this Rubric, is, when the elements
     shall be there placed? And that is, when he "humbly presents the
     alms;" and, therefore, to be offered together with them. . . . The
     Bread and Wine were ordered to be provided by an old Rubric, and
     sure neither Priest nor clerk need be told, that when there is a
     communion, Bread and Wine must be placed on the Holy Table: but the
     question was, when, and by whom? and upon this much depended; and
     these questions are answered by this Rubric in favour of the
     Christian oblation.

     And after all, if this Rubric be not so express, in words at length,
     as some honest men might desire, yet it is sufficient that there is
     enough said, as to the first oblation, to justify any man that doth
     take these words as an actual tendering and presenting the elements
     to GOD. They who reviewed the Liturgy had reason to be on the
     reserve, considering how many they had to please, how many severe
     critical eyes were to censure it, before it could be established by
     a national authority. And for this reason they did not go so far as
     Mr. Mede desired; for he, after the words just before cited, would
     have "the congregation stand up, and show some sign of due and lowly
     reverence," while the minister offered the elements. The adding of a
     new ceremony, in which the people were to be concerned, was not
     thought advisable at that season.

     2. Afterwards, all, or part of this Bread and Wine, thus offered, is
     by the Priest, in the words, and by the authority of CHRIST JESUS,
     declared to be His Body given or sacrificed, His Blood shed for our
     sins.

     And here we have another question of moment determined in favour of
     the "propitiatory oblation." For one main matter of dispute under
     this head, is whether the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S death is represented
     to GOD, or whether only to the people? and the Consecration Prayer
     clearly decides this dispute; for no one can doubt whether that
     Prayer be directed to GOD: and the words of institution are by our
     Church made a part of that Prayer, and therefore, to a
     demonstration, directed to GOD, as well as the rest of that Prayer:
     and to what end do we represent the Sacrifice of CHRIST to GOD, if
     not in order to procure from GOD the effects and purchase of that
     Sacrifice? And if this representation of a Sacrifice be made to GOD,
     and in order to obtain these blessings, then I need add no more
     words to prove it a "propitiatory oblation."

     3. Another argument may be drawn from those solemn words of
     propitiation, in behalf of every single communicant, "The Body of
     our LORD JESUS CHRIST, which was given for thee, preserve thy body
     and soul to eternal life;" and the same is said mutatis mutandis, at
     the delivery of the cup: and how can this Body and Blood preserve us
     to eternal life, but by preserving us from sin and punishment, from
     guilt, and from falling under temptations? So that no words can be
     more propitiatory; and it is to be observed, that, while they are
     spoken, the Minister is holding the consecrated elements in his
     hand, tendering them at the same time to GOD, and to the
     communicants.--pp. 86--88.

     After all have communicated, it is presumed by the Rubric that some
     of the consecrated "elements remain," which the priest is commanded
     "reverently" to "place" on the table, and, after the LORD'S Prayer,
     to say that which in the Scotch Liturgy is placed between the
     consecration and administration, and I think may properly be called
     the Prayer of Oblation; in which GOD is desired "mercifully to
     accept this our Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving;" which words,
     as they may be understood of the whole service, so they may likewise
     be referred to the Eucharistical elements, part of which, as was
     observed, are supposed still to remain and stand on the table. As
     for my part, I cannot but take "this Sacrifice of praise and
     thanksgiving" in its most proper sense, in congruity with ancient
     Liturgies, to denote the symbols of CHRIST'S Body and Blood.......
     And it is by virtue, and in confidence of this Sacrifice, that we
     proceed to intercede, that not only we, but the "whole Church may
     receive remission of sins, and all other benefits of His Passion,"
     "by the merits and death" of CHRIST JESUS, "and through faith in His
     Blood" represented by the consecrated cup. . . .

     On the other side, I dare not say that every one of these
     expressions must of necessity be taken in the sense here suggested,
     or that it was the intention of the Church to make the belief of the
     material Sacrifice in the holy Eucharist, a necessary term of
     communion: it is not absolutely required, that the prayer last
     mentioned should be used by any; for the following, in which there
     are no such expressions, may be used in its stead. All that I plead
     for is, that the doctrine here laid down, is agreeable enough to our
     present forms of celebrating the holy Eucharist, and that they ought
     the rather so to be understood, in conformity to the primitive
     church, and, as I truly think, to the Scripture itself; and if we
     thus understand our Liturgy, there will be no occasion for any of
     our people to run to the Church of Rome to have this defect
     supplier..... The doctrine of the Christian Sacrifice had been so
     horribly abused by the Papists, that our Church chose to be very
     sparing and cautious in inserting anything into her Liturgy, that
     might be improved to any superstitious notions or practices, and
     only left so much as to show, that she did not renounce the
     primitive, pious notion of the Christian Sacrifice. It is true she
     has wholly laid aside those words, to be met with in all the ancient
     Offices, "commemorating we offer;" but the Church, (if I understand
     her rightly,) offers the bread and wine in express terms; and though
     the word "offer" is not expressly applied to the Bread and Wine
     after consecration; yet I suppose none will dispute but that an
     oblation may be made by implication, without using the words,
     "offer" and "oblation."--pp. 89--91.

     And now the old question, cui bono, may be justly asked; to what end
     or purpose is so much zeal and warmth shown on both sides to
     persuade the world, that the holy Eucharist is, or is not, a real
     oblation, or, as others choose to speak, a Sacrifice? And,

     1. It cannot in justice be said, that the only end, which the
     assertors of the Eucharistical oblation propose to themselves, is to
     make the superior officers of CHRIST'S Church "priests" in the
     common acceptation of the word. It does not appear that Mr. Mede,
     who is, after all, the greatest patron of that doctrine, had any
     such design in his view; nor was there any great occasion for him to
     labour in that point, in the age when he wrote, the distinction
     between Clergy and Laity, or, at least, of ministers and people,
     being a thing then not disputed: nay, it is evident, that not only
     Bishop Bull had printed his answer to Monsieur Meaux, but Dr. Hickes
     had wrote, though not published, his letter on this subject, before
     ever the Christian priesthood had been assaulted in that furious
     manner it has since been.

     2. But I shall show, that this consideration of the Sacrament's
     being an oblation, or representative Sacrifice, does give more life
     and lustre to it in relation to the people. And,

     1. Let the reader judge, whether that be a more lively commemoration
     of CHRIST'S death, which is supposed to be a bare type and
     resemblance of it, as the Passover, and other Sacrifices under the
     Law, were; or that which is not only so, but a perfect
     representation of His Sacrifice, and, to all intents and purposes,
     as effectual to our good, as if JESUS CHRIST had been crucified
     before our eyes, and as if we had His very Body and Blood to present
     to the FATHER, in order to avert His indignation against our sins,
     and to atone for them. Mere types and shadows are cold, lifeless
     things; whereas perfect representatives do more raise our
     affections, and leave deeper impressions on our memories, and a
     perfect representative it cannot be, except it be an oblation;
     therefore, says Theophylact on Heb. x. 1. "We make a memorial of
     this oblation, as if it were now performed."

     2. I suppose it will not bear a dispute, whether our faith and
     confidence in the merits of CHRIST'S death be more invigorated and
     confirmed by a bare remembrance, a solemn calling it to mind, or by
     having the oblation, by which He purchased these blessings, put into
     our hands and mouths. . .

     3. And I believe there is nothing that can more inflame and exalt
     the devotion of a sincere Christian, than to think and believe, that
     when he is praying at GOD'S altar, and receiving the holy Eucharist,
     he has the price of his redemption in his hand, or lying before his
     eyes. He is emboldened to do somewhat more than pray, even humbly to
     claim those spiritual blessings he stands in need of; for the soul
     of every pious and judicious communicant, is hereby not only assured
     of pardon and grace, and a happy resurrection, and of whatever
     CHRIST has purchased for us, but is delighted to see and perceive by
     what means these blessings are obtained and conveyed to us; when the
     Sacrifice with which those blessings were purchased, is now
     representatively renewed, and when he can plead for all necessary
     supplies for his soul by that Sacrifice now visibly exhibited, to
     which nothing can be denied. And I believe, all that have
     experienced how the improvement of this truth of the oblation of the
     holy Eucharist does encourage and provoke their faith, hope, and
     devotion, will never permit themselves to be rifled of such a
     treasure, by the vain disputers of this world.--pp. 98--101.

     But from the whole the reader may see what reason we have to express
     and publish our zeal for the Eucharistical oblation; because it does
     so much illustrate the beneficial nature of the ordinance itself.
     Nay, it is a great honour done to CHRIST, frequently to represent to
     GOD, as well as man, what we believe to be the most wonderful and
     engaging favour that ever was, or could be performed for us. It is
     further the greatest honour we can do to GOD the FATHER, to present
     to Him the most valuable oblation that we can give, or He receive,
     ... an oblation which can be offered no where but in the Church of
     CHRIST; the benefits whereof no people are capable of but His
     disciples; which can be offered by none, but by the officers
     commissioned by Him: it is the only oblation, which is of greater
     value than ourselves; of which, therefore, to deprive the Church of
     GOD, would be the greatest sacrilege; and for men, by false glosses
     on the Scripture, to rob themselves of it, is a great injury done to
     their own souls; and I pray GOD give the reader such a sense of this
     truth as I am under, while I defend it; and GOD grant us all clear
     understandings, impartial judgments, and a truly primitive spirit,
     that we may follow the old apostolical paths.--pp. 107, 8.

                          ID.--Unbloody Sacrifice.

     Sacrifice is, 1, some material thing, either animate or inanimate,
     offered to GOD; 2, for the acknowledging the dominion, and other
     attributes of GOD, or for procuring divine blessings, especially
     remission of sin; 3, upon a proper altar, (which yet is rather
     necessary for the external decorum, than the internal perfection of
     the Sacrifice); 4, by a proper officer, and with agreeable rites; 5,
     and consumed in such a manner, as the author of the Sacrifice has
     appointed.--pp. 4, 5.

     In order to prove the Eucharist a proper Sacrifice, I am .... first
     to show, that material things were actually offered to GOD in the
     Eucharist by the primitive Church, and by CHRIST JESUS Himself. But
     before I undertake this, I shall first, by way of prevention,
     dispute one pass with our adversaries; and it is the main evasion
     they have, when they feel themselves closely pressed with our
     arguments; I mean, that the Sacrifice of the Eucharist is frequently
     called by the ancients an "unbloody," "rational," "spiritual"
     Sacrifice. And when they find any of these epithets given to the
     Sacrifice of the Eucharist, they from thence conclude that it was by
     the ancients meant to be a mere mental, figurative Sacrifice. Now
     once for all to silence this pretence, .... I shall beforehand show,
     that the ancients were so far from thinking it was inconsistent with
     a true material Sacrifice, to be "unbloody," "rational," or
     "spiritual," that they do often in the same sentence express, or
     imply, the Sacrifice of the Eucharist to be material, and yet
     unbloody, rational, or spiritual--p. 19.

     1. As to the word "unbloody," it generally denotes some material
     thing, according to the best of my judgment and information.
     However, that it does so, when applied to the Sacrifice of the
     Eucharist, take these following instances. St. Cyril of Alexandria
     says--"The table which had the shew-bread denotes the unbloody
     Sacrifice of the bread or loaves." .... St. Chrysostom ..... St.
     Gregory Nazianzen ..... St. Athanasius ..... Eusebius..... So that I
     take for granted, that by the "unbloody Sacrifice" is always meant
     the Sacrifice of the sacramental bread and wine, in all ancient
     monuments of Christianity; and, consequently, that when "rational"
     or "spiritual" go along with "unbloody," the same materials are
     thereby meant; and indeed, in some particular places, there are
     other concomitant words, which shew that bread and wine are meant;
     as, in the Apostolical Constitutions, "Instead of bloody Sacrifices,
     CHRIST enjoined the rational, unbloody Sacrifice of His Body and
     Blood;" for where is CHRIST'S Blood sacrificed in an unbloody way,
     but in the Eucharistical chalice?--pp. 20--22.

     2. As for the word "rational," when applied to the Eucharistic
     Sacrifice, that it does not only denote some act of our reason or
     understanding, sufficiently appears by this, that the Sacramentary
     of Gregory and other Latin Liturgies instruct the priest to pray to
     GOD, that he would "render it a rational acceptable Sacrifice, and
     make it the Body and Blood of CHRIST;" which can be understood of
     nothing, but the material bread and wine; for of nothing else can it
     be said or expected, that it should become the Body and Blood.--pp.
     24.

     3. It may seem very strange to some moderns, to be told, that the
     ancients looked upon the oblation of a material thing, when
     performed according to the laws of CHRIST and the Church, to be a
     "spiritual" oblation; yet certainly such were their 'thoughts, such
     were their words. St. James's Liturgy, in the Prothesis, teaches the
     priest to say, "I am not worthy to hold up my eyes toward this
     spiritual table." .... The priest, when he presents the elements on
     the altar, is by the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom directed to say,
     "Enable us to offer the gifts and spiritual Sacrifices for our own
     sins, and for the errors of the people." . . .

     Nay, it is further observable, that the ancients did not only assert
     the bread and wine in the Eucharist to have been rational and
     spiritual Sacrifices; but Theodoret expressly says, "We find
     Melchisedek offering to GOD not irrational Sacrifice, but bread and
     wine; and St. Hierom says, "Irrational Sacrifices are no longer to
     be offered, but bread and wine, that is, the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST." Eusebius Caesariensis, "Melchisedek never appears to have
     offered corporeal Sacrifices, but blessed Abraham with bread and
     wine." Eusebius, and St. Hierom, and Theodoret, certainly understood
     the language of the Primitive Church, equally at least to any now
     living; and they were so far from thinking that a Sacrifice of bread
     and wine might not be a spiritual Sacrifice, that they do very
     clearly and roundly deny, that such Sacrifices are irrational and
     corporeal.

     It is evident, that St. Paul uses the same language; for he speaks
     of a "spiritual body," 1 Cor. xv. and in the same chapter calls the
     entire Person of CHRIST JESUS, "a quickening spirit," ver. 45.--pp.
     24--26.

     I suppose there is no occasion for me particularly to prove, that
     the Fathers believed, that Melchisedec offered bread and wine, and
     that in so doing he was a type of CHRIST, by producing the several
     passages wherein they express these sentiments. .... And what I am
     chiefly concerned to prove is, that they who believed that
     Melchisedek offered bread and wine, and that in so doing he was a
     type of CHRIST, must believe that CHRIST also did offer those
     materials, nay, that they who believed that such an oblation was,
     and ought to be made in the Christian Church, must believe also,
     that CHRIST in the institution did make this oblation: for it
     cannot, in common sense and charity, be believed, that they thought
     any thing was, or ought to be done in the Eucharist by the Church,
     but what our SAVIOUR did when He founded it; and, indeed, several of
     them do express their sentiments to this purpose......But, to put
     the point beyond dispute, I shall further lay before my reader the
     express affirmations of the ancients to this purpose; namely, that
     our SAVIOUR did, in the original Eucharist, offer His Body and Blood
     in the symbols of bread and wine. Theodoret .... St Chrysostom ....
     St. Austin. .... St. Hierom..... St. Gregory Nyssen. . . .
     Eusebius.--pp. 51. 62--65.

     The sense of what these Fathers teach us is, that CHRIST entered
     upon His priestly office in the Eucharist; that there He began the
     one oblation; there He offered Himself in a spiritual mystical
     manner, as He afterwards did corporally upon the Cross.....These two
     parts of the oblation were but one continued solemnity; nay, we add,
     that the Ascension of CHRIST into heaven many days after, was but
     the finishing of this one oblation. The distinguishing the oblation
     in the Eucharist from that on the Cross, and that afterwards
     performed in heaven, is really a confounding or obscuring the whole
     mystery, and rendering it perplexed and intricate. We ought no more
     to reckon them two or three several oblations, than we would say an
     animal was three several Sacrifices, because it was first immolated,
     then slain, afterwards burned, and the blood of it ritually
     sprinkled. Any one of these actions may be called an oblation; and
     the animal, by having any one of these actions passed upon it, was
     rightly called a Sacrifice; and yet the whole process was really but
     one and the same Sacrifice.--pp. 71, 2.

     We have the express words of CHRIST JESUS Himself, recorded by St.
     Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. Paul, fully attesting this
     great truth; namely, that He did in the institution of this
     Sacrament, actually offer bread and wine to GOD, as His mysterious
     Body and Blood; and that He commanded His Apostles to do the same.

     (1.) I will shew that these words, "This is my Body given for you,
     this is my Blood shed for you," do prove, that CHRIST gave or
     offered the bread and wine to GOD, as His mysterious Body and Blood.
     And (2.) that He commanded His Apostles to do the same.

     Now, in order to prove the first point, I take it for granted that
     when our SAVIOUR says, "This is my Body given," by "given" He means
     "offered," or sacrificed to GOD. This is a thing very plain in
     itself, and is, nay, must be, acknowledged by all; when He said,
     "Take, eat," He gave His sacramental Body to His disciples; when He
     adds, "given for you," He must mean given, or offered in Sacrifice
     to GOD for them. The giving His Body to His Apostles, and giving it
     for them, are two things perfectly distinct; His putting it into
     their hands or mouths, was not giving His Body for them; this was an
     action performed to the Apostles; His giving, or offering it for
     them, was an action directed to GOD: which, as it is very plain in
     itself, so is it expressly taught us by St. Paul; "for CHRIST," says
     he, "has given Himself for us, an offering and Sacrifice to GOD,"
     Eph. v. 2. And if we duly consider this particular, which can be
     denied by none that do not want common sense and judgment, the rest
     inevitably follows.

     I take it for certain and indisputable, that the Body here spoken
     of, was now actually given, yielded, offered to GOD by our SAVIOUR,
     as a priest according to the order of Melchisedek. The three
     Evangelists before mentioned, and St. Paul, do every one of them
     speak in the present tense, didomenon, Luke xxii. 19. klwmenon, 1
     Cor. xi. 24. ekcunomenon, Matt. xxvi. 28. Mark xiv. 24. Luke xxii.
     20. The Spirit by which they wrote, directed them all with an
     unanimous harmony to represent our SAVIOUR as now performing the
     most solemn act of His Melchisedechian priesthood; and, therefore,
     as offering His Body and Blood to GOD, under the symbols of bread
     and wine. It is well known by all that are not perfect strangers to
     the Hebrew and Hellenistic diction, that the strongest and most
     strict way they have of expressing the time present, is by a
     participle of that tense; this way of expressing Himself our SAVIOUR
     uses, and all the four holy writers who give us the history of the
     institution, do agree in using this present participle; and do,
     therefore, most gloriously conspire to teach us this truth, that our
     SAVIOUR did now actually offer Himself to GOD, under the
     representations of bread broken, and wine poured out. . . . Tis
     therefore preposterous to tell us, that by "is" we are to understand
     "shall be." Nor have our adversaries any pretence for giving so
     unnatural a sense to these words: they tell you, it is the present
     tense for the future; and if you ask upon what grounds this is said,
     they have nothing to reply but this; viz. that CHRIST'S Body was not
     in any sense given or offered to GOD, till it was crucified, which
     is to take that for granted, which, my reader sees, was denied by
     the ancient fathers. What if some few MSS. and the old Italic
     translation, and St. Cyprian, and the translator of Irenaeus, and
     the canon of the Mass in the Church of Rome say, "shall be given,"
     "shall be shed?" Those can be of no weight when laid in the scale
     against the concurrent authority of most and the best of the Greek
     books. Nor does the Scripture give any countenance to our
     adversaries, while they would persuade us that CHRIST'S oblation was
     performed on the Cross only.

     It seems clear to me, that the one personal oblation performed by
     our SAVIOUR Himself, is not to be confined to any one instant of
     time; but commenced with the Paschal solemnity, and was finished at
     His Ascension into Heaven there to appear in the presence of GOD for
     us. And if our adversaries will restrain the oblation to the Cross
     alone, then they must exclude CHRIST'S sacerdotal entry into Heaven,
     as the holy of holies, and say that the oblation was finished before
     the blood of the Sacrifice was brought into the most holy place and
     there offered; contrary to what the Apostle teaches us, Heb. ix. 7;
     and, therefore, few, I suppose, will presume thus far. And if it was
     consistent with the one oblation to be made in the holy of holies,
     as well as on the altar; in Heaven, as well as on the Cross; then I
     cannot conceive, why the oblation made in the Eucharist should make
     the oblation cease to be one, any more than the double offering it,
     on the Cross and in the holy of holies, already mentioned-----

     If it could be proved, that our SAVIOUR offered Himself on the Cross
     only, it would from thence follow, that, in this one oblation, He
     did not at all act as a priest according to the order of
     Melchisedec. For Melchisedec, as the ancients observe, is never
     reported to have offered a bloody Sacrifice; if he offered any,
     (which will not admit of a dispute,) it was a Sacrifice of bread and
     wine, as a prefiguration of the grand Sacrifice. And if, therefore,
     our SAVIOUR did ever make an oblation according to the order of
     Melchisedec, He must have done it in the same materials, and,
     therefore, in the Eucharist. And from this my reader will observe,
     how much more agreeable the notions of the Fathers were, who
     believed that CHRIST blessed the spiritual progeny of Abraham, as
     Melchisedec did the Father of the faithful, by an oblation of bread
     and wine, than the notions of those who must assert, if they will
     discourse consistently with their own hypothesis, that, though our
     SAVIOUR was a priest according to the order of Melchisedec, yet in
     the main point of the priestly office, that is, Sacrifice, there was
     no correspondence between them. In a word, it is agreed, that
     Melchisedec typified the priesthood of CHRIST in blessing Abraham,
     and that the foundation of all the blessings conferred on Abraham,
     and his spiritual posterity, was the mactation of CHRIST'S natural
     Body. It is evident, that the way of deriving the merits of CHRIST
     to particular persons, or imparting benedictions to them, has always
     been by Sacrifice. It is clear that Melchisedec's priesthood was a
     sacrificing priesthood; but there is no probability, that he offered
     bloody Sacrifices, but bread and wine only; and that, therefore, in
     such a Sacrifice he imparted a benediction to Abraham; and by
     consequence, that our SAVIOUR, as a priest of the same order, did
     intend to confer benedictions to the people, as Melchisedec did to
     Abraham; and, therefore, performed the sacerdotal oblation in bread
     and wine. And here, as has been proved, we have the judgment of the
     ancients with us; who do generally assert, that CHRIST did offer
     bread and wine in the Eucharist, and offered them as a
     Melchisedechian priest, and as symbols of His Body and Blood; and
     that in, and by these symbols, He did mysteriously devote His
     natural Body to suffer according to the will of GOD; and this is a
     certain proof, that the Fathers took "given," not only as
     expressing, but as meaning and intending the time then present. Let
     the Papists then go on with their dabitur and effundetur, "shall be
     given," "shall be shed" and it fits their notion well enough, who
     believe that the same Body and Blood was substantially offered in
     the Eucharist and on the Cross; but let Protestants stick close to
     the Primitive Church, and to the Evangelists, and to CHRIST JESUS
     Himself; who undoubtedly declared, that, in that very instant of
     time in which He celebrated the original Eucharist, He did at once
     offer, or give to GOD bread and wine, and gave them as a pledge and
     earnest of the natural Body and Blood, which was soon after yielded
     to GOD on the Cross.--pp. 85--90.

     Thus the reader may see, that the main stress of the dispute lies in
     effect in this single question, whether our SAVIOUR did offer His
     Body and Blood in the Eucharist; to which our SAVIOUR'S express
     answer is, "This bread is My Body now given for you"--"This wine is
     My Blood now shed for you." Our adversaries, to shift off this, tell
     us our SAVIOUR, used one tense, but meant another; He said "is
     given," He meant, "shall be given:" and further, they will not allow
     the word "given" to be applied to His sacramental Body, though every
     word in the sentence, excepting that, is by them acknowledged to
     belong to that Body. Now this is perfectly precarious and evasive;
     and because our adversaries will not be convinced with the most
     plain, natural, obvious construction of the words, we have no means
     left us hut to refer our cause to the arbitration of the most
     competent, disinterested, and uncorrupted judges, the primitive
     Fathers and Councils, and the earliest Liturgies that are now in
     being; and they do unanimously, whenever they have occasion to speak
     of this matter, pronounce in favour of us; and I am bold to say,
     that none of them ever said the contrary. They say, indeed, that
     they have no such Sacrifices as the Jews and Heathen had, offered by
     blood and fire; but those very Fathers do upon occasion assert the
     unbloody Sacrifice; and if this be not sufficient to establish this
     doctrine in the opinion of all equal judges, we know not what
     will.--pp. 93, 4.

     Whatever CHRIST did Himself, the same He commanded us to do. If,
     therefore, He offered His own Sacramental Body and Blood in the
     Eucharist, He has positively commanded us to do the same; and we are
     without excuse, if we do wilfully and designedly omit it. Having,
     therefore, before showed, that CHRIST did here make an oblation, it
     inevitably follows, that we must do so too; taking these words, "Do
     this in remembrance of Me," in the sense which our adversaries
     themselves put upon them: but we affirm further, that the word
     poiein, when joined with a noun that signifies any thing proper to
     be offered to GOD, does very often signify to "offer," or present to
     the Divine Majesty, by way of Sacrifice. Dr. Hickes, in his
     "Christian Priesthood," has produced a very great number of proofs
     to this purpose, .... and when our SAVIOUR says of the cup, touto
     poieite osakiV an pinhte, it cannot in strictness be otherwise
     rendered than, "Offer this as oft as ye drink it."--p. 94.

     Thus, I conceive, I have fully established the doctrine of the
     Sacrifice, not only from the monuments of the Primitive Church, but
     from the words of CHRIST JESUS Himself. .... And I must continue of
     this opinion, till I am convinced by some direct evidence from
     Scripture, that CHRIST did at any other time or place here on earth,
     perform any sacerdotal act of oblation. That CHRIST'S Body was
     substantially sacrificed on the Cross, must be acknowledged by all;
     but by "sacrificed on the Cross," we must then mean, that He was
     slain as an expiatory victim, and not that He offered Himself as a
     Melchisedechian Priest: for He declares, that He did this in the
     Eucharist, "For this," says He, "is My Body given" to GOD "for you."

     And though we ought in every Eucharist to do what CHRIST did, yet we
     are not to do it in all respects, with the same ends and designs
     that He did. The chief end, or primary intention, which CHRIST seems
     to have had in the celebration of the first Eucharist, was to devote
     and resign Himself up to GOD, as a Sacrifice for the life of the
     world, and to institute a perpetual commemoration of it; but we do
     neither the one nor the other. We do not offer the Body of CHRIST in
     order to its being crucified; but as a memorial of its having been
     thus devoted to crucifixion or mactation, now long since past. We do
     not institute either a Sacrament or a Sacrifice; but put in practice
     the institution made so many hundred years since by CHRIST
     Himself.--p. 328.

     And thus I have beyond all just contradiction proved, that JESUS
     performed the office of a Sacrificing Priest, when He first
     instituted the holy Communion, and that He, at the same time,
     ordained His Apostles and their successors to succeed Him in that
     sacred office; and, whether Melchisedek's priesthood were a type of
     CHRIST'S, in offering bread and wine, or not, (of which, I believe,
     few impartial readers will doubt) yet that, in thus offering a real
     Sacrifice, He fulfilled the prefiguration of the pontifical
     Sacrifice offered under the law, and that He intended the latter, as
     well as the former, to be a perpetual dally Sacrifice, will be
     granted me by all that are not very hard to be convinced.--pp.
     98--100.

     Having fully showed what is offered in the Eucharist, I now proceed
     to consider the ends for which it is to be offered..... I proceed
     therefore.

     First, to show, that one and the primary end of the Eucharistical
     Christian Sacrifice, is the acknowledgment of GOD'S dominion and
     other attributes; and I must add, what is most especially implied,
     of His goodness, in redeeming the world by CHRIST JESUS, which is
     the foundation of all other spiritual mercies. And I apprehend our
     adversaries themselves do so far consent to this, as to own that the
     Eucharist is a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and a recognition of all
     the blessings and favours we receive from GOD, and more particularly
     of His sending His SON to die for us, and of all the inestimable
     mercies, accruing to ourselves and others, by this means: they only
     deny, that the bread and wine, or Eucharistical Body and Blood, are
     this Sacrifice; and would have it believed, that the verbal and
     mental praises are the only thing meant by this Sacrifice; and,
     therefore, the authorities produced under this head, shall chiefly
     be such as do effectually prove, that the Sacrifice of thanksgiving
     in the Christian Church, was, in the judgment of the ancients, an
     oblation, not only of words and thoughts, but of the material bread
     and wine. And first St. Chrysostom..... St. Austin . . . Paulinus .
     . . Eusebius . . . Origen . . . Irenaeus. . . . Justin Martyr . . .
     Gregory Nazianzen.--pp. 266, 7, &c.

     If from single Fathers we turn our eyes to the ancient Liturgies, we
     shall find them filled with long recitals of GOD'S power, dominion,
     providence, and attributes, with Psalms of David, and other hymns
     from canonical and apocryphal Scripture, or of a private and more
     late composure: and these were commonly introductory to the
     Trisagium, and, in all Liturgies, ended with those angelical words;
     soon after which, the priest proceeds to the Institution, and then
     to the Commemorative Oblation, and then to the finishing
     Consecration. Now these particular and very large enumerations of
     GOD'S mercy and care over the whole race of mankind and especially
     the Church, were intended to be express declarations of the meaning
     and intentions of CHRIST JESUS, and His priest and people, in
     instituting and celebrating the Eucharist: that it was designed, in
     an especial manner, to be a Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for
     the creation, and preservation, and wise government of the world,
     and especially for our redemption by CHRIST JESUS; and that these
     recitals were very ample and very ancient, is to be seen in Justin
     Martyr's account of the Eucharist.--I apprehend that the ancient way
     of introducing the Oblation in the Eucharist, was no more than an
     express and most solemn profession of the Church's intention, in the
     Sacrifice now to be offered, to do glory to GOD, to agnize His
     dominion and other attributes, and to acknowledge all His mercies
     and favours, especially that which was the principal and the
     foundation of the rest, His sending CHRIST JESUS into the world to
     die for our sins; and that this was the first and primary design of
     the Eucharist they knew, not only from the nature of Sacrifice, but
     because CHRIST had instituted this to be offered for a memorial of
     Him.--pp. 281--283.

     2. That the other end of this Sacrifice is to procure divine
     blessings, and especially pardon of sin. In the first respect, it is
     propitiatory; in the second, expiatory, by virtue of its principal,
     the grand Sacrifice. ... St. Chrysostom .... St. Austin .... Cyril
     of Jerusalem .... Eusebius .... St. Cyprian .... Origen.... St.
     Clement of Rome.....

     The Liturgies are very full of proof to this purpose; the Gregorian
     .... that of St. Peter . ... St. Chrysostom's Liturgy .... the
     Liturgy of St. Basil .... and the Liturgy of St. James. . . . But
     the Clementine Liturgy best deserves our notice; and in that the
     Bishop beseeches GOD, "to look favourably on the gifts, and to send
     down His Holy Spirit on them; that they who partake of them, may be
     confirmed in godliness, obtain remission of sins," &c. and then goes
     on to "pray" or "offer" (these words are indifferently used) for all
     sort and degrees of men, and for blessings of all kinds. . . .

     There is one proof of the propitiatory nature of the Eucharist,
     according to the sentiments of the ancient Church, which will be
     thought but only too great; and that is the devotions used in the
     Liturgies, and so often spoken of by the Fathers, in behalf of
     deceased souls. There is, I suppose, no Liturgy without them, and
     the Fathers frequently speak of them. ... I shall say nothing of
     this doctrine but

     That the ancients did not use these prayers, as if they thought of a
     Purgatory; it is certain this last is a modern invention, in
     comparison of the oblations and prayers offered by the primitive
     Church, in behalf of their deceased brethren.

     They did not allow prayers to be made for such as they thought ijl
     men, either as to principles or practice. They prayed for the Virgin
     Mary, Apostles, Patriarchs, &c. and such as they believed to be like
     them.

     They seem to have learned this practice from the synagogue; for it
     is probable the Jews in and before our Saviour's time did use it.
     ...

     The only use I make of it is to prove, that the ancients believed
     the Eucharist a propitiatory Sacrifice; and therefore put up these
     prayers for their deceased friends, in the most solemn part of the
     Eucharistic office, after the symbols had received the finishing
     consecration; for, as no desires are more sincere or affectionate
     than those which we conceive in behalf of our deceased friends, so
     certainly the ancients addressed these desires to GOD in such a
     manner as they thought most prevalent, that is, by virtue of the
     Eucharistical Sacrifice, then lying in open view.

     Upon whatever grounds it was that the Primitive Church received this
     custom of praying for the dead, which I am not now at leisure to
     consider so much at large as it deserves, it is certain they had
     this notion of the propitiatory nature of the Eucharist from the
     Scripture, and even from CHRIST JESUS Himself. For if the
     Eucharistical bread and wine be CHRIST'S Body and Blood, given and
     poured out for us; if our SAVIOUR did in the institution give the
     one, and shed the other for us; and if He commanded His Apostles,
     and their successors for ever after, to do the same, as a memorial
     of Him; then I think it is already sufficiently proved, that the
     Eucharist is a propitiatory Sacrifice.--pp. 289--293.

     And thus having finished my proof of the Eucharistical and
     propitiatory nature of the Christian Sacrifice, I think it
     seasonable, before I close this chapter, to consider such exceptions
     as have, or may be made against it, as here asserted to be
     propitiatory and expiatory. I have already, in the first section,
     answered, or prevented those objections, which may be raised against
     it, as if it were a repetition of the Grand Sacrifice; and have
     showed, that it is not the repetition of the satisfaction made on
     the Cross, but only of that oblation made by CHRIST in instituting
     this memorial: yet still it may be thought by some, that in
     pretending to offer an expiatory Sacrifice, after the all-sufficient
     and most satisfactory Sacrifice offered by CHRIST, we lessen and
     depress the value and merits of it.

     But I must confess I do not perceive any force in this argument,
     against the expiatory nature of the Eucharist, any more than against
     the expiatory nature of the Sacrifices offered by GOD'S direction
     before, or under the Law. If GOD had seen it necessary, in order to
     preserve the honour and esteem due to the grand Sacrifice, that no
     other oblation offered to Him, should be looked upon to be an
     expiation for sin, He would surely never have expressly told the
     Israelites, that "by the blood" of their Sacrifices "an atonement
     was made." Lev. xvii. 11. He would rather have told them, that
     instead of sacrificing, they ought to believe in that grand
     Sacrifice, which was hereafter to come; which was the only method,
     upon the supposition of our adversaries, to have secured the value
     and esteem which men ought to have for the personal Sacrifice of
     CHRIST JESUS. And then to suppose, that the faint, shady types and
     figures of the Law, should be of greater force and efficacy than
     what the ancients thought to be a completive Sacrifice under the
     Gospel, than a Sacrifice instituted with the mouth and hands of the
     Son of GOD Himself, is a doctrine very hard to be digested by those,
     that have a hearty esteem for the Gospel Sacraments, and the Founder
     of them. . . .

     It may further be said, that since so perfect a satisfaction has
     been made by the one oblation of CHRIST, all further propitiations
     and expiations must, to say the least, be perfectly unnecessary. To
     which I humbly reply, that,

     If, by calling the Eucharist a propitiatory or expiatory Sacrifice,
     I am understood to mean, that we add to the merits of our SAVIOUR'S
     death and sufferings; I must disclaim, and protest against all such
     thoughts and notions. It is the natural Blood of CHRIST which is the
     inexhaustible treasure of all those blessings, that can be derived
     to us by the Eucharist, or by any other means. Whatever power or
     efficacy is ascribed to the Eucharist, flows wholly from the
     original Sacrifice: and yet we cannot think the Eucharistical
     Sacrifice needless, because .... all Christians, with whom I am now
     arguing, will grant, that CHRIST purchased forgiveness and other
     blessings by His death, conditionally only; and that till we have
     complied with these conditions, we have no reason to expect these
     blessings.

     In order therefore to procure pardon of sin, or any other mercy,
     which we hope to receive by the shedding of His Blood, these two
     things are necessary.

     1. That we apply ourselves to GOD in a proper manner; and if He have
     directed us in what manner to do it, we are to seek for no other.
     GOD decreed from the beginning, that the death of CHRIST should be
     the means of all that pardon and other graces and favours, which He
     intended for His Church and people: yet this did not hinder Him from
     instituting Sacrifices, whereby men should apply themselves to Him,
     in order to have these graces and favours imparted to them; and
     though He hath now abolished all other Sacrifices, yet I have
     showed, that He has enjoined a new one in their stead. And since the
     sins of Christians are more exceeding sinful than those of other
     men, as being committed against a more clear and full light than was
     ever enjoyed by others; therefore it seems reasonable, that they
     should make this application to GOD for pardon, by more valuable and
     powerful Sacrifices than others did, or could: and since the mercies
     we expect are more great and weighty, than any men, before CHRIST'S
     coming had any reason with confidence to ask of GOD; therefore the
     Sacrifice offered by us ought in reason to be of greater price, and
     more full of persuasion than theirs were; and CHRIST hath
     accordingly furnished us with such a Sacrifice, even that of His
     spiritual Body and Blood. The Apostle excellently well teaches us
     this truth, when he tells us, that "GOD hath set forth" CHRIST "to
     be a propitiation," or rather, a "propitiatory," Rom. iii. 25; that
     is, CHRIST is to us what the mercy-seat was to the Jews. Now the
     Jews were never the better for the mercy-seat, if they did not apply
     themselves to it in the method which GOD by His law had prescribed:
     and the method of making approach to the mercy-seat was by offering
     Sacrifice, and sprinkling the blood thereof upon the veil, which was
     drawn before His throne, where the Divine Majesty did in so peculiar
     a manner reside, Levit. iv. 6,17; and our SAVIOUR has directed us,
     where, and how, we are to make our addresses to Him, as our
     mercy-seat; and that is, by offering the memorial, which He Himself
     hath appointed: and 'tis strange, that Christians can think of
     making application to their mercy-seat in a less solemn manner than
     the Jews did to theirs .... 'Tis agreed on all hands, that the merit
     and satisfaction, whereby our sins are forgiven, flow freely from
     the Grand Sacrifice; but I am now speaking of the actual application
     of these merits and this satisfaction, which was the end for which
     all Sacrifices under the Law, and the Eucharistical Sacrifice under
     the Gospel, were appointed by GOD: and it is, I suppose, very
     evident, that none was ever allowed to make expiation for himself by
     any thing that he was capable of doing as a private person. The High
     Priest, when he had sinned, was indeed to expiate his own fact; but
     it was by virtue of an Eternal Sacrifice instituted by GOD for this
     purpose: not by any prayer, or faith, or internal act of religion.
     He was to apply himself to GOD, "by the blood of other" creatures,
     to show, that nothing which proceeds ab intus, from within
     ourselves, can either make satisfaction for our sins, or make
     application of the satisfaction made by another ..... I conclude,
     that neither prayer, nor faith, nor any other act or deed of ours,
     can be expiatory in any sense; by them no satisfaction can be made;
     nor did GOD ever intend them to be the ordinary means of applying
     the merits of the Grand Sacrifice; if He had, sacraments would have
     been needless things, as well as Sacrifices; and this brings me to
     speak of,

     2. The other thing necessary for the receiving pardon of our sin, or
     any other benefit of CHRIST'S Passion; and this must be some divine
     act, passed by GOD the FATHER, SON, or HOLY GHOST towards us.....
     And 'tis extremely vain and groundless to suppose, that any
     particular man can perform this divine act of applying the merits of
     CHRIST'S death to himself: it is an act of GOD, who has the sole
     power of pardoning or conferring any special grace upon his
     creatures; and since GOD does it not by express revelations made
     from time to time to his creatures, 'tis very evident he performs it
     to Jews and Heathens upon their conversion, in and by baptism; to
     those that are already members of His Church in and by the
     Eucharist.. . .

     Our adversaries agree, that the sacramental Body and Blood of CHRIST
     do convey pardon, and all the benefits of CHRIST'S death, to the
     souls of the receivers; and if they allow that these mercies are
     bestowed by the Sacrament, they must allow, that there we must apply
     ourselves to GOD for them.....They may say, that this application
     may be made by GOD in the Eucharist, considered as a sacrament only,
     not as a Sacrifice; but then they must suppose, that GOD makes this
     application to us without any application made by us to Him. For we
     cannot apply ourselves to GOD otherwise than by Sacrifice. Our
     adversaries grant this; but they assert this to be only a mental
     Sacrifice of prayer, faith, and such like inward devotions; and
     granting this, yet 'tis evident, that the Sacrament without some
     sort of Sacrifice, is not sufficient for the application of CHRIST'S
     merits; and whether this Sacrifice consist only of such internal
     actions of the mind, or of the Body and Blood of CHRIST there
     represented, I leave to be determined by Scripture and antiquity,
     which I have proved to be with us in this particular. It is
     therefore sufficiently clear, that GOD does apply the effects of the
     Great Sacrifice to us in the Eucharist; and that in order to obtain
     this application, we must first apply to Him by Sacrifice, even the
     Sacrifice of the CHRIST'S Body and Blood. It is evident that, before
     the death of CHRIST, pardon was imparted to the Jews by the oblation
     of the Sacrifice for sin, no part of which was returned to the
     lay-offerer; but CHRIST hath provided, that our offering for sin
     should be shared out among all that attend this Sacrifice, as a
     token of GOD'S acceptance of it.

     But in some cases it seems pretty clear, that the ancients were of
     opinion, that the application of the merits of CHRIST'S death might
     be made by virtue of the oblation only, without eating and drinking
     the Eucharistical Body and Blood; as for instance, to those who by
     banishment, imprisonment for CHRIST'S sake, or other violent means,
     were debarred from the privilege of actual communion. As the case of
     such was always particularly recommended to GOD in the Eucharistical
     Service, so no doubt it was done upon an apprehension, that by
     virtue of this propitiation, they had the benefits of CHRIST'S
     sufferings imparted to them. ..... And let not any man suspect, that
     by saying this I intend to say any thing in behalf of the private,
     solitary masses of the Church of Rome; for I own them to be a modern
     corruption. .... I only speak of the efficacy of the oblation in
     behalf of such, as were detained from the communion by some
     involuntary and invincible obstacle; and am so far from having any
     good opinion of the solitary masses among the Papists, that I am
     fully satisfied, that in the primitive Church the oblation and
     communion were inseparable.--pp. 296--305.

     There is no occasion for me now to prove, either that the Eucharist
     is a Sacrifice, or that it is to be consumed by manducation: the
     first I have sufficiently proved already, the last is what all will
     grant, except the divines of the Church of Rome, who make the
     consumption of the Sacrifice consist in the miraculous change, as I
     suppose, according to Bellarmine's notion of it..... I have already
     showed .... that much the greatest part of the Jewish Sacrifices
     were consumed in this manner; . . .. and therefore under the Law it
     must be owned, that either manducation was a proper way of
     consumption, or that the greatest part of their Sacrifices were not
     rightly consumed.

     "Tis true, that what was burnt in the fire on the altar was more
     directly offered to GOD, because this action of burning was then a
     rite of oblation; but from hence the grosser part of the Jews were
     apt to conclude, that GOD stood in need of Sacrifice, and was
     refreshed with the nidor, or steam of the altar, as we may learn
     from Psalm 1. Therefore GOD, to take off this objection against
     Sacrifice, has commanded it to he consumed, as His own Sacrifice the
     Passover was, wholly by manducation. . . .

     And certainly this modus of consuming the Sacrifice was not only
     intended for the removing of that grand objection against
     consumption by fire, namely, that it gave occasion to men to think
     that the indigence of the Deity was by that means supplied, but
     likewise for the honour of the Sacrifice itself. For it is not easy
     to imagine, how any creature can be disposed of in a more honourable
     manner, than by being consumed in an act of the most solemn
     devotion, as the Eucharistical symbols arc by the institution of
     CHRIST JESUS. The Jewish Sacrifices were in part to be reduced to
     ashes, and the remainder to be eaten in such a place, and by such
     persons, and with such circumstances as GOD had appointed; but it
     does not appear, that they who eat them were obliged, during that
     action, to employ their minds in the service of GOD; only in the
     Passover they were to call to mind their deliverance from the
     Egyptian bondage: but on the other side, the manducation of the
     Christian Sacrifice is to be performed, as the most solemn and
     religious action, that private Christians ever do in their own
     persons. For the oblation, and consecration, have been showed to be
     the acts of the Priest, in which the people are only accessories. .
     . .

     That the receiving of the bread and wine in the Communion, is the
     consumption of a Sacrifice; or that the Eucharist is a feast upon a
     Sacrifice, has been asserted by several learned men in the last, and
     by some in this age: . . . . and so, it seems, Christians feast upon
     something that is a Sacrifice, but not offered. . . .

     And this brings me to reflect on the singular and honourable mark of
     distinction, by which GOD has dignified the Christian people, above
     and beyond his old peculium, the Jews: and that is, that whereas the
     Christian Church has but one Sacrifice, instead of that multitude
     and variety of Sacrifices under the law, and whereas the Jewish
     laity were not permitted to eat of any other Sacrifices but the
     peace-offerings, the rest being wholly burnt in the fire, or
     reserved to be eaten by the Priests and their families; on the other
     side, now under the Gospel, our one Sacrifice is wholly to be
     consumed by Priest, Clergy, and people jointly: and this I take to
     be a most signal mark of favour to the Christian laity, that they
     are admitted to a participation of the Sacrifice equally with the
     Priests themselves.

     And it is very evident that our SAVIOUR did intend the Eucharist to
     be not only a Sacrifice, but a feast upon a Sacrifice; and,
     therefore, when He was before-hand showing to His disciples the
     nature of His sacramental flesh, He calls it "the bread of GOD,"
     John vi. 33; for, as Dr. Whitby justly observes, "The oblations made
     to GOD are styled in the Old Testament the 'bread of GOD,' Levit.
     xxi. 6. 8. 22. and accordingly CHRIST styles His piacular victim by
     the same name." And I must add, that nothing but what had been
     sacrificed is ever in Scripture called "the bread of GOD;" and
     therefore, when our SAVIOUR gives this character of what we receive
     in the Sacrament, that it is the "bread of GOD," we may safely from
     thence infer, that it was by Him designed as a feast on a Sacrifice.
     And when, in the narrative of the institution, He says, "Take, eat,
     this is my Body given," i, e. sacrificed "for you," He does not more
     plainly say, that the Body which He reached out to them, was now
     made an oblation for them, than He says that they were to eat of it
     as such. In the tenth chapter of the first Epistle to the
     Corinthians, St. Paul draws a parallel between the heathen feasts
     upon the Sacrifices, and the Christian Eucharist, or between
     "drinking the cup of the LORD," and the "cup of devils" being
     partakers of "the LORD'S table," or altar, "and the table," or
     altar, "of devils," ver. 21. So that in all the most observable
     contexts which treat of this Sacrament, it is represented to us as a
     Sacrifice consumed by manducation.

     The true and full notion of the Eucharist is, that it is a religious
     feast upon bread and wine, that have first been offered in Sacrifice
     to ALMIGHTY GOD, and are become the mysterious Body and Blood of
     CHRIST. The Papists, both in their notions and practice, represent
     it more like a bare Sacrifice, than as a feast on a Sacrifice; for
     the generality of their masses are nothing else but a mere offering
     of the Sacrament to GOD, in their superstitious manner, without any
     distribution of the holy symbols to the people. Others endeavour to
     have it thought nothing more than a religious feast. These are two
     faulty extremes. The truth is that the holy Eucharist, according to
     the institution of CHRIST, and the judgment of the ancient Church,
     is a feast upon a Sacrifice. That it is a Sacrifice, I have already
     showed; that it is a feast, I need not take any pains in proving,
     since it is the universal opinion of all Protestants. The truth is,
     this Sacrament has so long been discoursed of, and used as a feast
     only, that too many think these two notions contrary to each other,
     and imagine, that if it be a feast, it cannot be a Sacrifice;
     therefore, I shall here make it my business to show, that these two
     notions are not only fairly consistent, but that, in truth,
     sacrificing and religious feasting are things which GOD hath in all
     ages joined together, and that, therefore, they ought by no means to
     be put asunder.

     We know not the laws of divine worship given to the ancients before
     the law of Moses.....Yet it is certain, that "Jacob offered
     sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread, and
     they did eat bread." "Eating bread," is a phrase used in Scripture
     for feasting; and here it is evident, that Jacob made a feast to his
     relation of the cattle which he had offered in sacrifice. Jethro was
     no Israelite, and therefore the sacrifices offered by him may safely
     be affirmed to have been in all respects agreeable to the primitive
     laws of divine worship, and of him we are informed, that he "took a
     burnt-offering and sacrifices for God, and Aaron came, and all the
     elders of Israel, and ate bread with him before GOD." And that this
     was the practice of the Israelites long before the giving of the
     Law, appears sufficiently from this, that Moses and Aaron, in their
     address to Pharaoh, use these two phrases, of "holding a feast to
     GOD," and "sacrificing to the LORD," as expressing the very same
     sense. (Exod. v. 1. 3.)

     Though feasting upon Sacrifice was more ancient than the Law, yet it
     pleased GOD to give more particular rules and precise directions,
     concerning the distribution and eating of the things offered at the
     altar, in the Books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy,
     than had been ever given before. The sin-offering, and
     trespass-offering, the first-born, and the meat-offerings, were
     divided between GOD and the priests; in the peace-offerings only the
     priests had their share; the burnt-offerings were wholly consumed in
     the fire, so that neither the priests nor people had any portion
     reserved for them. But then it is observed by them, who are best
     versed in the Jewish learning, that burnt-offerings were usually
     attended with peace-offerings, only some except such burnt-offerings
     as were offered for the whole congregation.....We may therefore
     safely conclude that the generality of Sacrifices among the Jews
     were accompanied with a feast. And their very language speaks this,
     for the same word [], signifies both feast and Sacrifice.

     And what comes nearer to our purpose still, is this, that the
     Passover, which was the most solemn Sacrifice among the Jews, and
     which GOD gave in charge to that people before the Law or even the
     Ten Commandments, was to be wholly eaten; and this was a Sacrifice
     which, as it was a special type of the Eucharist, so it exactly
     agreed with it in this particular, namely, that GOD took no portion
     to Himself, nor assigned any precise share to the priest, but it
     became wholly a feast to the owners, whether priests or
     laymen.--vol. ii. pp. 17--19.

     It will be very proper to consider the practice of the Gentiles, as
     well as of the Jews, under this head: for He who is the GOD of both,
     may reasonably be presumed to have had a regard to the notions and
     ancient usages of the former, as well as of the latter, in the whole
     frame of the Gospel dispensation. And the Scripture affords us
     sufficient proof, that the heathen, even in the age of Moses, did
     make feasts on their Sacrifices.--p. 21.

     Upon the whole, it is evident, that a Sacrifice and a religious
     feast are very near akin to each other; or rather, they are but two
     parts of the same worship, which, both among Jews and Gentiles, used
     to go hand in hand together.....I do not say, that there never was
     any religious feast made upon meats and drinks, which had not been
     first offered to GOD in Sacrifice; and I may safely affirm, that the
     most solemn religious feasts were always of this sort; such were the
     Passover, and the two other annual feasts of weeks and tabernacles,
     among the Jews. And, therefore, if the Eucharist be not a feast of a
     very inferior rank, and in its nature entirely different from the
     most solemn religious feasts of former ages, it must be confessed to
     be a Sacrifice too.--pp. 25, 6.

     The Eucharist agrees in the main with the most solemn Sacrifices of
     the ancients, in the ends for which it is offered.

     The ends or designs of men in sacrificing, have always been the same
     in all ages and nations; these are of two sorts, viz.

     First, particular. Secondly, general.

     I. There are particular ends and designs, which men have always
     proposed to themselves in offering every Sacrifice; these ends are
     various, but may be reduced to these following heads:

     1. One particular end of Sacrifice, is to render prayers or
     petitions for some special mercy, more effectual.

     2. Another end, is to express a grateful sense of some mercies or
     favours received.

     3. A third end, is the expiating the guilt of sin, or obtaining
     pardon.

     II. The general end of Sacrifice is,

     1. To acknowledge the power and dominion of that GOD to whom it is
     offered.

     2. To render Him gracious and favourable to the worshippers.

     3. To preserve covenant and communion with Him.--p. 30.

     And it is evident that all these ends are served by the Sacrifice of
     the Eucharist; and

     1. All the particular ends of Sacrifice. For, 1st, and 2dly, All
     prayers and praises for special mercies are most properly offered to
     GOD in, and by the Eucharist; because the Eucharist is the peculiar
     worship of the Christian Church, as will appear in the next chapter;
     and the primitive Christians practised it as such, and therefore
     used it in order to procure any singular blessing from GOD: as for
     instance, when a Bishop, or Priest was ordained, or when any of
     them, or of the faithful died, or were married, the Eucharist was
     offered to GOD in hopes of obtaining proper blessings and mercies on
     the persons concerned. The Eucharist was most probably that
     "ministry" in which "the prophets at Antioch" were engaged, when
     "the Spirit said unto them, Separate me Paul and Barnabas," and when
     they laid hands on these two eminent ministers of CHRIST. St. Paul
     exhorts, "that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and EUCHARIST"
     should be made for kings and all that were in authority. It can
     scarce be thought reasonable, that St. Paul should charge Christians
     to give thanks for such prodigies of vice and tyranny, as then
     swayed the Roman Empire; much less that "thanks" should be given
     "for all men" without distinction, for the enemies and persecutors
     of Christianity; but it was indeed proper to offer the Eucharist,
     the Christian Sacrifice, even for their most bitter enemies, that
     GOD might convert them, or bring them to a better mind, that so
     Christians "might lead quiet and peaceable lives." The very name
     Eucharist implies it to be a Sacrifice of thanks for all real
     blessings. It is also, by virtue of the personal Sacrifice of
     CHRIST, a means of averting all evil. And as to the third particular
     end, viz. forgiveness of sin, our SAVIOUR hath taught us, that this
     is one special end of the Eucharist, where He calls the consecrated
     bread and wine, "My body given" (to God) and "My blood shed for the
     remission of sins."

     3. The general ends of Sacrifice are all obtained by the Eucharist.
     For 1st, All gifts brought to GOD'S altar are an acknowledgment of
     His dominion; and CHRIST expects, that His disciples should bring
     gifts to the altar: and those too, material gifts, such as may be
     left behind them, while they go to be reconciled to their brethren:
     and Irenaeus justly explains this, as a gift given to our great
     King, and by which we honour Him. And 2dly and 3dly, That the
     Christian Eucharist is a service by which we render GOD propitious
     to us, and by which we do covenant, and communicate with Him, is
     what, I suppose, will be denied by none.

     And the excellency of the Christian Sacrifice, above and beyond all
     others, does appear from this consideration, that though it be but
     one, and always offered in the same manner, yet it does at once
     serve all the ends of all the Levitical Sacrifices: and we are
     actually to propose all these ends to ourselves, whenever we offer
     it. But there is one end in offering of the Sacrifice of the
     Eucharist, in which it differs from the generality of the ancient
     Sacrifices. What this is, I am to show in the next section.--pp.40,
     1.

     The first and principal design which our SAVIOUR proposed to Himself
     in the institution of the Eucharist, was, that it might be a
     standing perpetual memorial of the Sacrifice offered by Him for the
     sins of the world. He clearly teaches us this truth, in those words,
     "Do," or "offer this, in remembrance of Me." . . .

     It is a mistake to think, that we are only to call this to
     remembrance in our own minds, or before men: we are certainly to
     show forth CHRIST'S death in the Sacrament, not only to one another,
     but to GOD.....We offer the sacramental Body and Blood of CHRIST to
     GOD, not only as a Sacrifice of praise for the merits of our
     SAVIOUR'S Passion, but in order to render all our prayers and
     petitions more acceptable at the throne of grace, especially our
     prayers for the pardon of our sins, for grace to amend our lives,
     and thereby to obtain a happy resurrection to eternal life: so that
     indeed the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, as it is a commemoration of
     CHRIST'S offering Himself in Person, does answer all the ends of the
     ancient Sacrifices; forasmuch as the merits of His death are the
     most prevailing motive we can use with GOD, to render all our
     services acceptable to Him, to procure forgiveness of our sins, and
     the continuance of all spiritual favours, especially those of our
     covenanting, and communicating with GOD......

     It cannot be said of the generality of the Sacrifices of the
     ancients, that they were commemorations, or representations of some
     other more ancient and excellent Sacrifices: however, they were not
     so in the intentions of those who offered them.....

     There was indeed one very singular providence, and the greatest, I
     think, that ever happened, except our redemption by CHRIST JESUS;
     and that was, the deliverance of the Israelites from their bondage
     in Egypt, with the miracles which went before, and followed it. This
     providence GOD was pleased to have yearly commemorated by slaying a
     lamb for every family, and offering it as a Sacrifice to GOD, and
     consuming it in a religious feast: and this was indeed a
     commemorative Sacrifice both in the design of GOD and of the
     Israelites, by whom it was offered. Nay, and it seems, that the
     lambs slain every year in after-ages, were representations of the
     lambs slain at first, the evening before they went out of the land
     of Egypt: for GOD commands the people, when they were in future ages
     asked by their children, "What mean you by this service?" to answer,
     "It is the LORD'S Passover, who passed over the houses of the
     children of Israel in Egypt." By which, it appears, that all the
     lambs that were sacrificed on this festival, though many hundred
     years after the first institution, were commemorations and
     representations of the Sacrifice of the Passover, which was first
     offered in Egypt; and it does not appear, that they had any other
     Sacrifice of this nature.....

     I am entirely in the sentiment of all divines, both ancient and
     modern, Protestants and Papists, who agree in this, to the best of
     my observation, that all the Sacrifices before and under the law,
     received the atoning virtue they had, from the will of God, who
     instituted and accepted them, not in regard to their own value or
     virtue, but in consideration of the great and most meritorious
     Sacrifice, which was to be offered by CHRIST in the fulness of time;
     and that therefore these Sacrifices were types of CHRIST in the
     purpose and intention of GOD, though not revealed to all that
     offered these Sacrifices; and that, therefore, all acceptable
     Sacrifices agree in this, that they are representations of the grand
     one which was offered by CHRIST in His own Person.

     And of all representative Sacrifices, the Eucharist is certainly the
     most excellent.

     1. Because the bread and wine in the Sacrament are, or ought to be
     known by all who use them, to be representations of the great
     Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of CHRIST; whereas the Sacrifices
     under the law, and before it, were not generally known and discerned
     by those who offered them, to be types of CHRIST.

     2. The first and main design of the Eucharist, is to be a
     remembrance of the personal Sacrifice of CHRIST, whereas the beasts
     offered under the law were first and chiefly intended by GOD to be
     services performed to Him by His people, whereby to express their
     wants and desires, and procure a supply and relief of them; and they
     were types of CHRIST only by a second and more remote intention of
     Almighty GOD.

     3. The Eucharist is the only Sacrifice in which that of CHRIST is
     represented since it was offered, and to them who live under the
     Gospel, and is therefore clearly discerned by those who offer it. If
     the Jews had been informed that their Sacrifices represented a more
     excellent one to come; yet this apprehension of its signification
     and efficacy must have been more obscure than ours now is, because
     their notions of the Messias Himself were but imperfect, in
     comparison of that plain view of Him which the Gospel gives us.

     4. This is the only representation of CHRIST'S Body and Blood, which
     is that Body and Blood in power and effect; for the bread and wine
     in the Eucharist are such types, as that he who eats and drinks them
     unworthily, is "guilty of the Body and Blood of CHRIST," which can
     be said of none of the other ancient Sacrifices.--pp. 41--47.

       A Prayer to be used by one that is going to communicate. . . .

     O most merciful GOD and FATHER, I acknowledge, and adore Thine
     infinite love in sending Thy SON JESUS CHRIST to take upon Him our
     nature, and to suffer death upon the Cross, as a Sacrifice for the
     sins of men. I bless the divine goodness and wisdom of Thy Son, in
     offering His Body and Blood to Thee, and in commanding His Church to
     continue the memorial of it until His coming again to judge the
     quick and dead.

     Grant, O gracious GOD, that all Christian men may have a just sense
     of the riches of Thy love and mercy in CHRIST JESUS, and may be duly
     affected with His holy life, heavenly sermons, meritorious death and
     passion, glorious resurrection, and ascension; that we may all
     delight ourselves in doing Thy will, and His, in offering the good
     oblation, in showing forth His death according to His appointment:
     and, LORD, let the offering made by Thy Church be pleasant to Thee,
     as in the days of old, and come up with acceptance on Thine altar;
     let Thy gracious Presence be with Thy people assembled together, and
     praying in the Name of Thy Son: turn not away Thy face from the
     priests, and the congregations that join with them in pleading the
     merits of Thy SON'S death and passion, in the manner that He Himself
     ordained. Let the fire of Thy Holy Spirit always descend on the
     Christian Sacrifice, and on those who offer it; that their iniquity
     may be taken away, and their sins purged.--p. 250.

     When the Priest places the Alms, and the Bread and Wine on the
     altar, say,

     The LORD accept thine oblations, and perform all thy petitions in
     behalf of thyself and us.

     After the Prayer of Consecration, say,

     O most merciful LORD GOD, as we do believe Thy SON JESUS CHRIST, the
     High Priest of our oblation, to be now and always appearing at the
     right hand of glory, and always presenting His crucified and now
     glorified Body in our behalf; so we beseech Thee, let His
     intercession prevail with Thee for the acceptance of the services
     performed by Thy Church here on earth, according to His appointment.
     Reject not us, nor our oblations, while we wholly depend upon Thy
     Son JESUS CHRIST, as our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.--p. 256.

     A Prayer to be said after the Communion, in behalf of all Men, but
                           especially Christians.

     O most merciful and gracious LORD GOD, that art the SAVIOUR of all
     men, especially of them that believe; Having now humbly represented
     to Thy divine Majesty the glorious Sacrifice which Thy dearest SON
     JESUS CHRIST offered, of His own Body and Blood; relying on Thy
     goodness, and trusting in Thy promises, and in the never-ceasing
     intercession made by our eternal High-Priest in Heaven, I put up my
     prayers to Thee in behalf of all that call on Thy Name and have
     communicated to-day in the one Sacrifice, throughout the whole
     Christian world; and also in behalf of all them, that desire to
     communicate, but are hindered by any just necessity, whatsoever it
     be.

     Give unto me, O LORD, and give unto them a portion of all the good
     prayers made by CHRIST in Heaven, and by Thy Church on earth ...

     I humbly beseech Thy Divine Majesty to accept the Sacrifice this day
     offered to Thee in behalf of my dearest friends and relations.....

     Accept of this Sacrifice in behalf of all that suffer wrongfully, or
     that are under Thy correcting hand. . .--pp. 258--260.

     An Act of Spiritual Communion, to be used after the Prayer above
     written, when the person is destitute of an opportunity of external
     Communion. [Compare Bp. Taylor's Worthy Communicant, p. 386, as
     quoted by Johnson.]

     My soul hath a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the
     LORD ...

     I rely upon the Sacrifice offered by CHRIST JESUS .... LORD thou
     knowest the desire of my heart to be to this bread and this cup; and
     that whenever Thou, in Thy good Providence, shall remove this
     obstacle under which I at present lie, my heart is ready to join
     with any true Christian Priest and people, in offering this
     Sacrifice and partaking of this spiritual feast ....

     Accept, O Lord, of my will and desire, while I cannot actually
     communicate . . . Lord, reject not my prayer, nor turn Thy mercy
     from me; while, though absent from all true Christian congregations
     in body, but present with them all in spirit and desire, I join with
     them in pleading the merits of the all-sufficient Sacrifice of the
     Body and Blood of Thy Son, for the pardon of my own sins and of all
     sincere penitents; for the obtaining of all necessary graces, and of
     a happy resurrection to eternal life.--pp. 262, 3.

                         ID.--Primitive Communicant.

                 A recognition of the Priesthood of Christ.

     O Infinite and Almighty GOD the FATHER, who hadst from the beginning
     Thy Word and Son dwelling with Thee, and in Thee, who was the light
     of men, by shedding on the ancient Patriarchs and Prophets, and all
     holy people before and under the Law, whatever knowledge they had of
     Thee, and of spiritual things..... I desire to acknowledge and
     glorify Thee, and Thy divine Son, for these early dawnings of Thy
     grace and good will toward mankind; especially I confess and adore
     Thy immense goodness and mercy, for that Thou didst, in the fulness
     of time, send this Thy Word, and Son, to take upon Him our nature,
     and, as a priest according to the order of Melchisedek, to fulfil
     and abolish all the types of the Aaronical Priesthood and
     Sacrifices, and to bless the spiritual posterity of Abraham, in and
     by the Sacrifice of His Body and Blood, represented in bread and
     wine. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, all the days of Thy life, for such
     a priest and Sacrifice, by which the Gospel ministry, and Church,
     have been once for ever consecrated and perfected, and their
     services established, and a perpetual availment given to them; and
     all the defects and blemishes of them that attend Thine altars
     supplied by the abundant merits of this great High Priest, and His
     most efficacious oblation. Praise the LORD, O my soul, all the days
     of thy life, for such a Priest, and for the oblation of His body and
     Blood, which He commanded for ever to be continued in remembrance of
     Him; for the mysterious Bread given for the life of the world, for
     the cup poured out for the remission of the sins of men...... Praise
     the LORD, O my soul, all the days of thy life, for this High Priest
     according to the order of Melchisedek, and for this pure oblation of
     bread and wine, by which we serve all the ends, and obtain all, and
     more than all the benefits procured by the manifold Sacrifices
     under, and before the law: of that bread and wine in the offering
     whereof CHRIST consigned Himself to the Cross, there to suffer death
     and make a full satisfaction for the sins of all, who should with
     true penitent hearts apply themselves to Thee through His
     all-sufficient death and Sacrifice. Praise the LORD, O nay soul, all
     the days of thy life, for this High-Priest of our oblation; who,
     after He had finished the works and sufferings which Thou hadst
     assigned Him here on earth, did visibly ascend into Heaven, and sit
     down on Thy right hand; and now with His crucified and glorified
     Body appears in Thy presence, to give force and effect to the
     devotions of His Church, and especially to the ordinances of His own
     institution. May all Christian Priests and people for evermore
     rejoice in this most prevailing Mediator, and never seek for any
     other. May they with diligence and constancy employ themselves in
     those duties of religion, in which they may most safely depend on
     the intercession of this High Priest; especially in the
     commemorative oblation of His Body and Blood, May we make it our
     chief care and study to imitate His example in all the virtues of a
     holy life; that so we may at last receive the reward of faithful
     servants, and follow Him into the Holy of Holies, for His merits,
     and for Thy mercies' sake. Amen.--pp. 188--190.

        An Exercise of Communion with God and His Church, in the Holy
                                 Eucharist.

     O GOD of peace and love, who didst send Thy Son into the world to
     gather a holy nation, a peculiar people, an universal Church, from
     among all kingdoms, tongues, and countries, and to unite them
     together in the same faith and worship, and to bring them all at
     last to the same blessed place of eternal rest and joy.....Thou
     didst purchase this Church to Thyself, by the precious Body and
     Blood of Thine own Son offered in Sacrifice to Thee; and madest the
     commemoration of that Sacrifice the centre and ligament of that
     worship we owe Thee, and of that communion, which Thou didst intend
     to continue between Thee and Thy Church. The many loaves offered to
     Thee in all the congregations of Christians throughout the world,
     are but one and the same Sacrifice to the same GOD and Father of
     all, and are sanctified by the same Holy Spirit, and are made the
     one mysterious flesh of our one Mediator.....And do Thou, LORD GOD,
     send out Thy lively and powerful Spirit, to unite all Christians in
     the sincere belief and practice of these sacred truths, that they,
     with one heart and one voice, may offer this one Sacrifice, that Thy
     Church and the services of it may be perfectly one.--pp. 198--200.

      An Eucharistic Prayer to be said just before the receiving of the
                         Sacramental Body and Blood.

     The highest praises, honours, and thanksgivings be to GOD the
     Father, who sent His Son into the world to make an atonement for the
     sins of men; and to His Son, for willingly offering Himself as a
     ransom for our souls; and to the eternal Spirit, with whose
     concurrence this inestimable offering was made, and this glorious
     work of our redemption was accomplished. The whole Church was first
     founded, and raised to be a holy nation and peculiar people, for the
     setting forth the praises of GOD, and offering spiritual Sacrifices
     for the salvation purchased by the Blood of CHRIST. At the same time
     that the Holy JESUS declared His Body to be given, His Blood to be
     shed for us, He did command that this remembrance should be
     continued, till His coming again. And this is that Sacrifice of
     thanksgiving in which we see the salvation of GOD; and in and by
     which we receive and enjoy all the benefits of CHRIST'S death and
     passion, if we come with hearts prepared for such great blessings
     .... May I never want a heart to value, and rejoice over them; or an
     opportunity of joining with the priests and people of Thy Church, in
     presenting this Sacrifice of praise to Thee, the GOD of all our
     mercies . . . The favourable acceptance of the Sacrifices offered to
     Thee of old, did much depend on the eating them in a due and just
     manner. And it was declared that he who eat of them without
     observing the rules prescribed by the Law, should bear his iniquity
     and be cut off from Thy people: and Thou hast declared by Thy
     Apostle, that he who eateth and drinketh the Body and Blood of the
     LORD unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself. LORD GOD,
     do Thou be pleased so to dispose my heart, while I am approaching
     Thy mysteries with joy and praise, at the same time to be assisted
     with such awe and reverence, such a judicious fear and trembling, as
     befits those who are employed in so solemn and concerning an
     ordinance...... As no Christian ought to doubt but that the
     Christian Sacrifice is accepted on the heavenly Altar, and that the
     sacramental Body and Blood of CHRIST are replenished with His
     merits, and enriched with the special presence of the Holy Spirit;
     so it is the sincere desire of my heart, that I myself, and all who
     communicate in this holy Sacrament, may perceive, and lay hold, and
     possess themselves of these rich treasures..... and that, looking to
     CHRIST JESUS as the Author and Finisher of our faith and good
     services, and on His all-sufficient Sacrifice as the foundation of
     all our hopes and devotions, we may at last obtain the reward of
     faithful servants, for the sake of the same JESUS CHRIST our LORD.
     Amen.--pp. 201--204.

    WILSON, BISHOP, CONFESSOR & DOCTOR.--Short Introduction to the Lord's
                                   Supper.

                                  Sect. ii.

     The holy Apostles of CHRIST, who were present when He first
     administered this Sacrament, give us the following account of its
     end and institution.

     They signify to us, in the first place, that this Sacrament was
     ordained by CHRIST the same night in which He was betrayed, and
     after they had observed the Passover.....

     Now, after the Paschal Supper, as the Apostles relate it, "JESUS
     CHRIST took bread," &c.

     In obedience, therefore, to this command of JESUS CHRIST, who has
     delivered us from a greater bondage than that of Egypt, the
     Christian Church keeps up the memory of His love, His Sacrifice, and
     His sufferings and death, after this solemn manner.

     First, as an acknowledgment that our lives, and all that we eat or
     drink to preserve them, are owing to the bounty of GOD, we present
     upon His table, by the hands of His own minister, a portion of His
     creatures, the best we have for the support and comfort of our
     natural life, namely, bread and wine. After this, the bread and wine
     are consecrated, the bread is broken, and the wine poured out, to
     represent the death of CHRIST, whose Body was broken, and whose
     Blood was shed for us.

     Then the Minister of GOD, as the Steward of CHRIST'S household,
     applies these blessings to every person who receives the Sacrament,
     in this devout prayer:--"The Body and Blood of CHRIST, which were
     given and shed for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting
     life."--Works (8vo. edit.), vol. ii. pp. 21--23.

    The Order for Administration of the Lord's Supper, or Holy Communion,
           With suitable Directions, Observations, and Devotions.

     [Note.] The following prayer was used by the pious author, before
     receiving and administering the Sacrament:--

     "Give me grace, O merciful GOD, now I am going to Thine altar, that
     I may in some measure answer the work appointed me, in offering
     sacrifice unto Thee, in order to communicate the bread of life to
     Thy people." . . .

     [On the Rubric, "And when there is a Communion, the Priest shall
     then place upon the Table," &c.]

     [Note.] If this rubric is not strictly observed, as in many places
     it is not, the intent of the Church is defeated, and a very
     instructive circumstance is omitted.

                     [After the Prayer of Consecration.]

     Say secretly,--Send down Thy Spirit and blessing upon this means of
     grace and salvation, which Thou Thyself, O JESUS, hast ordained.

     Most merciful GOD, the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, look
     graciously upon the gifts now lying before Thee, and send down Thy
     Holy Spirit on this Sacrifice, that He may make this bread and this
     wine the Body and Blood of Thy CHRIST, that all they who partake of
     them may be conformed in godliness,--may receive remission of their
     sins,--may be delivered from the devil and his wiles,--may be filled
     with the HOLY GHOST,--may be worthy of Thy CHRIST, and obtain
     everlasting life; Thou, O LORD ALMIGHTY, being reconciled unto them,
     through the same JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

                      [Concerning Spiritual Communion.]

     The Church, for the comfort and advantage of such Christians as,
     through any just impediment, be hindered from receiving the LORD'S
     Supper in the manner which she has appointed, (that is, from the
     hands of CHRIST'S own minister,) has given us this
     instruction:--"That if we do truly repent," &c. . . . They that
     composed this Rubric had, it is very probable, an eye to the daily
     Sacrifice, which, under the law of Moses, was offered for the whole
     people of Israel; at which all such pious persons who could not
     possibly be present, yet offered their daily prayers to GOD in union
     of spirit, and in virtue of that Sacrifice offered in the temple;
     and which, no doubt of it, were accepted of GOD. [See the second
     Rubrick after the Office of the Communion of the Sick.]

     Now, forasmuch as very many pious souls do labour under this sad
     impediment, especially in many country churches, where the Sacrament
     is but too seldom administered,--to supply this defect, some such
     help as the following may be made use of, on the LORD'S day, or on
     any other Holy-Day. . . .

             ST. LUKE xxii. 19. "Do this in remembrance of Me."

     O good SAVIOUR, I will, through Thy grace, "do this in remembrance
     of Thee," and in obedience to Thy command, as well as I am able.

     I do, therefore, this good day join, in desire and spirit, with
     every Christian congregation in the world, which truly celebrates
     this holy mystery.

     With them I join in giving my devoutest thanks to Thy ALMIGHTY
     FATHER, and our gracious GOD, who did not overlook lost mankind, but
     sent Thee, His only SON, to redeem us. With them I call to
     remembrance what Thou hast done and suffered for us;--Thine
     incarnation,--Thy laborious life,--Thy bitter passion,--Thy death
     and resurrection,--the great deliverance Thou hast thereby wrought
     for all mankind,--and the obligations Thou hast laid upon us.

     I join with Thy Church, and plead the merits of Thy Sacrifice for
     all estates and conditions of men; that none may deprive themselves
     of that happiness which Thou hast purchased by Thy death:--for all
     Christian Kings and Governors;--for all Bishops and Pastors; . . .
     for all persons and places in distress by the sword, pestilence, and
     famine ' &c. . . .

       ID.--The Lord's Supper practically explained.--(Sermon lxxvi.)

     May not one therefore conclude, without any great uncharitableness,
     that such as do lightly turn their backs upon this ordinance, do not
     indeed love the LORD JESUS; and that, according to St. Paul's
     direction, they ought to be "anathema," that is, separated from the
     communion of the faithful.

     And though this would be railed great severity at this time, yet
     this was the practice of the primitive Church, and it was agreeable
     to the law of the Passover, the great figure of CHRIST'S death, and
     by GOD'S express command; that is, that whoever did neglect to
     observe the Passover, in remembrance of their deliverance out of
     Egypt, "that soul should be cut off" from among the people of
     Israel.

     .... For, as the most unlearned Israelite under the Law, when he was
     commanded to bring his Sacrifice to the altar, to lay his hand upon
     the head of the beast, confessing his sins over him;--as he did very
     easily understand, that this was to put him in mind, that death was
     the punishment due to sin,--that he himself deserved the death that
     that creature was going to suffer,--that it was great mercy in GOD
     that He would accept such a Sacrifice for his sin, which yet he had
     good hopes He would do, since He Himself had ordained it;--as he
     would very easily perceive, that all this was designed as a very
     powerful motive to humble him before God; [1 Macc. xii. "We remember
     you in our Sacrifices, and in our prayers, as reason is, and as it
     becomes us to think upon our brethren."] to give him an abhorrence
     of sin, which could not be forgiven without the loss of the life of
     an innocent creature; and lastly, that it was intended to lead him
     to the love of GOD, who would be reconciled to him upon such
     gracious terms;--I say, the most ignorant Israelite could understand
     this end of Sacrifices, and perform the duty required of him, as
     well as the most learned master in Israel:--

     Even so every Christian, even the most unlearned, is capable of
     understanding, (if it be not plainly his own fault,) and of
     performing all the duties of a worthy communicant.

     For when he is informed, that this is the true Christian
     Sacrifice,--the only means of rendering our persons and all our
     prayers acceptable to GOD,--of obtaining the pardon of our sins, the
     assistance of GOD'S grace, and everlasting happiness after
     death:--when he sees that done before his eyes that JESUS CHRIST
     Himself did; who the same night in which He was betrayed, having
     devoted Himself an offering and a Sacrifice to GOD for the sins of
     the whole world, did institute this holy Sacrament, by taking bread
     and wine, and blessing them, and making them, by that blessing, the
     true representatives of His Body and Blood, in virtue and power, as
     well as in name:--

     When he is made sensible that this service was ordained by CHRIST
     Himself, not only as a testimony of His great love for His poor
     creatures, but as a means whereby He would communicate all the
     benefits of that death which He was then going to suffer; and by
     which He would apply the merits of His death to all people and ages
     of the world:--

     Lastly, when he is assured, even from CHRIST Himself, that whoso
     eateth and drinketh this His Flesh and Blood after this holy manner,
     dwelleth in CHRIST, and CHRIST in Him; that such a one has a right
     to eternal life, and that GOD will raise him up at the last day:--

     Let a man, I say, be never so unlearned, yet he will easily
     understand, that he is not to look upon and receive this bread and
     wine as common food, but as holy representatives of CHRIST'S Body
     and Blood, made such by an especial blessing of GOD; that he is to
     receive it in remembrance of the death of CHRIST, and to believe
     assuredly that the blessing of GOD will attend his doing so; for it
     being GOD'S own ordinance, He cannot but bless it, and him who
     observes it.

                        ID.--Holy Bible, with Notes.

                             On St. Matt. v. 23.

     "If them bring thy gift," &c.] This was always understood to have
     respect to the Christian Sacrifice, to the bread and wine there
     offered to GOD: for the legal Sacrifice being soon to be abolished,
     it is not likely that CHRIST would give precepts concerning them.
     "Thy gift." Thy Sacrifice.

                             On Chap. xxvi. 28.

     "Which is shed"--i. e. He then, at that instant, gave His Body and
     Blood a Sacrifice for the sins of the world. He then offered, as a
     priest, Himself under the symbols of bread and wine, and this is the
     Sacrifice which His priests do still offer. And let it be observed,
     that JESUS CHRIST did this before He was apprehended, when He was at
     His own disposal; it was then He offered Himself a Sacrifice to GOD.

              ID.--Parochialia, or Instructions to the Clergy.

     Now, as JESUS CHRIST did by His death make our peace with GOD, and
     "obtain eternal redemption for all them that obey Him," we
     Christians, in obedience to His command, do keep up the remembrance
     of His death until His coming again, after this solemn manner.

     First, As GOD is the King of all the earth, we offer unto Him the
     best things that the earth affords for the life of man, namely,
     bread and wine, as an acknowledgment that all we have, whether for
     the support or comfort of our lives, is owing entirely to His
     bounty.

     The bread and wine being placed upon the altar, (by which they are
     sanctified, that is, set apart for holy uses,) we then proceed to
     give GOD thanks for His SON, our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who is the life
     of our souls, after this manner:

     The priest, by doing what CHRIST did, by prayer and thanksgiving, by
     breaking the bread and pouring out the wine, obtaineth of GOD, that
     these creatures become, after a spiritual manner, the Body and Blood
     of CHRIST, by receiving of which our souls shall be strengthened and
     refreshed, as our bodies are by bread and wine.

     For all this is done to represent the death of JESUS CHRIST, and the
     mercies which He has obtained for us; to represent it not only to
     ourselves, but unto GOD the FATHER, that, as the prayers and alms of
     Cornelius are said to have "gone up for a memorial before GOD," so
     this service may be an argument with His Divine Majesty to remember
     His SON'S death in heaven, as we do on earth, and for His sake to
     blot out our sins, and to give us all an interest in His merits.

     After this, we all receive the bread and wine (being thus made the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST,) in token of communion with CHRIST our
     Head, and with all His members.

     And, that we may have a more lively sense imprinted upon our minds
     of the love of GOD, of the kindness of our Redeemer, and of the
     benefits He has, by the shedding of His Blood, obtained for us, the
     Minister of GOD applieth the merits of CHRIST'S death to the soul of
     every faithful receiver in these words: "Eat and drink this in
     remembrance that CHRIST died for thee, and that He may preserve thy
     body and soul unto everlasting life."

     By explaining the meaning of this ordinance after some such familiar
     way as this, a young Christian will see,

     That, by joining in this Sacrament, we keep up the remembrance of
     CHRIST'S death, which is our salvation:

     We plead with GOD for pardon, for His SON'S sake, after a way which
     His SON Himself appointed:

     We are hereby more firmly united to CHRIST our Head, and to the
     Church, which is His body:

     And lastly, we do hereby express our faith and hope of His coming
     again to reward His faithful servants.

                             ID.--Sacra Privata.

                               LORD'S SUPPER.

                           Before Service begins.

     May it please Thee, O GOD, who hast called us to this ministry, to
     make us worthy to offer unto Thee this Sacrifice for our own sins,
     and for the sins of Thy people.

     Accept our service and our persons, through our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
     who liveth and reigneth, with Thee and the HOIY GHOST, one GOD,
     world without end. Amen.

     O reject not this people for me, and for my sins.

                    Upon placing the Alms upon the Altar.

     All that we possess is the effect of Thy bounty, O GOD; and of Thy
     own do we give Thee. Pardon all our vain expences; and accept of
     this testimony of our gratitude to Thee, our Benefactor, for the
     LORD JESUS' sake.

                  Upon placing the Elements upon the Altar.

     Vouchsafe to receive these Thy creatures from the hands of us
     sinners, O Thou self-sufficient GOD.

                     Immediately after the Consecration.

     We offer unto Thee, our King and our GOD, this bread and this cup.

     We give Thee thanks for these, and for all Thy mercies; beseeching
     Thee to send down Thy Holy Spirit upon this Sacrifice, that He may
     make this bread the Body of Thy CHRIST, and this cup the Blood of
     Thy CHRIST; and that all we who are partakers thereof, may thereby
     obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of His Passion.

     And, together with us, remember, O GOD, for good the whole mystical
     Body of Thy SON; that such as are yet alive may finish their course
     with joy; and that we, with all such as are dead in the LORD, may
     rest in hope, and rise in glory, for Thy SON'S sake, whose death we
     now commemorate. Amen.

     May I atone Thee, O GOD, by offering to Thee the pure and unbloody
     Sacrifice, which Thou hast ordained by JESOS CHRIST. Amen.

     But how shall I dare to offer Thee this Sacrifice, if I had not
     first offered myself a Sacrifice to Thee, my GOD?

     May I never offer the prayers of the faithful with polluted lips,
     nor distribute the Bread of life with unclean hands.

     I acknowledge and receive Thee, O JESUS, as sent of GOD, a Prophet,
     to make His will known to us, and His merciful purpose to save
     us;--as our Priest, who offered Himself an acceptable Sacrifice for
     us, to satisfy the Divine Justice, and to make intercession for
     us;--and as our King, to rule and defend us against all our enemies.

     May I always receive the Holy Sacrament in the same meaning,
     intention, and blessed effect, with which JESUS CHRIST administered
     it to His Apostles in His last Supper.--Vol. ii. pp. 226

                                    LENT.

             Meditations proper for a Clergyman at that season.

     Give me such holy dispositions of soul, whenever I approach Thine
     Altar, as may in some measure be proportionable to the holiness of
     the work I am about,--of presenting the prayers of the faithful,--of
     offering a spiritual Sacrifice to GOD, in order to convey the Body
     and Blood of JESUS CHRIST, the true Bread of life, to all His
     members. Give me, when I commemorate the same Sacrifice that JESUS
     CHRIST once offered, give me the same intentions that He had, to
     satisfy the justice of GOD,--to acknowledge His mercies,--and to pay
     all that debt which a creature owes to his Creator. None can do this
     effectually but JESUS CHRIST. Him, therefore, we present to GOD, in
     this holy Sacrament.--pp. 288, 9.

      SHERLOCK, (WILLIAM,) PRESBYTER.--Practical Discourse of Religious
                                 Assemblies.

     For we may consider further, that as CHRIST has instituted this Holy
     Supper, so He has instituted it as an act of religious worship. It
     is a Sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving to GOD, and to our
     SAVIOUR. It is a commemoration of the Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the
     Cross, "a showing forth the LORD'S death until He come" and
     therefore is a mysterious rite of worship, as all Sacrifices were
     under the law. But to explain this more particularly, though
     briefly, I shall consider this holy feast, both as it respects GOD,
     and as it respects our SAVIOUR.

     1. With respect to GOD; and so we may consider it as a thanksgiving,
     or as a prayer.

     As a thanksgiving to GOD for His great and inexpressible goodness in
     sending His Son JESUS CHRIST into the world, and offering Him up as
     an expiation and atonement for our sins. . . . and what more proper
     Sacrament of thanksgiving and praise can we use than to present Him
     with the memorials of His stupendous love? You cannot more
     effectually praise any man, than to show the visible remains and
     monuments of his bounty and charity; as the widows, weeping, "showed
     the coats and garments which Dorcas made while she was with them."
     Thus, when we offer up to GOD the memorials of CHRIST'S Death and
     Passion, it is a visible Sacrifice of praise, and speaks such kind
     of language as this; "Behold, Lord, here is the token of Thy love to
     us, Thy own Son bleeding and dying for our sins; Thy eternal Son,
     the Son of Thy love, in whom Thy soul is well pleased, dying upon
     the Cross, a shameful, accursed, lingering, tormenting death;
     scorned and reproached of men, and forsaken of GOD. We will never
     forget such love as this; we will perpetually celebrate this holy
     feast, and offer up the memorials of a crucified JESUS, as a
     Sacrifice of praise to His FATHER, to His GOD, and to our GOD."

     2. The LORD'S Supper may be considered as a Sacrament of prayer; for
     so the Sacrifices under the law were always offered with prayers,
     which were accepted in virtue of the Sacrifice.... offered by the
     priests who were God's ministers; and now under the Gospel, GOD has
     sent His own Son into the world, to be both our Priest and our
     Sacrifice; the acceptation of our prayers depends upon the power of
     His intercession; and the power of His intercession upon the merit
     of His Blood: for "with His own Blood He entered once into the holy
     place, having obtained eternal redemption for us." We must now go to
     God in His name, and plead the merits of His Blood, if we expect a
     gracious answer to our prayers.

     Now, for this end was the LORD'S Supper instituted, to be a
     "remembrance" of CHRIST, or of the Sacrifice of the Cross, to "show
     forth the LORD'S death till He come;" which, as it respects GOD, is
     to put Him in remembrance of CHRIST'S death, and to plead the virtue
     and merit of it for our pardon and acceptance. It is a visible
     prayer to GOD, to remember the sufferings of His Son, and to be
     propitious to His Church, His body, and every member of it, which He
     has purchased with His own Blood. And therefore, the ancient Church
     constantly at His holy Supper, offered up their prayers to GOD, in
     virtue of the Sacrifice of CHRIST, there represented, for the whole
     Church, and all ranks and conditions of men. For this reason, the
     LORD'S Supper was called a commemorative Sacrifice, because we
     therein offer up to GOD the remembrance of CHRIST'S Sacrifice; and
     therefore, in the ancient Church, the altar, or the place where they
     consecrated the elements, was the place also where they offered up
     their prayers to signify that they offered their prayers only in
     virtue of the Sacrifice of CHRIST, and that the very remembrance of
     this Sacrifice in the LORD'S Supper by virtue of its institution,
     did render their prayers prevalent and acceptable to GOD, and
     therefore, in the very first account we have of the exercise of
     Christian worship, we find "breaking of bread and prayers" joined
     together. The efficacy of our prayers depends on the merit of
     CHRIST'S Sacrifice; and the way CHRIST hath appointed to give our
     prayers an interest in His Sacrifice, is to offer them in the holy
     Supper, with the sacramental remembrance of His Death and
     Passion.--pp. 316--322.

              GRABE, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--MS. Adversaria.

     [Translated from papers "deposited, among the rest of his valuable
     remains, in the Bodleian Library, to which, after the deaths of Bp.
     Hickes and Bp. Smalridge, he had himself bequeathed them." See
     Preface to "De Formâ Consecrationis Eucharistiae, &c. or a Defence
     of the Greek Church against the Roman, in the article of the
     Consecration of the Eucharistical Elements, &c. London, 1721." This
     paper, together with those from which extracts are given above, is
     contained in Dr. Grabe's Adversaria, of which there are three and
     twenty volumes preserved in the Bodleian Library. The seventh volume
     is headed, "Testimonia Veterum de Controversiis ad Theologiam
     Mystagogicam pertinentibiis.

     " I. De modis diversis quibus panis et vinum possint esse in S.
     Eueharistia corpus et sanguis Christi.

     "II. De mutatione quae in S. Eucharistia fit, contra
     Transubstantiationem Pontinciani.

     "III. De Sacrificio Eucharistico, juxtasensum ejus genuinumvereque
     Catholicum."

     These papers are marked No. 116, and they begin with the fragment of
     a translation of Mede's "Christian Sacrifice," containing the first
     chapter of the Discourse. There is a rough draft of this translation
     in Vol. xx. No. 29. together with a translation of part of the third
     chapter. It is there headed, "Sacrificium Christianum ex Malach. i.
     11. descriptum et expositum a viro pio ac profunde docto, Josepho
     Medo, Theologo Anglicano."

     The paper, No, 117, (in vol. vii.) from which extracts are given
     above, is headed "Qu. An S. Eucharistia sit Sacrificium Novi
     Testamenti?"

     On the opposite page is pasted a paper containing a rough draft,
     less fully expanded, of the first few sentences, down to the
     quotation from St. Irenaeus. On the margin of this paper stands a
     list of names of English divines in alphabetical order, written
     wide, as though for further insertions. "Burnet, Brevint, Beveridge,
     Fell, Forbesius, Hammond, Hooperus, Laud, Medus, Montacut.,
     Sherlock, Taylor, Thorndike, White." "Burnet" has been added
     afterwards, and perhaps "Hooperus." This list, accidentally
     discovered, was, it may be mentioned, the groundwork of the present
     Catena.

     No 118, in the same volume, is the tract published, with a
     translation, in the volume referred to above. "De formâ
     Consecrationis," &c.]

     Is the Eucharist a Sacrifice of the New Testament? It is agreed
     amongst divines, even those who differ concerning the question
     proposed, that "Sacrifice is a religious rite, whereby a sacred
     person offers some creature, on the altar or holy table, to GOD in
     the way of a gift, to testify his own subjection, and that of those
     in whose behalf he offers, to Him as the Creator and Supreme GOD."
     The genus of Sacrifice, therefore, is oblation, and consequently
     whatever is properly called a Sacrifice must be offered by a priest
     upon an altar, as a sacred gift to GOD; and that which is not so
     offered, is not truly a Sacrifice. The general end of Sacrifices is
     the testifying of our inward devoted subjection to GOD, as the
     supreme LORD, in like manner as tributes or gifts are given to kings
     for the acknowledgment of their supreme outward dominion. Which
     comparison St. Irenaeus uses, book iv. chap. 34. writing thus,
     "Therefore the oblation of the Church, which the LORD hath taught to
     be offered in the whole world, is esteemed by GOD a pure Sacrifice,
     and is accepted by Him; not that He wants a Sacrifice from us, but
     because he who offers is himself honoured in what he offers, if his
     gifts be accepted. For our honour and affection toward a king is
     declared by our gifts." And so all nations by means of Sacrifices
     showed themselves devoted to the service of those gods to whom they
     offered; so the Jews testified their devotion to the true GOD. But,
     in truth, in the Sacrifices of these [Christians] there was yet
     another general end regarded, namely a representation of the
     oblation of CHRIST upon the Cross, through which all other oblations
     are accepted of GOD, whereas, without respect to that, they are
     hateful, or at all events useless. There were indeed besides, many
     and divers special reasons of Sacrifices, whence also the Sacrifices
     themselves were divers, being either Eucharistic, or propitiatory,
     or impetratory; but the two afore-mentioned ends were in common
     regarded in all the Sacrifices whether of all nations or of the
     people of GOD. And that which hath thus far been said is placed
     beyond all hazard of controversy, so that he would be losing his
     labour who should go about to prove it at length; and he who would
     deny it, would be introducing a new signification of the word
     "Sacrifice," and removing landmarks that have been fixed. It was,
     however, in the last century, a point strongly affirmed on the one
     side, and denied on the other, that the mystery of the holy
     Eucharist is a Sacrifice as described in the manner aforesaid. This
     point, namely, (to pass by the refinements of others,) was disputed;
     whether, in the Eucharist, the bread and wine, and, after the
     mystical consecration, the Flesh and Blood of the LORD, are offered
     upon the holy table, as upon an altar, to GOD, for the testifying of
     His supreme dominion, and the commemoration or representation of the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST finished on the Cross. For there were, and yet
     are, many who believe that the holy Eucharist is a bare Sacrament,
     or sacred feast, not a Sacrifice, and who will have the aforesaid
     sacred symbols to be signs, indeed, whereby GOD doth declare and
     communicate His grace to the faithful, and represent the death of
     the LORD to their eyes, that they may not be taken with
     forgetfulness of it: but they deny them to be signs whereby the
     faithful testify their subjection to the Deity, and represent the
     Sacrifice of the Cross to GOD the FATHER, in order that by this
     memorial they may find favour in His eyes. This, I say, in the last
     century almost all the Protestants denied; it is still denied by
     many: it hath been affirmed, however, in this century, and is still
     affirmed, by not a few prelates and divines of the English Church,
     Laud, Abp. and Martyr, Mountagu, White, Fell, and others, bishops,
     and, of presbyters, Mede, Hammond, Thorndike, Beveridge, Sherlock,
     Hooper, &c., to whom may be added, from Scotland and Ireland, two
     most eminent Prelates, William Forbes and Jeremy Taylor; all, men
     illustrious for learning and piety, who would not have asserted it
     in their writings, unless they had seen firm grounds for this
     opinion, which it will be worth our while briefly to go over. [In
     the margin is added, "Burnet forte;" or possibly the text
     is--"Whiteus, Fellus, episcopi," and the note, "Burnet aliique
     forte."]

     To begin from what is the better known, there is in behalf of this
     opinion such a consent of the most ancient Fathers and successors of
     the Apostles, as is seen in scarcely any mystery of the Christian
     faith. St. Clement of Rome, in his epistle to the Corinthians,
     written while many of the Apostles were yet alive, § 40. "We ought
     to do all things in order, whatsoever our LORD hath commanded us to
     observe; to celebrate the oblations and liturgies at the appointed
     times," &c.. . . and §. 44. "It will be no small crime if we eject
     those from the episcopal function, who offer the gifts in an
     unblameable and holy manner." Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with
     Trypho the Jew, p. 259. sq. "The oblation of fine flour which was
     ordered to be offered for those that were cleansed from the leprosy,
     was a type of the bread of the Eucharist, which the LORD JESUS
     CHRIST ordered to be offered for the remembrance of the suffering
     which He underwent for those who are cleansed as to their souls from
     all wickedness;' in order that we may give thanks to GOD for having
     created the world, and all things in it for the sake of man, and for
     having delivered us from the wickedness in which we lived, and for
     having finally dissolved powers and principalities through CHRIST,
     who, according to His will, became subject to suffering." [Here
     follows a discussion of the right reading of the original text.]
     .... I prove it by other words which Justin Martyr has used, in that
     Dialogue with Trypho, p. 344. "We who, by the name of JESUS,
     believe, as one man, in GOD the Maker of all things, are indeed a
     priestly race unto GOD; as GOD also Himself testifies, declaring
     that we offer in every place among the Gentiles, victims pleasing to
     Him and pure. Verily, GOD accepts Sacrifices from no one save from
     His priests. All those, therefore, who, by His name, offer the
     Sacrifices which JESUS CHRIST delivered to be performed, namely, in
     the Eucharist of the bread and the cup, which are offered in every
     place by Christians, GOD beforehand testifies to be acceptable to
     Him. But He rejects those made by you, and those priests of yours,
     saying, 'I will accept none of your Sacrifices at your hands, for,
     from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, My name is
     glorified among the Gentiles, &c. ' "But concerning this passage of
     Malachi, I shall, in what follows, adduce other expressions of
     Justin and other Fathers. I now go on to testimonies of Irenaeus
     concerning the Eucharistic Sacrifice. [On the back of this leaf is a
     discussion of the question of Apostolical tradition, in regard to
     the Eucharist. What follows is on the next leaf.]

     I proceed to the second oblation, whereby the bread and wine, or
     symbols and sacraments of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, are offered
     by the priest to GOD the FATHER, and not only thanks are given to
     Him, for that He hath delivered His beloved Son to death for the
     redemption of the human race, but He is also entreated that, looking
     from heaven upon these holy signs of the New Covenant, He will
     become propitious to us, and not disdain to bestow upon us remission
     of sins, and other good things obtained to us through Christ. Such
     an oblation there is in the first Liturgy of Edward VI. [and also in
     the Scotch] in the following form, immediately after the words of
     institution, the consecrated symbols being present, "Wherefore, O
     LORD," &c. .. . There is rightly there made, and said to be made,
     that Eucharistic oblation, in observance of the sacred institution
     of CHRIST, who, pointing to the leading character of this sacrament,
     saith, "Do this for the commemoration of Me." Which words the
     Apostle reciting, (1 Cor. xi. 25.) subjoins these words of his own,
     v. 26. "Wherefore as often as ye eat this bread," &c. From which it
     is plain, that the memory of the LORD'S Passion is to be celebrated
     not only by the mind inwardly, but also outwardly with the voice;
     and not by words only, but also in act. But is it in discourse to
     the people, or in prayer to GOD? That it is the latter that is to be
     done, rather than the former, is both pointed out by the very nature
     of a commemorative Sacrifice, in that therein we have to do with
     GOD, not with man; and also our SAVIOUR hath taught us by His
     pattern, inasmuch as, in the institution of this mystery, He
     discoursed not with His Apostles concerning the redemption of men,
     but blessed GOD His FATHER for it, and commanded the Apostles and
     their successors, all priests whatsoever, unto the end of the world,
     to do the same which He then did. Now, that our SAVIOUR gave thanks
     to GOD the FATHER for the redemption of the human race, now shortly
     to be accomplished by the offering of His Body and the shedding of
     His Blood, is most rightly gathered from the rites as well of the
     Jews as of the Christians, although the holy Evangelists have not
     expressed the matter or the form of the praise and prayer uttered by
     CHRIST. For the Jews, on festival days, not only praised GOD, as the
     LORD of all the creatures, in the ordinary form, for the creation of
     bread and wine, but made likewise especial mention of that benefit
     of winch the festive memory was then celebrated. And CHRIST
     accordingly, in the first Eucharist, gave thanks to GOD the FATHER,
     not only for creation but chiefly for redemption, the memorial
     Sacrament whereof He was then instituting, and, by His example and
     precept, appointed the same to be done now also by priests. Whence
     Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho, p. 250, having before
     made mention of the Eucharistic bread says, "which we offer for the
     remembrance of the suffering," &c. . . . and Eusebius de Dem. Evang.
     lib. i. cap. 10. ... And that the primitive Christians strictly
     observed this institution of CHRIST, as well Eusebius bears witness
     as Justin Martyr, in the dialogue above cited. ... In which passage
     of Justin, and that above cited, thanksgivings are spoken of as
     being appointed by CHRIST, and made by the primitive Christians,
     both for the creation of food and of the creatures necessary, and
     also for redemption by the Passion. And this their practice is most
     clearly seen from the ancient liturgies. Of which I will quote one,
     and that of the greatest antiquity, and undoubtedly genuine, extant
     in the 8th book of the Apostolical Constitutions . . . . Compare
     other forms, prescribed, as appears, for sacred services, lib. vii.
     c. 26. But that CHRIST not only gave thanks to GOD for the
     redemption of man, but also prayed GOD His FATHER that He would make
     His Apostles, and them that should believe on Him through their
     word, partakers of that benefit; and that He prayed also for His
     Church; is further gathered from the constant practice as well of
     the Jews before Him as of Christians after Him. For, among the Jews,
     on feast days, the master of the family, holding a cup of wine,
     joined with the giving of thanks a long prayer, cited by Fagius, on
     Deut. viii. 10; which runs thus: "Have mercy, O LORD our GOD, upon
     our Israel, even Thy people, and Thy city Jerusalem, and Sion the
     tabernacle of Thy glory," &c. . .. With regard to the Christians, in
     the Liturgies of St. James and of St. Clement, immediately after the
     words above recited, the priest goes on, "And we pray Thee," &c.
     which correspond remarkably to those forms of the Jews above
     mentioned, where they pray for the temple, and for Sion, the
     tabernacle of the glory of GOD. And this selfsame prayer, in which,
     through the Body and Blood of CHRIST represented on the altar, GOD
     is entreated to be propitious to us, and bestow upon men all good
     things, is that "propitiatory Sacrifice," or "unbloody immolation
     and propitiatory Sacrifice" of CHRIST, of which very frequent
     mention occurs in the writings of the holy Fathers. We have already
     above recited the words of Justin Martyr, where * * * * * *

     [Distinctions of the English Church above other Congregations of
     Protestants, in practice and doctrine especially.]
     ["Amongst his plans there is one in Latin, entitled ANGLICANS E
     Prerogativae, prae aliis Protestantium Coetibus, in Praxi et
     Doctrina speciatim. The titles of the chapters of this intended
     treatise are those which follow, in his own words, 'In Hierarchiâ,'
     &c. I have set down these titles to show what a singular esteem he
     had for the Church of England above all other reformed Churches, and
     to take occasion to tell the world, that, upon his deathbed, he
     desired it might be known that he died in her faith and communion,
     which he thought a pure and a sound part of the Catholic Church. But
     then, after these heads, he hath written in capitals DESIDERATA. . .
     . For it cannot be denied that he was for restoring the pure
     primitive practices and discipline of the Catholic Churches, which
     continued more or less corrected in all Churches, till the
     Reformation. . . . And as he used to speak of the want of these
     things, as defects in the reformed Churches, so it was not without
     sorrow and indignation that he used to lament the corruption and
     depravation of them in the Church of Rome, to which his great love
     and zeal for pure ancient Christianity would no more let him be
     reconciled than any of those Martyrs who, for bearing their
     testimonies against her intolerable errors, have, here or elsewhere,
     resisted unto blood." See "Some account of Dr. Grabe, and of his
     Manuscripts," by Dr. Hickes, prefixed to "Some instances of the
     defects and omissions in Mr. Winston's Collection of Testimonies,"
     &c.--pp. vi--x.

     Among the "Desiderata," enumerated in the page following of the MS.,
     is "6. Circa Eucharistiam a Negatio Sacrificii," &c.

     The paper above quoted is in Vol. xx. of the Adversaria, No. 21. In
     the same Volume, No. 19, is a dissertation entitled, "Sacrificium
     Christianum ab Apostolis traditum," in which the authorities
     referred to in the last cited paper are quoted at greater length.]

     In the Ecclesiastical hierarchy, and the continued succession of
     Bishops from the Apostles, and the lawful ordination of
     priests.--chap. 1.

     In the celebration of the Eucharist, wherein is treated of the
     oblation of bread and wine, and the bread leavened, of the blessing,
     of the giving of thanks and prayers, of the breaking the bread, and
     of the priest himself taking the first portion of the
     oblations.--chap. 2.

     In the administration of Confirmation, &c. . . .

     The English divines teach that in the holy Eucharist the Body and
     Blood of CHRIST, under the species, that is, the signs, of bread and
     wine, are offered to GOD, and become a representation of the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST once made upon the Cross, whereby GOD may be
     rendered propitious. Daniel Brevint, &c..... Jeremy Taylor. . . .

                  [Preface to Edward VI.'s First Liturgy.]

     ["It was with the same freedom that he used to lament the
     alterations that were made in the first Common Prayer Book of king
     Edward VI. which, as I find by a fragment among his English MSS., he
     designed to publish with notes."--Hickes, sup. cit. p. xiv. The
     above fragment is in Vol. xxii. of the Adversaria, No. 174.]

     Of the occasion of publishing by itself this form of Liturgy with
     annotations. Of the use of it, namely, to show how near the first
     reformers of the Church of England kept to the primitive institution
     of JESUS CHRIST, and the practice of His immediate followers, the
     holy Apostles and the ancient Christians; although they laid aside
     the later Popish abuses. Of the most certain and yet easy means of
     knowing the institution and practice of JESUS CHRIST, and of the
     first Christians in the Apostolical Churches, in this particular
     point. Of the obligation of keeping to, and complying with the said
     institution and practice. . . .

     § 1. When I last year perused the two very learned and most
     excellent treatises of Dr. Hickes, concerning the "Christian
     Priesthood," and the "Excellency of the Episcopal Order," and found,
     by the occasion of the former, added at the end the form of the
     Liturgy and administration of the holy Eucharist, as the same was
     reformed by our bishops in the first year of Edward VI. and
     confirmed by act of Parliament, in which

     I was very much pleased with it, and wished that the same might, to
     the more common and better use, be published by itself, and with
     somewhat larger annotations. In which sentiment a very pious and
     good friend agreed with me, and, indeed, hath since, more than once,
     urged me to take upon me this small piece of work; which, therefore,
     after some delay, I have now done out of hand, in hopes that it
     will, some time and some way or other, tend to the honour of GOD,
     and the good of men. But if it should be asked, of what use the said
     form, with such annotations, can be at present, when it is out of
     use, I answer, that it will serve at least to show, to the honour of
     our forefathers, the first Reformers of this Church, how near they,
     concerning the celebration of that most holy Sacrament, kept to the
     primitive institution of it by our blessed SAVIOUR, and to the
     practice of His holy Apostles, and the first Apostolical Churches,
     although they changed and threw out many abuses and corruptions of
     this sacred ordinance, which were crept in afterwards, and at last
     established by Popish decrees and Councils of later ages. Such was,
     in the whole, the use of an unknown tongue in this holy office.....
     And, not to mention the elevation of the consecrated elements to be
     worshipped by priest and all people, as JESUS CHRIST Himself, both
     GOD and Man in person, whom the Church of Rome believeth to be
     substantially and wholly present under the outward figures of bread
     and wine; nor to speak of some other faults of less moment; our
     Reformers justly redressed that grievous and grand sacrilege, as it
     is deservedly called by * * * * *

     But at the same time our first Reformers laid aside the [] they took
     not away all the substance, or beauty, and due order of the
     Eucharistical Office of prayers and thanksgivings, as others [Luther
     and Calvin] then had done beyond sea, insomuch that they hardly left
     a Prayer of Consecration of bread and wine at the holy table, of
     which the Archbishop of Spalato therefore justly hath written * * *
     * * * *

     No; our English Bishops were wiser, and, although they left the
     Church or Court of Rome upon the account of their intolerable
     abuses, yet, as they duly kept up their holy order, and episcopal
     dignity, so did they likewise retain the substance of the ancient
     Liturgy, or celebration of the holy Eucharist; yea, they rather made
     the Form and Prayer of Consecration better and fuller than it is in
     the Canon of the Mass, used in the said Church.

     For, whereas there GOD is entreated to sanctify the oblation of
     bread and wine, that they may be unto them the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST, in this English as also in the Scottish Liturgy, is, to the
     word "sanctify," added "by Thy Word and Holy Spirit;" of which both,
     not only the primitive Fathers make most frequent mention, when they
     speak of this matter, but there is also not one ancient Liturgy,
     except the Latin Canon, where the Holy Spirit is not expressly
     named, and desired to come, or to be sent down upon the proposited
     elements to sanctify them, as I have shown in the annotation upon
     the said place, and proved this Prayer of Consecration to be of
     Apostolical tradition.

     [The beginning of the next paragraph stood originally thus--
     "§ Now I think that our forementioned Reformers, for their true
     wisdom, as well as great prudence, in this point, are highly to be
     commended."]

     §. And since I mention "tradition" and Apostolical "tradition,"
     knowing how much some [unknowing, qu.] people are offended at the
     very sound of it, I must show how little reason they have for being
     so, and that it is not only * * * * * but in some * * * * * *

                       [The Eucharistical Sacrifice.]

           [Published in the Pamphlet above referred to, "De Forma
                              Consecrationis."]

          Of the Oblation of Bread and Wine in the Holy Eucharist.

     That action, which in the celebration of the holy Eucharist, hath
     ever been performed in all Christian Churches throughout the whole
     world by orthodox priests, even in the times of the holy Apostles,
     as also by heretics, which kept up that holy ordinance; and hath
     been observed under that notion, that our SAVIOUR did it Himself in
     the first institution of the blessed Sacrament; that action, I say,
     is doubtless of Apostolical tradition, and instituted by CHRIST,
     although it is not in plain terms recorded by the holy Evangelists;
     and ought, therefore, still devoutly to be observed in the
     celebration of that holy mystery.

     Now the oblation of bread and wine to GOD the FATHER, partly to
     agnize Him as the CREATOR, and Supreme LORD of all the world, partly
     to represent before Him the oblation of CHRIST'S Body and Blood on
     the Cross, to the intent that He might be propitious to them that
     offered, and for whom it was offered, and make them partakers of all
     the benefits of CHRIST'S Passion; such action, I say, hath in all
     Christian Churches throughout the world, ever been performed by
     Catholic priests, even in the Apostles' time, as also by the
     heretics that had any Eucharist; and hath been observed under that
     notion that CHRIST did it Himself, in the first institution of that
     holy Sacrament.

     Therefore, such an oblation is of Apostolical tradition, and
     instituted by CHRIST, although it is not in plain terms recorded by
     the holy Evangelists, and ought, therefore, still devoutly to be
     observed in the celebration of that holy mystery.

   LESLIE, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR .--Case of the Regale and Pontificate.
                                   §. xix.

     [In the "Preliminary Dissertation on the doctrine of the
     Eucharistical Sacrifice," prefixed to Skinner's "Office for the
     Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper, or Holy Communion, according to the
     use of the Episcopal Church in Scotland," is an extract from a
     letter of Leslie's prefixed to "a valuable little tract, entitled,
     'Sacrifice the Divine Service, &c. by J. Scandret, Priest of the
     Church of England.' This tract the compiler of the present Catena
     has been unable to meet with, and can, therefore, only give the
     extract quoted from Leslie's Letter by Skinner, which, as he
     observes, (p. 49,) "gives this ample testimony in favour of the
     subject matter" of Scandret's treatise. "Sir, I have perused with
     great pleasure the ensuing pious and useful treatise, committed to
     my hands. The subject you have undertaken vindicates the Church of
     England and her doctrine against the profane, the Papists, and
     Dissenters: and you have done it with that clearness and fulness, as
     was greatly desirable among us, in an age, when not only this great
     point of the Christian Sacrifice, but all parts of our religion,
     have been openly attacked;" concluding thus, "I desire your prayers,
     as you have those of your fellow labourer, brother, and faithful
     servant, CHARLES LESLIE. All Saints, 1706."]

     The seals which the Levitical priesthood were empowered to put to
     the covenant, which they administered to the people in the name of
     GOD, were circumcision and the Sacrifices, which were appointed as
     types of CHRIST, for the remission of their sins.

     The seals of the New Covenant are baptism and the LORD'S Supper, as
     commemorations and exhibitions of the Sacrifice of CHRIST already
     past, and a true, real conveyance of all the benefits of it to the
     worthy receivers, for the remission of their sins, and a pledge to
     assure them of heaven.

     Now surely these are greater and more glorious, and at least as
     efficacious, as the seals of the law; and, therefore, the priests of
     the Gospel, to whom CHRIST has committed the administration of
     these, are as truly and properly priests, empowered by CHRIST, to
     seal covenants in his name with the people, as the priests under the
     law. . . .

     .... And so, on the other hand, as we are commanded to sanctify GOD,
     and to esteem Him holy, the same is communicated to the priests, who
     represent Him, and officiate in His name, . . . (ver. 8.) "Thou shah
     sanctify him, therefore, for he offereth the bread of thy GOD; he
     shall be holy unto thee, for I the Lord, who sanctify you, am holy."
     The meaning of which is, that if GOD be holy, so must His priest be
     esteemed by us; not upon a personal account, as GOD is holy in
     Himself, and none but He, and some priests, as Hophni and Phineas,
     are sons of Belial, and know not the LORD; and there was a Judas
     among the apostles; but upon account of their office, which is holy,
     and that they offer the bread of our GOD, which is holy.

     Nor can the shewbread in the temple be called the bread of our GOD
     so properly, so strictly, so eminently, as the bread in the holy
     Sacrament, which is the body of CHRIST? And "we being many, are one
     bread, and one body; for we are all partakers of that one bread." (1
     Cor. x. 17.) And does not then holiness and honour belong as much,
     at least, to the evangelical priesthood, who offer this bread of our
     GOD, as to the priests under the law, who set the shewbread upon the
     holy table in the temple? And is not the one as properly the office
     of a priest as the other?--Works, Vol. i. pp. 660. 665.

             BRETT, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--Brief Answer, &c.

     As to what has been said to prove the Christian Sacrifice in the
     holy Eucharist, I need not tell the reader, that this has been so
     fully made out, that no further evidence is necessary in its behalf.
     For if so many texts of Scripture, explained by the concurrent
     testimony of those ancient Fathers who have cited them, if Scripture
     or reason, if the agreement of all the ancient Liturgies, however
     different in other matters, if the most strictly literal expressions
     to GOD, in His holy worship; in a word, if antiquity, universality,
     and consent, if any one of these, much more if all of them together
     be good evidence, I am sure we do not want evidence. If the
     doctrines and practices of the Jewish Church, in relation to their
     Sacrifices, be evidence, we have hence still farther evidence. If
     the rites and usages of the heathen in their worship, and their
     explications of their sacrificial terms be evidence, we have
     evidence in abundance.....

     The throughly learned and judicious Dr. Hickes, has taken such
     effectual pains in this argument, and confirmed his position with
     such variety of reading and reasoning, as may be carped at, but can
     never be answered to any purpose.....

     The learned author, likewise, of the "Propitiatory Oblation in the
     holy Eucharist," has performed his part, very much to the
     satisfaction of the impartial reader.....

     Thus convincingly have these two learned authors engaged in the
     present controversy; proving, by all the argument the thing is
     capable of, that our blessed SAVIOUR did leave His own Supper as a
     commemorative, eucharistical, material Sacrifice, a Sacrifice of
     impetration, as well as gratulatory, showing forth our SAVIOUR'S
     death, presenting it before GOD as our all-sufficient propitiation,
     and so being an especial means of obtaining the benefits of it for
     us; and in a word, that it is propitiatory.--pp. 5. 8--10.

    ID.--The Christian Altar and Sacrifice. A Sermon. [On Heb. xiii. 10.]

     Dr. Heylin long ago, and of late Dr. Hickes, and the learned author
     of the "Propitiatory Oblation," have proved this to be the plain
     doctrine of this Church, contained in her Liturgy. And Dr. Heylin
     has showed that it was a doctrine freely owned by our best divines,
     even in their controversial writings against the Church of Rome,
     such as Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Andrews, and Bishop Morton, and
     that it was acknowledged by those blessed martyrs of this Church,
     Fryth, Lambert, Philpot, Latymer, and Ridley, even at the time when
     they were called upon to give their testimony to the truth for which
     they suffered.

     The reverend and learned Dr. Hickes has since showed it to have been
     the professed and declared opinion of Bishop Overal, Bishop Taylor,
     Archbishop Laud, Mr. Mede, the Compilers of the Scotch Liturgy, &c.
     . . . and even of Mr. Baxter himself.--Preface, pp. x. xi.

     But now the old question may be asked, cui bono? What signifies it
     to us, whether we believe the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist to be
     a Sacrifice or not? What need any disputes about it? All parties are
     agreed that it is an holy ordinance, instituted by CHRIST Himself,
     and that every good Christian ought to partake of it.

     But we may ask again, if it be not convenient, nay necessary, that
     all those who partake of this holy Sacrament, should understand and
     know what it is they do? Ought they not to be instructed in the
     nature and design of it, lest "they eat and drink unworthily, not
     discerning the LORD'S Body?" And how shall they "discern the LORD'S
     Body," if they are not taught that "the LORD'S Body," is there
     present? . . .

     The next question then is, how is the LORD'S Body there to be
     discerned? It cannot be meant of the literal, natural Body of the
     LORD, as the Church of Rome blasphemously teaches; for St. Paul
     himself calls it "bread" and "wine," even at the very time it is to
     be eaten and drunk. "Let a man examine himself," says he, "and so
     let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup." How then can "the
     LORD'S Body" be there discerned otherwise than by representation?
     ....

     In the last place, then, we are to inquire how the Body and Blood of
     Christ is there represented? And it is evident from the Scriptures,
     that it is not the whole CHRIST, body, soul, and divinity,
     hypostatically united, as the Papists also blasphemously teach; and
     from thence as blasphemously infer that it is to be worshipped. That
     which is represented in the Eucharist is neither the divinity nor
     the human soul of CHRIST, but only His Body and Blood separated from
     both and from one another. The Blood is not represented by the
     element of wine, as in the body, but as shed and separated from it;
     which is utterly irreconcileable with, and plainly contradictory to
     the Popish doctrine of the mass. Our SAVIOUR, at His institution of
     this Sacrament, gave the bread and wine as representing His Body
     broken, and His Blood shed, or poured out from it. "This is my Body
     which is broken for you, this is my Blood which is shed for many."
     And when CHRIST'S real Body was broken, and His Blood shed, it was
     then separated, not from His divinity only, but from His human soul
     also, and died and was buried. The bread and wine, therefore,
     representing CHRIST'S Body, as broken, and His Blood as shed and
     poured out from it, can by no means represent, much less really be,
     the very individual glorified Body of CHRIST now in heaven, and
     personally united, not only to the human soul, but also to the
     divine nature. But it plainly represents CHRIST'S Body as given,
     that is, offered or sacrificed for us, for so our LORD Himself
     appointed it to do, saying, "This is my Body which is given," or
     offered "for you." It is evident, therefore, from the very
     institution, that the bread and wine in the holy Sacrament of the
     Eucharist, represent CHRIST'S Body and Blood1 as given, offered, or
     sacrificed for us; and are so full and perfect representatives
     thereof, that our LORD Himself thought fit to give to the bread and
     wine, the name of His Body and Blood. The consequence of all this
     is, that the bread and wine, in the holy Eucharist, do by the very
     institution represent the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Body broken, and His
     Blood shed; and that if we do not know and understand this, we
     cannot rightly "discern the LORD'S Body."--pp. xii--xv.

     From the whole, then, we may learn,

     First, If the holy Eucharist, as I trust has been sufficiently
     proved, be a visible material Sacrifice, representative of the one,
     true, and only meritorious and all-sufficient Sacrifice of CHRIST,
     of the same nature with, though of greater worth and dignity than
     the Jewish Sacrifices; it follows, that this cannot be the real and
     true Sacrifice of CHRIST Himself, as the Church of Rome most
     wickedly and absurdly teaches; to support which vain notion, she has
     invented the unintelligible doctrine of transubstantiation. For the
     representative cannot be the person represented; the thing
     signifying cannot be the thing signified: for the very notion of a
     representative implies something distinct from that which is
     represented by it. Those therefore who charge the doctrine of the
     Eucharistical Sacrifice as savouring of Popery, either know not what
     Popery is, or have no right notion of the Eucharist itself; for
     nothing can be more directly opposite to the doctrine of
     transubstantiation, or to "the Sacrifices of Masses, in the which it
     was commonly said that the priests did offer CHRIST for the quick
     and the dead," than this doctrine of the representative Sacrifice of
     the Eucharist.....This doctrine, therefore, of a true and proper
     Sacrifice in the Eucharist, representing the one great and truly
     meritorious Sacrifice of CHRIST, is so far from savouring of Popery,
     that nothing can be more opposite to Popery than this is, nor can
     any other doctrine be so effectual to root out all Popish notions,
     relating to the blessed Sacrament of the altar, as this is. For if
     we deny the Eucharist to be a real and proper Sacrifice, we give the
     Papists a great advantage over us. Because they may easily prove
     from the institution of this Sacrament by CHRIST, from this and
     divers other texts of Scripture, and from the primitive Fathers of
     the Church, that it is a Sacrifice; and forasmuch as our Church
     declares, that "this LORD'S Supper is in such wise to be done and
     ministered as our LORD and SAVIOUR commanded it to be done, as the
     holy Apostles used it, and the good Fathers in the primitive Church
     frequented it" (Hom. of the Sacrament); they will easily show, that
     if we do not believe the Eucharist to be a Sacrifice, we do not hold
     to this rule and declaration of our Church, and confute us from our
     own principles.

     And when they have thus confuted us, and clearly proved the
     Eucharist to be a Sacrifice, and we have not instructed our people
     in the nature of this Sacrifice, what a mighty advantage do we give
     them to draw our people from us? For when they have thus convinced
     them of our error in so material a point, how easy may it be to
     persuade them that all our doctrines are erroneous also! But when we
     show our people the true nature of this Sacrifice, that it is not
     the very individual Sacrifice of CHRIST Himself, (for that was
     offered "once for all,") but only the memorial or representation of
     that Sacrifice, they will see clearly that the Popish Sacrifice of
     the Mass, wherein they pretend to offer CHRIST "for the quick and
     the dead," has no foundation either in the Scripture or the ancient
     Fathers, but is clearly opposite to them; forasmuch as the picture
     cannot be the man whose picture it is, nor the representative the
     person he represents. And therefore many of our best divines, in
     their controversial writings against the Church of Rome, have
     acknowledged it as the doctrine of our Church, that this "Sacrament
     is a Sacrifice which does represent the Sacrifice which CHRIST once
     offered; wherein we set before GOD the bread and wine as figures or
     images of the precious Blood of CHRIST shed for us, and of His
     precious Body; an unbloody Sacrifice instituted by GOD, instead of
     the many bloody Sacrifices of the law:" and thereby have clearly
     confuted the doctrine of transubstantiation and of the Mass. For how
     can this be an unbloody Sacrifice, or a Sacrifice without blood, if
     therein the very Blood of CHRIST was offered up to GOD? There
     cannot, therefore, be a better or more effectual preservative from
     Popery, as it has relation to the holy Sacrament of the altar, than
     this doctrine of the Eucharist being a true, proper, commemorative,
     representative and unbloody Sacrifice.--pp. 19--23.

     Secondly, If the holy Eucharist is a Sacrifice which, by our
     SAVIOUR'S institution, fully and perfectly represents the one great
     and meritorious Sacrifice of CHRIST upon the Cross, then it is much
     more excellent than any of the old legal Sacrifices: not more
     excellent in its own nature, (for bread and wine have nothing in the
     nature of them more worthy than the blood of bulls and of goats,
     than the libations of wine, or the oblations of fine flour, than
     shew-bread or incense,) but by virtue of the institution. For indeed
     there can be no natural virtue in any creature to make atonement for
     sin; nothing can satisfy for sin but the very Body and Blood of
     CHRIST Himself. And the legal Sacrifices, under the Mosaical
     dispensation, were propitiatory, only as they were appointed by
     divine institution to be so, and as they were types or shadows of
     that just and truly meritorious Sacrifice of CHRIST. . . . And so,
     by this divine appointment, the Sacrifice of the Eucharist being
     offered according to the institution, becomes propitiatory, that is,
     renders GOD good and gracious to us, and procures His pardon and
     favour.

     In this respect, then, that is, by virtue of the divine institution,
     the Sacrifice of the holy Eucharist far exceeds all the Sacrifices
     of the law, and is far more excellent. For the Sacrifices of the law
     were, by their institution, but imperfect types of the great
     Sacrifice on the Cross. They were appointed to render GOD propitious
     or gracious, but in some cases and on some occasions, not in all.
     There was no Sacrifice that could make an atonement for murder, and
     some other heinous offences; but the Eucharistical Sacrifice,
     rightly and duly ministered and received, is an atonement for the
     greatest sins, and, by virtue of the divine institution, procures
     pardon for them, and renders GOD propitious and gracious to us being
     truly faithful and penitent, notwithstanding the foulest crimes.
     This Sacrifice is not an imperfect type, as the Jewish Sacrifices
     were, even by their institution, of the meritorious Sacrifice on the
     Cross; but it is, by virtue of the institution, the full and perfect
     representative of it, so as to convey to us all the benefits and
     blessings purchased by the original. Whatsoever sins CHRIST'S
     meritorious death and Passion made satisfaction for, whatsoever sins
     are cleansed by His Blood; the pardon of them is conveyed to every
     worthy receiver, in the holy Eucharist or Sacrifice of His
     representative Body and Blood. Now there are no sins but what CHRIST
     made a satisfaction for; the Scripture expressly teaching that "the
     Blood of JESUS CHRIST cleanseth us from all sin." "And He is the
     propitiation for our sins," whatsoever they be, "and not for ours
     only, but also for the sins of the whole world." And He appointed
     this Eucharistical Sacrifice to convey to every particular person
     that should receive it, all the benefits of His Death and Passion.
     He appointed it to be such a perfect complete representative of His
     very Body which was broken, and of His very Blood which was shed for
     us, that He thought convenient to give it the name of His Body and
     Blood, saying, "Take, eat, this is my Body"--"Drink ye all of it;
     for this is my Blood." Therefore, as St. Paul says, "The cup of
     blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the Blood of
     Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
     Body of CHRIST?" That is, Are not all the blessings purchased for us
     by the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S Body and Blood, communicated or
     conveyed to us by this Eucharistical Sacrifice of bread and wine?
     Undoubtedly they are. Since, then, by CHRIST'S Body broken, and His
     Blood shed, there is a satisfaction made, and a pardon obtained for
     all sins, it is manifest that this pardon is conveyed to every
     penitent and faithful receiver of the Eucharist; for that, the
     Scripture teaches, is the communion of the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
     the means by which He has appointed that the merits of His death
     shall be communicated to us: that is, the pardon and remission of
     all sins, of all transgressions. Since, therefore, the Sacrifices of
     the law could procure pardon for some sins only, not for all, and
     the Sacrifice of the Eucharist is appointed to procure and convey
     the pardon of all sins, of all transgressions, the Eucharist is
     manifestly a more worthy and acceptable Sacrifice, by virtue of the
     institution, than all the Sacrifices of the law.

     Thirdly, Forasmuch as the Eucharist is a Sacrifice, it is certain
     that none can administer it but a priest, one particularly called
     and appointed by GOD to that office, as was Aaron....

     Fourthly, Since the Eucharist is a Sacrifice, an oblation appointed
     by GOD Himself, to render Him propitious and gracious, and has no
     intrinsic virtue in itself to procure pardon and grace, but all its
     worth and virtue is derived only from its institution, whereby it
     perfectly represents and conveys to us all the benefits purchased by
     the truly meritorious Sacrifice of CHRIST, let us be very careful to
     minister and partake of it as it was ministered by CHRIST, and
     received by His disciples. Let the priest, who represents CHRIST
     Himself on this occasion, in a more particular manner, as the
     steward or dispenser of His mysteries, be especially careful to
     perform every part of the oblation Himself as CHRIST did; not
     permitting the oblation to be made by any other hand, as is too
     commonly practised. I speak with regard to the placing the bread and
     wine on the altar. This is too frequently done by the clerk or
     sexton before the Office begins: a thing contrary to the nature of
     an oblation and the express directions of our Rubric, and by no
     means agreeable to CHRIST'S institution. For He Himself took the
     bread and the cup, and made an oblation of them to GOD, before He
     consecrated them, or declared them to be His Body and Blood. For "He
     took bread, and when He had given thanks He brake it." By taking the
     bread, and giving of thanks, He plainly made an oblation of it to
     GOD, before He brake it, and pronounced it to be His Body. We ought,
     therefore, as He did, to make an oblation of the elements to GOD,
     before we consecrate, or pronounce them to be the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST. Now the placing the elements on the altar, or the LORD'S
     table, makes them an oblation to GOD, and separates them from all
     common use; and to make an oblation or Sacrifice, is, as I have
     showed you, the proper office of the priest; and it is the highest
     presumption, and a great offence to GOD, for any one else to
     undertake it: therefore it is necessary that the priest place the
     elements on the table; for thereby it is that he makes them an
     oblation; he presents them to GOD, and having so presented or
     offered them, he then, as our Church also directs, blesses them,
     beseeching GOD to accept them, together with our alms; which are
     also by him placed there at the same time, saying, "We humbly
     beseech Thee most mercifully to accept our alms and oblations."
     Then, after some other prayers, suitable to the occasion, he
     consecrates, or declares them, in our SAVIOUR'S own words, to he the
     Body and Blood of CHRIST. But if the priest does not make an
     oblation of the elements before the consecration, he does not
     minister this Sacrament as CHRIST ministered it, and fails in a very
     material part, and consecrates what he has not first offered to GOD;
     which CHRIST did not do.

     And as the priest ought to minister this holy Sacrament, as it was
     ministered by CHRIST Himself, so ought the people to receive it, as
     it was received by His disciples; that is, they ought to receive the
     whole Sacrament, not a part of it only. Therefore the Church of
     Rome, which permits not the people to receive the Cup of the LORD,
     but the Bread only, is guilty of a sacrilegious sin, and a most high
     profanation of this Sacrifice. For when a Sacrifice or oblation is
     made to GOD, that which is so offered is then to be disposed of as
     GOD has appointed, and no otherwise? because GOD has a more
     particular, peculiar right in our oblations than in other things. .
     . . Therefore, when we have made an oblation of bread and wine at
     the LORD'S table, if we do not dispose of that bread and wine as He
     has directed, we are guilty of sacrilege. Now, when CHRIST
     instituted this holy Sacrifice and Sacrament, He gave the wine as
     well as the bread to all His disciples, saying, "Drink ye all of
     this." For this reason, if the wine as well as the bread be not
     given to all the communicants, then is not this oblation entirely
     disposed of according as GOD has directed, consequently there is a
     sacrilege committed. And the Church of Rome is guilty of this great
     abomination, in denying the cup to all but him that ministers, when
     CHRIST Himself communicated it to all that were present, and gave
     express command that we should do as He did.

     Fifthly, since the holy Eucharist is a Sacrifice perfectly
     representing by virtue of its institution, that great and truly
     meritorious Sacrifice of CHRIST Himself, so that the bread and wine
     which we offer is accepted in the sight of GOD, as the very Body and
     Blood of His only begotten Son, and as such is communicated to us;
     then, whensoever we rightly and duly make this oblation, we set
     before GOD the memorial of His SON'S death, put Him in mind of that
     meritorious Sacrifice which has made a full, perfect, and complete
     satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, For though things are
     at all times present with GOD, and therefore He needs no memorial,
     nothing to put Him in mind of any thing on His own account, as if He
     was forgetful, and did not always remember or know every thing; yet,
     in compliance with our infirmities, and to adapt Himself to our
     nature and capacities, He is graciously pleased to require us to put
     Him in mind of what He knows and sees infinitely better than we do.
     . . . Whensoever, then, we make a memorial before GOD, to put Him in
     mind of us, by our prayers, our alms, or our oblations, it is not
     meant that we put Him in mind of what otherwise He might forget, but
     only that we thereby engage or induce Him to be mindful of us, and
     to remember us for good. So when we set before GOD the memorial of
     His SON'S most meritorious Sacrifice, we plainly engage and induce
     Him to confer on us all the mercies and graces purchased for us by
     that all-sufficient Sacrifice; as pardon of sin, reconciliation to
     GOD, union with CHRIST, a pledge or earnest of eternal life, and
     grace and strength to enable us to work out our own salvation.

     But if this holy Sacrament be not a Sacrifice or an oblation offered
     to GOD, (as some have of late pretended, contrary to the doctrine of
     the holy Scriptures, and of the pure Catholic Church in the first
     ages of Christianity,) but only a commemoration made among
     ourselves, to put us only, and not GOD, in mind of CHRIST'S death,
     then there is no memorial offered to GOD; and if there be no
     memorial of CHRIST'S death offered to GOD in this service, then
     cannot this service engage or induce Him to confer on us the gifts
     and graces purchased for us by the all-sufficient Sacrifice of
     CHRIST, more than any other common service of prayer and praise: and
     if so, then is this Sacrament of no more worth and excellency than
     any other service of the church; and St. Paul's precept requiring a
     man to examine himself before he presumes to eat of this bread, and
     drink of this cup, was perfectly needless. For what occasion can
     there be for such an examination before this Sacrament, more than
     before any other ordinary duty, if no memorial be offered to GOD of
     a more excellent nature than our daily prayers and praises? But if
     there be a particular memorial offered to GOD in the holy Eucharist,
     a memorial of CHRIST'S all-sufficient and most meritorious
     Sacrifice, as undoubtedly there is, and that JESUS CHRIST is there
     "evidently set forth, crucified amongst us," and if evidently set
     forth as crucified, then evidently set forth as offered for us; it
     plainly follows, that when such a memorial is made to GOD, to put
     Him in mind of all that His SON has done or purchased for us,
     thereby to induce Him to confer on us all the mercies and graces
     obtained for us by CHRIST'S death; that we should be in a more
     especial manner careful to examine ourselves before we presume to
     make this offering, that we may not, by our impenitence, or want of
     faith, draw down a curse upon us instead of a blessing, and so eat
     and drink our own damnation.

     Sixthly and lastly, since, as the text assures, "We have an altar
     whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle," but
     we, by the rules of opposition, must have a right to eat of it, for
     it is our altar; let us not, by our own impenitence, unfaithfulness,
     or negligence, deprive ourselves of this right. Let us consider it
     as no small privilege to be admitted to partake of this altar, a
     privilege to which GOD would not admit His own chosen people the
     Jews, for the text plainly says, that they had no right to eat of
     it; and I have shewed to you, that, by the Mosaical law, they had no
     right to eat even of that Sacrifice which they themselves offered,
     even as a type of this. Since then GOD has vouchsafed to us
     Christians, a so much greater privilege than He ever before allowed
     to His own chosen people, if we put a slight and contempt upon this
     high and extraordinary privilege, we certainly deserve not to
     partake of any of those benefits designed to be conveyed to us by
     the right and due use of it. If we will not come to the LORD'S
     table, there to make our oblation of bread and wine to Him, as a
     memorial to put Him in mind of the Sacrifice of His SON, which there
     by Divine institution is fully and perfectly represented, and there
     to receive them from Him again, as the representative Body and Blood
     of CHRIST, conveying to us all the benefits of His meritorious Death
     and Passion, we can have no good grounds to hope that ever we shall
     partake of any of those benefits; and if we do not, what will become
     of us? ... Let us then never neglect this so beneficial a service,
     but as often as we have opportunity, let us make our oblation to GOD
     of the memorial of CHRIST'S Sacrifice, that by receiving it from Him
     again, we may therewith receive the pardon of our sins,
     reconciliation with GOD, the increase of strengthening grace, and
     become so firmly united to CHRIST, that nothing may ever be able to
     dissolve the union; but being begun here in grace, it may be
     consummated in glory, through the merits and mediation of the same
     JESUS CHRIST our LORD; to whom with the FATHER and the HOLY GHOST be
     ascribed, as most due is, all honour and glory, now, and for
     evermore. Amen.--pp. 25--40.

                      ID.--True Scripture Account, &c.

     I shall only further observe that our Church shows that she
     understands the words "do this," to signify "offer this," and
     therefore orders the bread and wine not to be placed on the LORD'S
     table by any other than the priest, and requires him to place them
     there as oblations; for at the time that she restored that old
     Rubric which orders the priest to place the bread and wine upon the
     table, she also ordered him, at the beginning of the Prayer
     immediately following, to beseech GOD to accept our oblations. Which
     word "oblations" being not in that Prayer (but the word "alms" only)
     before the restoration of that Rubric, shows that the Church by
     adding that word to the word "alms" which was before in the Prayer,
     at the very time that she restored that Rubric, intended the priest
     should solemnly offer them there, and esteemed the priest's placing
     them there to be the making them "oblations," which they cannot
     properly be called when placed there by any other than a priest. For
     Mr. Johnson in his "unbloody Sacrifice," p. 4. Part I. having
     examined the several definitions which learned men have given of a
     Sacrifice, does from thence give this as a full description of it,
     viz. "Sacrifice is some material thing, either animate or inanimate,
     offered to GOD, &c. . . . [Vid. sup.] And he observes, p. 14. that
     "If we inquire into these rites, which were peculiar to Sacrifice,
     we shall find them to be no other but the very actions of offering
     them. I will not," says he, "pretend to say, that there never were
     any ceremonies esteemed necessary by some particular people, for
     some particular Sacrifices; but what I affirm is, that no rite is
     essential to Sacrifice in general, but only the very act or acts of
     oblation. For if it were otherwise, the Levitical Sacrifices were in
     reality null; for no rites were necessary in offering them, but
     sprinkling the blood, and burning the whole or part of the
     Sacrifice." (He might have added "heaving," or "waving," part of
     what was offered for a heave-offering or wave-offering.) "And I
     suppose it needs no proof, that these were the very rites by which
     the sacerdotal oblation was performed: by the sprinkling the blood
     the whole Sacrifice was consecrated to GOD, and the atonement made;
     and by burning a part or the whole upon the altar, GOD had what He
     required actually yielded to Him: so that these ritual actions were
     indeed no other but what were used as vocal signs, with which the
     Sacrifice was presented to GOD. The priest was not directed to use
     any words, but the actions were significant, and spake the thoughts
     of him that performed the office. Nor can I, upon the best inquiry I
     am able to make, find any (one) ceremony generally thought necessary
     for offering a Sacrifice, but only the actions whereby the Sacrifice
     was presented." And I conceive the priest's solemnly placing the
     bread and wine upon the altar, is as proper a rite as sprinkling the
     blood, or heaving or waving the Sacrifice or a part of it, or as
     burning it in whole or in part, or any other rite used by the
     Levitical priests.--pp. 84--86.

     And if it be offered as our Church directs, it has all the parts
     requisite to a complete Sacrifice. For there is first the material
     thing, bread and wine; secondly, an acknowledgment of the dominion
     and other attributes of GOD in the prayers and praises which
     accompany it, as likewise a desire to procure Divine blessings,
     especially remission of sins, which, as Christians, we expect and
     ask only through the merits and for the sake of JESUS CHRIST who
     bore our sins in His Body on the tree, and shed His Blood for the
     remission of them, and dignified these gifts, which we offer, with
     the name of His Body and Blood, and has made them truly His Body and
     Blood in power and effect. Thirdly, they are offered on a proper
     altar, the LORD'S table, a table set apart entirely for this
     service. Fourthly, they are offered by a proper officer, a priest
     regularly ordained to this office, and with an agreeable rite, a
     solemn placing them on the LORD'S table or altar. And lastly, they
     are consumed by eating and drinking in such manner as our LORD JESUS
     CHRIST, the Author of the Sacrifice, has appointed. Thus the Church
     of England has taken care that the holy Eucharist, may be duly
     celebrated as an oblation or Sacrifice, by directing the
     ministration of it to be performed in such manner that it may want
     nothing necessary to a true Sacrifice. If any of her priests
     wilfully maim it in a principal part, and do not himself solemnly
     and devoutly place them on the LORD'S table or altar, the fault is
     wholly in them and not in the Church, whose plain rule and precept
     they have no regard to.--p. 88.

     The essence of this Sacrament, therefore, consists, not, as he
     pretends it does, barely in the remembrance of CHRIST, and
     expressing that remembrance by partaking of bread and wine as
     memorials of His Body and Blood, but likewise in the doing or
     offering them in the same manner He did. This necessarily requires a
     particular person to execute this priestly office, who may do or
     offer as CHRIST did in the institution, and requires to be done by
     us till He come. A priest, therefore, is necessary and essential to
     the due administration of this Sacrament. He, as CHRIST did, and
     whose Person he on this occasion represents, must take bread and
     give thanks, and bless it, and break it, and give it .to those that
     are present, as "the Body of CHRIST," before they can partake of it.
     "In like manner, he must take the cup, and, having" eucharistized
     it, "or blessed it with thanksgiving, "he must give it to them" as
     the "New Testament in the Blood of CHRIST, shed for many for the
     remission of sins," that they may "all drink of it." And if the
     LORD'S Supper be not celebrated in this manner by a priest, then it
     is not celebrated in the manner CHRIST has appointed it to be
     done.--p. 132.

     We cannot, therefore, celebrate the LORD'S Supper except we have a
     priest standing in the place of CHRIST and representing Him, who may
     take the bread, and having given or offered it to GOD by devoutly
     placing it on His holy table, may then bless it by prayer and
     thanksgiving, and break it and give it to the communicants as the
     representative Body of CHRIST, and in remembrance of Him, of all
     that He did for us, and more especially His dying for us. The
     difference between the oblation which CHRIST made at His last
     Supper, and what we now make when we rightly and duly celebrate the
     LORD'S Supper, is only this--He offered bread and wine as
     representatives of His Body and Blood, in order that He might suffer
     and bear our sins in His Body on the Cross: we offer the same in
     remembrance that He did suffer and bear our sins there.--p. 135. i

                  BENNET, PRESBYTER.--Rights of the Clergy.

     St. Clement of Rome, who wrote in the Apostles' times, plainly
     speaks of the Bishops presiding in the celebration of the LORD'S
     Supper. For nothing else can be meant by their "offering the gifts;"
     especially if we consider, that the Eucharistical elements are
     called a "gift" by St. Ignatius himself; and that this language is
     used by innumerable other writers, particularly those that are the
     most ancient; and 'tis notorious, that irpoatyiptiv signifies to
     offer a Sacrifice, such as all antiquity thought the Holy Eucharist
     to be; and that this word is particularly applied to the Holy
     Eucharist by Justin Martyr, and all antiquity.--p. 52.

     I have already shewn from St. Clement of Rome, who wrote in the
     Apostles' own times, and knew what method ought to be taken in the
     celebration of this ordinance, that the elements were consecrated by
     the Clergy; who consequently did something more than merely receive
     them after the same manner as the Laity did. And 'tis notorious,
     that all along in the following centuries this practice was
     constantly observed. So that we must not now reverse an established
     order by new fangled notions or pretend to a better understanding of
     Christian mysteries, than those very persons who learnt from the
     Apostles' own mouths, and were taught by them how to administer the
     Eucharist. The Jewish laity received the meat of their offerings,
     and applied it to an holy use, as much as the priest, who in some
     cases had his portion thereof; the laity also joined in the same
     ceremony of sacrificing, by being publickly present as the parties
     concerned, and bearing a share in the solemnity. And yet no man in
     his wits will conclude from hence, that the Jewish laity did
     properly sacrifice, or that it was not necessary for the priest in
     particular to do his office with respect to it. Even so in the Holy
     Eucharist, though the people do what the Clergy do, as far as
     relates to the reception and use of the elements; yet the Clergy
     must first consecrate the elements by prayer, before they become
     CHRIST'S mystical Body and Blood to either the Clergy or the
     laity.--pp. 308, 309.

     Nothing now remains, but that I consider an argument which is drawn
     from the practice of the Jewish Church. Tis pretended that the
     Christian Baptism succeeds the Jewish circumcision; that the
     Christian LORD'S Supper succeeds the Jewish Passover; and that the
     Christian preaching succeeds the Jewish teaching in Synagogues. And
     consequently, since circumcision and the Passover were administered
     by the laity amongst the Jews, and since the Jewish laity were
     permitted to teach in their synagogues; there is the same reason,
     why the Christian laity should also administer such Gospel
     ordinances, as succeed in the room of those Jewish observations . .
     .

     1. With respect to circumcision, 'tis said that the Jewish laity did
     perform it, and that the Christian Baptism succeeds in the room of
     it. These two particulars I freely grant. For as the Jews were
     initiated by circumcision, so are Christians initiated by baptism.
     And we are assured, that Zipporah circumcised her son. Exod. iv. 25.
     Nor is it ever said, that the Jewish Priests did circumcise the
     children of that nation. Nor do the Jews to this day believe, that
     any particular administrator is necessary. So that from the
     beginning any person that could dextrously perform the operation,
     might lawfully circumcise. But what will follow from these
     concessions? Does not this very plea suppose that GOD never
     appointed any administrator of circumcision under the Law? and that
     He always acknowledged it to be His seal, by whomsoever that mark of
     distinction was impressed? Was not the bare instance of Zipporah a
     demonstration of this?

     She could not but be a lay person; and yet she was never blamed by
     Moses for executing that office, even though 'tis plain, that 'tis
     no case of necessity; for Moses himself, or any other proper
     administrator, might have been procured. But can anything like this
     be pleaded with respect to the ordinance of Christian Baptism? If
     so, this argument from the Jewish circumcision to the Christian
     Baptism will be unanswerably strong. But it appears from what I have
     already said, that nothing of this nature can be shown. For I have
     proved, that, from the very first plantation of the Christian
     Church, GOD committed the administration of Baptism to the Clergy,
     by giving them a particular and express commission to perform it;
     and that the administration of it was confined to them, not only in
     the Apostles' times, (which is abundantly sufficient) but also for
     the first three hundred years after CHRIST. And, I presume, GOD has
     not since that time made any such discovery of His divine will to
     our adversaries, as may warrant the alteration of that rule which He
     at the first was pleased to settle in His Church.

     Now my argument is entirely built upon the signification of GOD'S
     will. I do by no means deny, but that GOD might have left the
     administration of Baptism in common to all Christians, and made it
     as lawful for the Christian laity to perform it, as 'tis i on both
     sides allowed to have been for the Jewish laity to circumcise: but I
     affirm, that since GOD has been pleased to do otherwise; since He
     has from the beginning made it the business of the Clergy to
     baptize; since the Clergy have undoubted authority so to do, and the
     laity are so far from having the like authority, that the constant
     and uninterrupted practice of the Church, from the first
     promulgation of Christianity down to the end of the three first
     centuries, (in which period, surely, the laity had the best
     opportunity of knowing what liberty GOD would indulge them; nor did
     they want a true zeal to exercise it for as good purpose, as our
     adversaries can pretend to,) demonstrates that GOD restrained them
     from the administration of Baptism, and appropriated that office to
     the Clergy; therefore 'tis plain, that the laity must needs be
     guilty of a most heinous and provoking sin, if they presume to
     baptize, and thereby invade the property of the Clergy, and trample
     upon the authority of GOD, who bestowed it on them.

     2. With respect to the Paschal Sacrifice 'tis pleaded, that the
     masters of families offered it amongst the Jews, and that our LORD'S
     Supper succeeds in the room of it. Now I grant, that our LORD'S
     Supper succeeds in the room of the Jewish Passover; but then with
     respect to the oblation of the Jewish Passover, 'tis necessary for
     me to distinguish the times, there being a difference as to this
     particular between the practice before, and the practice after, the
     institution of the Jewish Priesthood.

     First, when the Passover itself was instituted, the Jewish
     Priesthood was not instituted. And accordingly, in the first
     institution of the Passover, the masters of families did, by GOD'S
     express command, sacrifice the lamb.....

     Secondly, when the Jewish Priesthood was instituted, the sacrificing
     of the Passover was appropriated to the Priesthood by GOD Himself in
     a most solemn manner; and this was done before a second Passover was
     celebrated. For after that Aaron and his posterity had the
     priesthood conferred and entailed upon them, we read, that "the LORD
     spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto Aaron," &c. . .. Lev. xvii.
     1--7. And that this law was enacted before a second Passover was
     celebrated, is manifest; for this law is found in Lev. xvii. whereas
     in Numb. ix. we have these words, "And the LORD spake unto Moses,"
     &c. ver. 1, 2, 3. So that though the first Passover was by GOD'S
     express command sacrificed by the masters of families, yet all the
     following Passovers were sacrificed by the Priests; nor was it
     lawful for the laity to celebrate the Passover, unless the Priest
     did his part therein.

     Now 'tis certain, that the most essential and solemn part in the
     Sacrifice of any beast, was the sprinkling or pouring of the blood.
     The laity themselves, provided they were clean, did usually kill the
     Sacrifices; but the oblation of the blood was appropriated to the
     Priests. This appears from GOD'S express institution. "If any man of
     you bring an offering unto the LORD, he shall put his hand upon the
     head," &c. Lev. i. 2. 4, 5. "And if his oblation be a Sacrifice of
     peace-offering," &c. Chap. iii. 1,2. "He shall bring his offering,"
     &c. Chap. iv. 23, 24, 25. "He shall lay his hand," &c. ver. 29, 30.
     And that this was particularly required and observed at the Passover
     Sacrifice, appears from the following passages of Holy Writ. "Then
     they killed the Passover," &c. 2 Chron. xxx. 15, 16, 17. "So the
     service was prepared," &c. Chap. xxxv. 10. So that (not to mention
     what other particulars were either confined to the Priests, or
     permitted to the people) 'tis plain, that the Priest's action was
     necessary to the Sacrifice; that the strictly sacrificial part was
     restrained to him; and that though the people may be sometimes said
     to have sacrificed, yet 'tis only in a figurative sense, inasmuch as
     they furnished the offering, or bear a part in the solemnity, which
     was then only valid and acceptable to GOD, when the Priest
     discharged his office with relation to it.

     Nay, so punctual an observance did GOD require with respect to this
     Passover Sacrifice, that He made it unlawful for the Jews, after
     they possessed the promised land, to celebrate that feast in any
     other place than that which He chose. Thus they are commanded;
     "Observe the month of Abib, and keep the Passover," &c. Deut. xvi.
     1--7. And, accordingly, since their dispersion into distant
     countries, and the destruction of their Temple, the Jews have not
     pretended to sacrifice the Passover; nor indeed have they offered
     any of those other Sacrifices, which God required to be offered in a
     certain place.....

     From what has been said, it appears, that our adversaries cannot
     infer the lawfulness of the laity pretending to consecrate the
     LORD'S Supper, from the practice of the Jews touching the Sacrifice
     of the Passover. Because 'tis plain, that ever since the institution
     of the Priesthood, the oblation of that Sacrifice was always made by
     the Priest, and that no lay Jew could perform it.--pp. 353--363.

            POTTER, ARCHBISHOP.--Discourse of Church Government.

     Another power which our Lord has left to His Church, is that of
     consecrating the Eucharist, or LORD'S Supper. The first Eucharist
     was consecrated by our LORD Himself, a little before His Passion. At
     the same time He gave His Apostles commission to do as He had done:
     "Do this," said He, "in remembrance of Me." Yet this office was not
     so strictly appropriated to the Apostles, but that it might lawfully
     be executed by the ministers of the second order. . .

     In the primitive Church the Bishop consecrated, when he was present.
     Which appears from the before cited passage of Justin Martyr, where
     he tells us, that, sermon being ended, the elements of bread and
     wine mixed with water, were brought to the President of the
     brethren, who immediately proceeded to consecrate them by prayer and
     thanksgiving..... In the Bishop's absence, it was common for the
     Presbyters to consecrate; but they neither did this, nor any other
     act of their office, without the Bishop's direction or allowance....

     What part the Deacons had in this office, may be learned from the
     fore-mentioned passage of Justin Martyr, where he tells us, that,
     when the bread and wine had been consecrated by the president, it
     was customary for the Deacons to distribute them among the people
     who were present, and to carry them to such as were absent. Which
     power was not thought to imply any power in the Deacons to
     consecrate this Sacrament; but they did it as the Bishops' and the
     Priests' ministers, as we are expressly assured by the Apostolical
     Constitutions. . . .

     It will here be enquired, why Deacons, who were allowed to
     administer Baptism, never consecrated the LORD'S Supper? To which
     this might be a sufficient answer, that Baptism was always reckoned
     one of the lowest ministries, and therefore was usually committed by
     the Apostles to Ministers of the lower orders, as was before
     observed: or that Baptism, being the rite of admission into the
     Church, was thought more necessary than the LORD'S Supper; which
     reason is commonly assigned by the ancient Fathers, for permitting
     laymen to baptize, when any person was in danger of leaving the
     world unbaptized. But there is yet a further reason, why none but
     Bishops and Presbyters here ever consecrated the LORD'S Supper; viz.
     Because the LORD'S Supper was always believed to succeed in the
     place of Sacrifices; consequently, as none beside the High Priest
     and inferior Priests, were permitted to offer Sacrifices under the
     Jewish Law; so, the LORD'S Supper was consecrated by none but
     Bishops and Presbyters, who alone are Priests in the Christian sense
     of that name. It is not my design to explain the nature and ends of
     the LORD'S Supper, any further than these may lead us to the proper
     minister of it, and therefore I shall only hint a few things
     necessary to this purpose.

     Here, then, it may be remembered, that, in the ancient Sacrifices,
     both among the Jews and Heathens, one part of the victim was offered
     upon the altar, and another reserved to be eaten by those persons,
     in whose name the Sacrifice was made; this was accounted a sort of
     partaking of GOD'S Table, and was a federal rite, whereby He owned
     the guests to be in His favour and under His protection, as they by
     offering Sacrifices acknowledged Him to be their GOD .... In the
     Christian Church there is only one proper Sacrifice, which our LORD
     offered upon the Cross; and consequently Christians cannot partake
     of any Sacrifice in a literal and strict sense, without allowing
     Transubstantiation. Lest, therefore, they should want the same
     pledge, to assure them of the Divine favour, which the Jews enjoyed,
     our LORD appointed the elements of bread and wine to signify His
     Body and Blood offered in Sacrifice; whence they are expressly
     called His Body and Blood; it being common for representatives to
     bear the name of those things or persons, which they represent: "And
     as they were eating, Jesus took bread," &c. The elements were not
     His real Body and Blood, nor understood to be so by the Apostles, or
     any primitive Father: but they were the symbols of His Body and
     Blood, the partaking whereof is all one to the receivers, and does
     as much assure them of the favour of GOD, as if they should eat and
     drink the real Body and Blood of CHRIST offered upon the Cross. To
     this purpose is the following discourse of St. Paul: (1 Cor. x.
     16--21.) "The cup of blessing," &c. Where it may be observed: 1.
     That eating the LORD'S Supper is the same rite, in the Christian
     Church, with eating the things offered in Sacrifice among the Jews
     and Heathens. 2. That it is an act of communion or fellowship with
     GOD, at whose table we are said to be entertained; and therefore it
     is declared to be inconsistent with eating the Gentile Sacrifices,
     which is an act of communion with devils, to whom those Sacrifices
     are offered. 3. That it is an act of communion between Christians,
     who eat at the same table, and by that means are owned to be members
     of the same evangelical covenant under CHRIST. Whence the Apostle
     declares in another place, that the Jews, who are not within the
     Christian covenant, and consequently not in communion with CHRIST
     and His Church, have no right to partake of the Christian altar: "We
     have an altar," says he, "whereof they have no right to partake who
     serve the tabernacle." (Heb. xiii. 10.) Hence it is manifest that to
     eat the LORD'S Supper, is to partake of the Sacrifice of CHRIST
     which is there commemorated and represented. For which reason the
     most primitive Fathers speak of eating at the Christian altar: "He
     that is not within the altar," says Ignatius . . . "is deprived of
     the bread of GOD:" where by "the bread of God," he means the
     Sacrament, which GOD imparts to Christians from His own table, which
     this Father calls "the altar." And the LORD'S Supper is called an
     "oblation," a "Sacrifice," and a "gift." Thus, in Clemens of Rome:
     "It is no small crime, if we depose those from their episcopal
     office, who have unblameably and holily offered the gifts." Where he
     manifestly takes this phrase of "offering gifts" in the sense
     wherein the Jews and our LORD used it: "If thou bring thy gift unto
     the altar," says our LORD, &c. Matt. v. 23, 24. Where "gift" is put
     for "Sacrifice." Justin Martyr, in several places of his Dialogue
     with Trypho the Jew, calls the Eucharist a "Sacrifice" . . .
     Irenaeus calls the Eucharist, "the oblation of the Church," &c. In
     another place, where he speaks of our LORD'S instituting the
     Eucharist, he has these words: "He taught the new oblation of the
     New Testament," &c. And in the Fathers of the next age, to
     consecrate the LORD'S Supper is so constantly called prosferein in
     Greek, and offerre in Latin, that is, to "offer" it, that it is
     needless to cite any testimonies from them. So that it is plain,
     both from the design and nature of the LORD'S Supper, and from the
     concurrent testimony of the most primitive Fathers, who conversed
     with the Apostles or their disciples, that it was reckoned through
     the whole world to be a commemorative Sacrifice, or a memorial of
     our LORD offered upon the Cross, which, being first dedicated to GOD
     by prayer and thanksgiving, and afterwards eaten by the faithful,
     was to all intents the same to them, as if they had really eaten the
     natural Body and Blood of CHRIST, which are thereby represented. The
     consequence whereof, as explained by the constant practice of the
     Church in all ages, is, that they who consecrate this Sacrament,
     must be Priests in the Christian sense of this name, as was before
     observed. But it is not to be wondered, that those of the reformed
     religion have either wholly abstained from the names of Sacrifice,
     and oblation, or mentioned them with caution and reserve, in
     explaining this Sacrament, which were used by the primitive Fathers
     in a very true and pious sense; since they have been so grossly
     abused by the Papists in their doctrine of Transubstantiation, which
     is the daily occasion of many superstitious and idolatrous
     practices, and has for several ages given infinite scandal both to
     the Jews and Gentiles, and to the Church of GOD.--pp. 261--274.

             HUGHES, PRESBYTER.--Dissertationes Prooemiales &c.
      [Prefixed to his edition of S. Chrysostom de Sacerdotio. From the
     translation in the Appendix to Hickes' Two Treatises, vol. ii. pp.
                                cccxxii. sq.]

     I cannot but observe from St. Cyprian, that the Eucharist is called
     a "true and full Sacrifice," which the Priest offers to GOD the
     FATHER; and while he is offering it, acts in the stead of JESUS
     CHRIST Himself our great High Priest. And if the case be so, if the
     Eucharist is a true Sacrifice, if, as often as the Priest offers
     this Sacrifice, he acts in the stead of JESUS CHRIST Himself, what
     can be more plain and manifest, than that no man ought to offer up
     this venerable Sacrifice, but he who is called of GOD, but he who is
     ordained and consecrated after the lawful and ordinary manner?--p.
     cccclxxxvi.

     But before we produce the holy Fathers, it may not be foreign to my
     purpose to answer an objection brought from Scripture, which our
     sons of Corah frequently allege, and in which they are wont
     egregiously to boast, as an objection of very great force. The
     Eucharist, say they, is instituted in the room of the observance of
     the Passover; and for that reason we cannot better learn who are the
     ministers of this Sacrament, than by well considering who were the
     ministers of that observance. For it cannot be doubted, but that the
     laics among Christians have the same power and authority in things
     sacred, and especially in the administration of this Sacrament,
     which they had among the Jews in holy functions, particularly in the
     celebration of the Passover. But it appears, say they, most
     evidently from the very institution of the Passover mentioned in the
     Old Testament, that the celebration of the Paschal Supper did not
     belong to the priests, but to the whole multitude of the Israelites,
     to the fathers of families. From hence they argue most strenuously,
     that the celebration also of the LORD'S Supper (which succeeded in
     the room of the Passover) appertains to all the multitude of the
     faithful; and that all the laity have right, both of consecrating
     the elements, and of administering to themselves. I readily grant,
     that the case is this; and that the father of the family did at his
     own home sacrifice a lamb, in the name of all the family; and that,
     in that regard, he retained the ancient right of priesthood, which
     belonged to the first-born, or fathers of families. [That what is
     here asserted of the Passover, is to be confined to the times before
     the institution of the Levitical Priesthood, see proved in the
     Advertisement.... at the end of this Appendix [to Hickes].] But,
     unless I am very much mistaken, it is so far from following from
     hence, that our laics have a right to administer the LORD'S Supper,
     that the contrary will be very easily proved from it.

     The fathers of families did, at their own homes, slay the Paschal
     lamb, viz. because it was a private sacrifice, instituted of GOD for
     that end, that it should be eaten in every family. It was by no
     means of the number of those Sacrifices, which were brought to the
     temple and offered up in a public manner. The Paschal Supper did not
     any way belong to the public worship of the temple; but was confined
     within the walls of private houses, and had all the appearance of a
     private commemoration. If, therefore, our most blessed SAVIOUR had
     so instituted his Sacrament of the Eucharist, as that it should not
     be celebrated in public assemblies, but that every one should in his
     own private house administer it to himself and to his family; there
     would, indeed, be some weight in this argument. But since it
     evidently appears, both from Sacred Writ, and from the constant
     practice of the Catholic Church, that the holy Eucharist is to be
     accounted among the chief offices of the public worship; the
     contrary, in my opinion, does manifestly follow from it. It was our
     blessed SAVIOUR'S will, that the commemoration of His bloody Passion
     should have the chief place in the public offices; and that it
     should have the nature of a commemorative Sacrifice, far more .noble
     than that typical and figurative one, made use of among the Jews. It
     was His intent, therefore, without all doubt, that this public
     commemoration should be celebrated by the public ministers of His
     Church; that this commemorative Sacrifice should be offered up by
     the public Priests. It was necessary that the Jews should, from
     their own principles, understand our SAVIOUR thus; for their public
     Sacrifices were slain by their Priests only. Nothing was here
     claimed by the laity, nothing by the Fathers of families. Therefore
     the argument drawn from the Paschal Supper is trivial, and of no
     force. For there is a very great difference between the Paschal
     Supper, which was a private Sacrifice, and the Supper of the LORD,
     which is a public Sacrifice, and claims the chief among the public
     offices.--pp. ccccxciii--ccccxcv.

        LAURENCE, BISHOP.--The Bishop of Oxford's Charge considered.

     In this sense of a "proper Sacrifice," there never was but one
     proper Sacrifice in the world, my lord, and that was the Sacrifice
     of the real Body and Blood of CHRIST at His death. This proper
     Sacrifice was but once offered; and, in comparison of this, not one
     of the Jewish or Patriarchal Sacrifices was a proper Sacrifice; they
     had nothing in them of intrinsic worth or value to take away sin;
     and, therefore, in this exalted sense, were not proper Sacrifices,
     any more than that of bread and wine at the Christian altar.

     And then, if by "proper Sacrifice," your lordship means something
     material offered to GOD, and, by Divine institution, appointed to
     represent to Him the one only proper meritorious Sacrifice of the
     death of His SON;--if your lordship designs such a Sacrifice as is
     representative of the Sacrifice of CHRIST'S death, and calls this a
     "proper Sacrifice," then, my lord, it is acknowledged, that such a
     "proper Sacrifice," in this secondary sense, has been taught, and
     not only warmly asserted, but firmly proved to be offered to GOD in
     the Sacrament of CHRIST'S Body and Blood; and that this Sacrifice is
     as proper a Sacrifice offered to God as any of the Jewish Sacrifices
     were. . . .

     In all which it is evident at first sight, that this Article (xxxi.)
     asserts the offering of CHRIST once made, to be that one only
     self-sufficient Sacrifice which had an intrinsic value and worth in
     itself to take away sin; and therefore, the Article calls it
     "perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction," and says, that
     "there is none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone" for,
     indeed, there never was any other: because it was "impossible that
     the blood of bulls, or of goats," or indeed any other, the most
     excellent, material offerings, under the Patriarchal, Jewish, or
     Christian dispensation, "should take away sins," I. e, by their own
     intrinsic worth and merit; but yet, by Divine institution, they were
     made types and representations of CHRIST'S Sacrifice, and, as such,
     the means of procuring remission. So that the Article's saying,
     there is "none other satisfaction for sin," does not signify, that
     there are no other means of remission of sin; for there are others
     under the Christian dispensation, vim. Baptism, the LORD'S Supper,
     and priestly absolution, by Divine appointment. But the true sense
     of "there is none other satisfaction," is, that there is nothing but
     the death of CHRIST that has any real intrinsic value in itself,
     adequate to the righteous demands of Infinite Justice, to take away
     sin; for which reason the Church makes use of the word
     "satisfaction," to express the inestimable, self-sufficient merit of
     that price, which was of full and perfect value, and, therefore, fit
     and exactly proper for the Divine wisdom and justice to accept of
     for the redemption of sinners.

     And 'tis only for this reason that the Article condemns the
     Sacrifices of Masses, for "blasphemous fables, and dangerous
     deceits," because the Romanists pretend that CHRIST is again really
     offered to GOD in those Sacrifices; that His very Body and Blood are
     substantially (and not representatively) then present at their
     altars, and offered to GOD daily by the priests for the sins of the
     world; making thereby these their pretended Sacrifices of CHRIST'S
     real Body and Blood, equal in worth and value to His own oblation of
     Himself, which He offered but once upon the altar of the Cross. This
     is blasphemy with a witness; but what has all this to do with the
     doctrine of that Sacrament, of real bread and wine, which has been
     lately revived, and convincingly taught, and proved, by the
     excellent writers of our Church? Do they teach that this Sacrifice
     is "that perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all
     the sins of the whole world," &c. which the Article speaks of? or,
     do they say, that it is "another satisfaction" for sin, besides that
     one "perfect satisfaction" which CHRIST made once upon the Cross to
     Divine Justice; as the Church of Rome says their Sacrifice of the
     Mass is? No, my lord, our writers have taught no such doctrine, but
     the direct contrary, viz. that the Christian Sacrifice of bread and
     wine has no real intrinsic worth or excellency in itself; that it is
     only a Sacrifice representative of CHRIST'S one meritorious
     Sacrifice of Himself, as the Jewish Sacrifices were only types
     thereof, and not proper satisfactions in themselves to propitiate
     the Divine nature; that its whole worth and value is owing only to
     Divine institution, as that of the Jewish Sacrifices was; and that
     it is only a Sacrifice, or offering, made to GOD to put Him in mind
     (as it were) of the all-sufficient Sacrifice of His SON; to beseech
     Him, for the sake thereof, and of that only, to be propitious and
     merciful to us; and to express our unfeigned thankfulness and
     gratitude for the infinite benefit of our redemption, purchased by
     the Sacrifice of the death of CHRIST. This directly overthrows the
     Popish pretended Sacrifice of CHRIST'S real Body and Blood in the
     Mass; the very nature of it is such, that it highly agrees with, and
     constantly expresses the sense of our 31st Article, that "there is
     none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone" which was made by
     the death of CHRIST, once upon the Cross; because this Sacrifice of
     bread and wine is only a representation (not the reality) of that
     satisfaction which the Article speaks of, and, therefore, is no ways
     inconsistent with that Article of our Church.--pp. 13--18.

              LAW, PRESBYTER AND CONFESSOR.--Demonstration, &c.

     [Demonstration of the gross and fundamental errors of a late book,
     called "A plain Account of the Nature and End of the Sacrament of
     the LORD'S Supper," &c.]

     The plain truth is this: the institution consists of those two
     essential parts just mentioned; that is, in offering, presenting,
     and pleading before GOD, by faith, the atonement of CHRIST'S Body
     and Blood, and in owning Him to be a principle of life to us, by our
     eating His Body and Blood; this is the entire, whole institution.
     ...

     And yet this poor man [The Author of the "Plain Account."] (for so I
     must call one so miserably insensible of the greatness of the
     subject he is upon) can find nothing in the institution, but, first,
     bread and wine, not placed and offered before GOD, as first
     signifying and pleading the atonement of His SON'S Body and Blood,
     and then eaten and drunk in signification of having our life from
     Him; but bread and wine set upon a table, to put the people that see
     it in mind, that by and by they are to exercise an act of the
     memory;--and then, secondly, this same bread and wine afterwards
     brought to every one in particular, not for them to know or believe
     that they are receiving any thing of CHRIST, or partaking of any
     thing from Him; but only to let them know, that the very instant
     they take the bread and wine into their mouth, is the very time for
     them actually to excite that act of the memory, for the exciting of
     which bread and wine had been set upon a table.--pp. 94, 5.

     Now here it may be proper for you to observe, that whatever names or
     titles this institution is signified to you by, whether it be called
     a Sacrifice propitiatory or commemorative, whether it be called an
     holy oblation, the Eucharist, the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST, the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper, the heavenly banquet,
     the food of immortality, or the Holy Communion, and the like,
     matters not much. For all these words or names are right and good,
     and there is nothing wrong in them, but the striving and contention
     about them.

     For they all express something that is true of the Sacrament, and
     therefore are, every one of them, in a good sense, rightly
     applicable to it; but all of them are far short of expressing the
     whole nature of the Sacrament, and therefore the help of all of them
     is wanted.

     He therefore that contends for one name, as the only proper one, in
     exclusion of the rest, is in the same mistake, as he that should
     contend for one name and character of our SAVIOUR, as the only
     proper one, in exclusion of all the rest.--pp. 122, 3.

     Do you, therefore, reject this author's wisdom of words which he
     proposes to you, and be content to be devout without it. Be glad to
     know, that as the nature, office, and condition of our SAVIOUR,
     could not be made known to us, but by a variety of different names
     and titles ascribed to Him, so the nature and end, and effects of
     this Holy Sacrament could not be made known to us, but by a variety
     of different names and titles ascribed to it; that in one respect it
     is a "propitiatory" Sacrifice, in another a "commemorative"
     Sacrifice; in one respect it is the seal and renewal of the covenant
     between GOD and man, in another the "food of immortality," the "life
     of the soul," the "bread" that came down from heaven, the "tree of
     life;" that in one respect it is the Holy "Eucharist," in another
     the Holy "Communion."

     And be assured, that he who tries to set these expressions at
     variance with each other, and would persuade you that, if one is a
     true account of the Sacrament, the others cannot be so, is as vain a
     "disputer of this world," as he that would persuade you that, if our
     SAVIOUR be the "seed of the woman," He cannot be essentially "the
     SON of GOD;" or that if He be the "Lamb" of GOD, He cannot be the
     "bread of life."

     The reason why this Sacrament is said in one respect to be a
     "propitiatory," or "commemorative" Sacrifice, is only this: because
     you there offer, present, and plead before GOD, such things as are,
     by CHRIST Himself, said to be His "Body" and "Blood given for you:"
     but if that which is thus offered, presented, and pleaded before
     GOD, is offered, presented, and pleaded before Him only for this
     reason, because it signifies and represents, both to GOD, and angels
     and men, the great Sacrifice for all the world, is there not
     sufficient reason to consider this service as truly a Sacrifice? Or
     even supposing that the calling this service a Sacrifice is no more,
     according to a certain literal exactness of some critics, than when
     our SAVIOUR says of Himself, "I am the resurrection and the life,"
     or that a quibbler in words may be able to object as much against
     it, as against our SAVIOUR'S saying of Himself, "I am the
     resurrection and the life," have you any reason to dislike it on
     that account, or to wish that such little critics might find more of
     their empty, superficial, worthless niceties, in the language of the
     Church, than in the language of Scripture?--pp. 126--128.

           WHEATLY, PRESBYTER.--Illustration of the Common Prayer.

     "And if there be a Communion, the Priest" is then also to "place
     upon the Table so much Bread and Wine as he shall think sufficient."
     Which rubric being added to our own Liturgy at the same time with
     the "oblations," in the Prayer following, (i. e. at the last
     review), it is clearly evident, as Bishop Patrick has observed, that
     by that word are to be understood the elements of bread and wine,
     which the Priest is to offer solemnly to GOD, as an acknowledgment
     of His sovereignty over His creatures, and that from henceforth they
     might become properly and peculiarly His. For in all the Jewish
     Sacrifices, of which the people were partakers, the viands or
     materials of the feast were first made GOD'S by a solemn oblation,
     and then afterwards eaten by the communicants, not as man's, but as
     GOD'S provision; who, by thus entertaining them at His own table,
     declared Himself reconciled and again in covenant with them. And
     therefore our blessed SAVIOUR, when He instituted the new Sacrifice
     of His own Body and Blood, first "gave thanks and blessed" the
     elements," i. e. offered them up to GOD as LORD of the creatures, as
     the most ancient fathers expound that passage; who, for that reason,
     whenever they celebrated the holy Eucharist, always offered the
     bread and wine for the Communion to GOD, upon the altar, by this, or
     some such short ejaculation, "LORD, we offer Thee Thy own, out of
     what Thou hast bountifully given us." After which they received
     them, as it were, from Him again, in order to convert them into the
     sacred banquet of the Body and Blood of His dear SON.--p. 280.

     The alms, and devotions, and oblations of the people being now
     presented to GOD, and placed before Him upon the holy table, it is a
     proper time to proceed to the exercise of another branch of our
     charity, I mean that of intercession. Our alms perhaps are confined
     to a few indigent neighbours; but our prayers may extend to all
     mankind, by recommending them all to the mercies of GOD, who is able
     to supply and relieve them all. Nor can we at any time hope to
     intercede more effectually for the whole Church of GOD, than just
     when we are about to represent and show forth to the divine Majesty
     that meritorious Sacrifice, by virtue whereof our great High Priest
     did once redeem us, and for ever continues to intercede for us in
     heaven. For which reason we find that the ancient and primitive
     Christians, whenever they celebrated these holy mysteries, used a
     form of intercession for the whole Catholic Church. But there is
     this difference between our practice and theirs, that, whereas we
     use it immediately after the placing the elements upon the table, it
     is in all the ancient Liturgies, except in St. Mark's and the
     Ethiopian, deferred till after the Consecration.--p. 285.

                      [Of the Prayer of Consecration.]

     And this [the repetition of the words of institution] is certainly a
     very essential part of the service. For during the repetition of
     these words, the priest performs to GOD the representative Sacrifice
     of the Death and Passion of His SON. By taking the bread into his
     hands, and breaking it, he makes a memorial to Him of our SAVIOUR'S
     Body broken upon the Cross; and by exhibiting the wine, he reminds
     Him of His Blood there shed for the sins of the world; and by laying
     his hands upon each of them, at the same time that he repeats those
     words, "Take eat, this is My Body," &c. and "Drink ye all of this,"
     &c. he signifies and acknowledges that this commemoration of
     CHRIST'S Sacrifice so made to GOD, is a means instituted by CHRIST
     Himself to convey to the communicants the benefits of His Death and
     Passion, viz. the pardon of our sins, and GOD'S grace and favour for
     the time to come. For this reason we find that it was always the
     practice of the ancients, in consecrating the Eucharist, to break
     the bread, (after our SAVIOUR'S example,) to represent his Passion
     and Crucifixion. The Roman Church, indeed, instead of breaking the
     bread for the communicants to partake of it, only breaks a single
     wafer into three parts, (of which no one partakes,) for the sake of
     retaining a shadow at least of the ancient custom.

     Very judiciously, therefore, did our good Reformers (though they
     ordered "these words to be said, turning still to the Altar, without
     any elevation or showing the Sacrament to the people," yet) restore
     these other ceremonies to avoid superstition: and yet this very
     restoration of them is charged as superstitious by Bucer; who,
     therefore, objects to them, and prevails for the leaving them all
     out. . . . The taking of the bread and the cup into the hands, have
     indeed since been restored, viz. first to the Scotch Liturgy, and
     then to our own, even at the request of the Presbyterians, at the
     last review. . . .

     But besides this, our Liturgy at that time suffered a more material
     alteration; the Prayer of Oblation, which by the first book of King
     Edward was ordered to be used after the Prayer of Consecration, (and
     which has since been restored to the Scotch Common Prayer,) being
     half laid aside, and the rest of it thrown into an improper place;
     as being enjoined to be said by our present rubric, in that part of
     the Office which is to be used after the people have communicated;
     whereas it was always the practice of the primitive Christians to
     use it during the act of Consecration. For the holy Eucharist was,
     from the very first institution, esteemed and received as a proper
     Sacrifice, and solemnly offered to GOD upon the altar, before it was
     received and partaken of by the communicants. In conformity
     whereunto, it was Bishop Overall's practice to use the first Prayer
     in the Post Communion Office between the Consecration and the
     administering, even when it was otherwise ordered by the public
     Liturgy.--pp. 303--305.

           RIDLEY (GLOCESTER), PRESBYTER.--The Christian Passover.

     I design in this and some subsequent discourses, to lay before you
     the nature of the LORD'S Supper, and shew what place it holds in the
     Christian oeconomy.

     We learn from the institution, that it is a memorial of our blessed
     SAVIOUR: "This do," says our LORD Himself, "in remembrance of Me;"
     and St. Paul teaches us, what he received from CHRIST, that this was
     in remembrance of His death: "for as often as ye eat this bread,"
     &c.; and in the same epistle, mentions the death of CHRIST, under
     the notion of a Sacrifice, "CHRIST our Passover is sacrificed for
     us;" where we see the particular sacrifice singled out, to which the
     death of CHRIST answers, as the antitype to its type.

     He then proceeds to exhort his Corinthians, to keep a commemorative
     feast in remembrance of it, analogous to the custom of feasting upon
     the Paschal Lamb; and to attend it with circumstances analogous to
     those which were observed in the Passover, "therefore let us keep
     the feast," &c--pp. 1, 2.

     And as the law held forth these types, the Gospel answers them with
     their antitypes. Did they sacrifice their Passover? "CHRIST our
     Passover is sacrificed for us." Was theirs to them for a memorial?
     we also are to celebrate ours "in remembrance of" the Institutor.
     Was that Sacrifice a feast to them peculiar, of which the stranger
     and the foreigner were not to eat? "We" also "have an altar of which
     they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle."--p. 30.

     . . . From which relation the following doctrines are easily
     deducible:

     First. That the death of CHRIST is to be remembered by us under the
     notion of a Sacrifice.

     Secondly. That the LORD'S Supper, instituted in memory of it, is
     also a Sacrifice, as much as any of the Jewish sacrifices were.

     Thirdly. That the LORD'S Supper is farther a covenanting rite ....

     First, that the death of CHRIST is to be remembered by us under the
     notion of a sacrifice.

     1. Though the death of CHRIST bore no relation to the Passover in
     particular, yet as the original design of sacrifices in general was
     to prefigure the satisfaction of CHRIST'S death, and the atonement
     of His Blood .... then the death of CHRIST must be looked upon as a
     sacrifice in the strictest sense; nay, in comparison of which, all
     other sacrifices were but as shadows to the substance. This
     preference the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews gives it, when
     he says, "Ye are come .... to the blood of sprinkling" (meaning the
     sacrificial Blood of CHRIST) "which speaketh better things than that
     of Abel;" i. c. the blood which Abel sprinkled in sacrifice, could
     not speak that peace to the conscience, which the Blood of CHRIST
     does, that being but a figure and shadow of this real atonement.

     2. Though sacrifices in general had not been divinely instituted to
     prefigure the death of CHRIST, yet as this is the antitype of the
     Passover, it must be considered as a Sacrifice: for that the
     Passover was a Sacrifice is evident... It is so called expressly by
     GOD Himself; "It is the Sacrifice of the LORD'S Passover:" the blood
     of the lamb was sprinkled upon the door-posts in the first
     celebration, and by the Priests afterwards; which was undoubtedly a
     sacrificial rite; for we know that "the blood was given to be an
     atonement for the soul:" and that the death of CHRIST corresponds
     hereto, the Apostle directly affirms in the text, "CHRIST our
     Passover is sacrificed for us."--pp. 39--41.

     . . . But, this point secured, it may be objected, that since the
     LORD'S Supper was instituted in remembrance of the Sacrifice of
     CHRIST, it cannot be itself a Sacrifice, only a memorial. This leads
     me to shew,

     Secondly, That the LORD'S Supper instituted in memory of CHRIST'S
     death, was itself a Sacrifice, as much as any of the Jewish
     sacrifices were.

     1. It is no argument against it to say it is a memorial, and
     therefore no sacrifice; for amongst the Jews we find that the most
     consecrated part of the Sacrifice is called a "Memorial;" I mean
     that part of the meat-offering which was burnt upon the altar, as
     GOD'S appropriate share.....This objection rather helps us; for it
     proves at least, that the LORD'S Supper is nevertheless a SACRIFICE
     for being a MEMORIAL.

     2. The Passover itself was appointed, amongst other reasons, as a
     memorial; and yet it is expressly called, "The Sacrifice of the
     LORD'S Passover:" the rite, therefore, which succeeds in die place
     of that, and is, like that, appointed for a "Memorial," is, like
     that, to be considered as a Sacrifice also.

     3. I contend for its being a Sacrifice, as much, and no more than
     the Jewish Sacrifices were, because the death of CHRIST was the one,
     only, real Sacrifice, which could be offered but in one instant of
     time: and yet, as the benefits thereby procured were the greatest
     comfort, and only support to a burthened conscience, it was
     therefore necessary that they should be often present to the mind,
     in all ages of the world. For this reason types were instituted to
     prefigure the Sacrifice of CHRIST before He suffered; and for the
     same reason a memorial instituted to commemorate it after He
     suffered; both of them appointed for the same purpose, to represent
     the death of CHRIST: they are equally memorials, and equally
     sacrifices, differing from one another, only as the morning and
     evening shadow.

     4. St. Paul understood the LORD'S Supper as a Sacrifice, as appears
     in this epistle from whence the text is taken: he exhorts the
     Corinthians who communicated at it, not to eat of the meats
     sacrificed to idols; for, says he, "You cannot be partakers of the
     LORD'S table, and the table of devils;" so that table signifies the
     same thing in both places, only appointed for different services.
     But the table of devils means the akar, and the meat upon it the
     sacrifices offered thereon .... and as the table of the LORD is
     opposed to these, it must be opposed under the notion of an altar,
     and the cup of blessing, and bread partook of there, under the
     notion of a Sacrifice. This passage leads me to shew

     Thirdly. That the LORD'S Supper is, further, a covenanting rite; and
     this appears because it is a feast upon a Sacrifice, and all such
     feasts were covenanting rites . . . Whence

     1. Sacrifices, as religious feasts, were in testimony of friendship
     betwixt the Deity and the sacrificers, who had eaten their
     respective portions . . .

     2. In the Jewish oeconomy they were always accounted as such...

     3. As sacrifices in general, so the Passover in particular, was a
     covenanting rite, by which the LORD engaged to be their GOD. .... No
     person was permitted to partake of this Sacrifice, and thereby renew
     their covenant, who had not before entered into covenant by the rite
     of circumcision. Wherefore the LORD'S Supper succeeding in the place
     of the Passover, and being itself a Sacrifice, ought to be looked
     upon (not as the making a new and fresh covenant with GOD) but as
     repeating and confirming one already made, namely that at our
     Baptism; and accordingly "the cup" is called by our SAVIOUR, "the
     new covenant in His Blood."--pp. 46--52.

                JONES, PRESBYTER--The Churchman's Catechism.

     Q. When are alms more particularly required by the Church?

     A. In the Communion Service; when, with the holy oblation of
     CHRIST'S Body and Blood, it is right we should offer ourselves and
     our worldly substance to be consecrated with the offering of the
     Eucharistic Sacrifice; that we, and all we have, may be acceptable
     and blessed."--Works, vol. xi. p. 419.

                   COMPILERS OF THE AMERICAN PRAYER-BOOK.

                          [Prayer of Consecration.]

     All glory be to Thee, Almighty GOD, our heavenly FATHER, for that
     Thou, of Thy tender mercy, didst give Thine only SON JESUS CHRIST to
     suffer death upon the Cross for our redemption; who made there, &c.
     . . and did institute, and in His holy Gospel command us to
     continue, a perpetual memory of that His precious death and
     Sacrifice until His coming again: For in the night in which He was
     betrayed, He took bread, &c. . .
     Wherefore, O LORD, and heavenly FATHER, according to the institution
     of Thy dearly beloved Son, our SAVIOUR JESUS CHRIST, we Thy humble
     servants, do celebrate and make here before Thy divine Majesty, with
     these Thy holy gifts, which we now offer unto Thee, the memorial Thy
     Son hath commanded us to make; having in remembrance His blessed
     passion and precious death, His mighty resurrection and glorious
     ascension; rendering unto Thee most hearty thanks for the
     innumerable benefits procured unto us by the same. And we most
     humbly beseech Thee, O merciful FATHER, to hear us, and, of Thy
     Almighty goodness, vouchsafe to bless and sanctify, with Thy Word
     and Holy Spirit, these Thy gifts and creatures of bread and wine;
     that we, receiving them according to Thy Son our Saviour JESUS
     CHRIST'S holy institution, in remembrance of His Death and Passion,
     may be partakers of His most blessed Body and Blood. And we
     earnestly desire Thy fatherly goodness mercifully to accept this our
     Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving1; most humbly beseeching Thee
     to grant, &c. . . . humbly beseeching Thee, that we, and all others
     who shall be partakers of this holy Communion, may worthily receive
     the most precious Body and Blood of Thy Son JESUS CHRIST, be filled
     with Thy grace and heavenly benediction, and made one body with Him,
     that He may dwell in them and they in Him. And although we are
     unworthy, &c.

                              HORSLEY, BISHOP.
   [From a Letter, dated London, June 17; 1806, to the Rev. John Skinner,
      printed in his "Office, &c. according to the use of the Episcopal
      Church in Scotland," containing in the Appendix Bishop Horsley's
   "Collation of Offices," &c. viz. "the several Communion Offices in the
   Prayer Book of Edward VI., the Scotch Prayer Book of the year 1637, the
      present English Prayer Book, and that used in the present Scotch
              Episcopal Church.".--See Skinner, p. 157, note.]

     With respect to the comparative merit of the two Offices for England
     and Scotland, I have no scruple in declaring to you, what, some
     years since, I declared to Bishop Abernethy Drummond, that I think
     the Scotch Office more conformable to the primitive models, and, in
     my private judgment, more edifying than that which we now use;
     insomuch that, were I at liberty to follow my own private judgment,
     I would myself use the Scotch Office in preference. The alterations
     which were made in the Communion Service, as it stood in the first
     book of Edward VI. to humour the Calvinists, were, in my opinion,
     much for the worse; nevertheless, I think our present Office is very
     good; our form of consecration of the elements is sufficient; I mean
     that the elements are consecrated by it, and made the Body and Blood
     of CHRIST, in the sense in which our LORD Himself said, the bread
     and wine were His Body and Blood.

                      DAUBENY, PRESBYTER.--Discourses.
     ["See Discourse IV. of a printed volume of Discourses, by the Rev.
    Charles Daubeny, Archdeacon of Sarum, and dedicated to the [present]
    Bishop of Salisbury. In which discourse, if Mr. Daubeny has expressed
   no other doctrine, than such as the Church of England authorises; and,
    at the same time, has expressed the very doctrine which the Episcopal
    Church in Scotland authorises, then is the doctrine of both Churches
           one and the same."--Skinner's Office, &c. p. 53, note.]

     The holy Eucharist is a commemorative Sacrifice, offered up to GOD,
     by way of memorial, or bringing to remembrance that grand Sacrifice,
     once offered on the Cross, and for the purpose of applying the
     merits of it to the parties who, in faith, offer it up.

                    ID.--Appendix to Guide to the Church.
                       [As quoted by Skinner, p. 28.]

     The first Christians had no idea of the holy Eucharist being a
     proper propitiatory Sacrifice, in which the Body and Blood of
     CHRIST, in truth, reality, and substance, are offered up--the ideas
     which gave rise to the idolatry practised in the modern Church of
     Rome, on the subject,--but they consider it to be a commemorative
     Sacrifice and typical representation, by way of memorial, of the
     grand Sacrifice that had been offered upon the Cross by JESUS
     CHRIST; an idea, which perfectly secures the possessors of it from
     the gross corruptions of the Church of Rome, because the
     commemoration of a fact cannot be the fact itself; the
     representation cannot be the thing designed to be represented; the
     sign cannot be the reality, which it is meant to signify. Such is
     the idea which our Church entertains upon the subject. She considers
     the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper to be a feast upon a Sacrifice;
     to constitute it such, that which is feasted upon must have been
     first made a Sacrifice, by having been offered up by a priest. Such
     is the idea which the episcopal Church of Scotland has upon this
     sacred subject; which, by forming her Communion Service upon the
     model of that set forth for the use of the Church of England, in the
     reign of Edward VI. still keeps closer to the original pattern of
     the primitive Church, in the celebration of this service, than the
     Church of England now does--vol. ii. p. 414.

            JOLLY, BISHOP.--Christian Sacrifice in the Eucharist.
   [The whole volume is a concise and valuable statement of the doctrine,
   and refers to a chain of writers in the English branch of the Church.]

     All grace, all virtue spring from the ever full and ever flowing
     fountain, which was opened in His adorable side, pierced with a
     spear upon the Cross, whence issued blood and water--water to wash,
     and blood to give us life; for His death, His atoning blood, is our
     life. This is the sole foundation of man's claim of pardon, grace,
     and glory, from Adam to the end of the world. Our resort, therefore,
     must ever be to the Sacrifice of the death of CHRIST, which was
     prefigured, for the support of man's hope, by instituted typical
     Sacrifices from the beginning, as we see in Adam's family; looking
     forward to it before its actual accomplishment, and now perpetuating
     the sacrificial remembrance of it, in that divine institution, which
     He Himself ordained, to show it forth before GOD, and plead its
     merit, till He shall come again to judge the quick and the dead.--p.
     183.

     Such is the doctrine of man's redemption and salvation, by the
     Sacrifice of CHRIST, and such the means of representing and applying
     it, from the beginning to the end of the Book of GOD. It shines more
     and more from its first dawn in the third chapter of Genesis, to the
     last of Malachi. And in the New Testament, it breaks out in its
     meridian light--CHRIST JESUS, Immanuel, illuminating the whole from
     first to final day, when He shall be the Light and Life everlasting,
     eternal joy taking place of momentary sorrow.

     Meantime, following Him, we shall not walk in darkness, but have the
     light of life. As long as this lower world shall endure, and the
     time of trial for salvation last--until death, the last enemy be
     destroyed, He ever lives in His mediatorial capacity, to make
     intercession for us, and bring us to GOD. In the highest heavens, He
     presents the substance of His Body and Blood, once offered and slain
     upon earth, and which must in heaven remain until the times of the
     restitution of all things; and His Church upon earth, by the hands
     of those whom He commissioned, and promised to be with them, in
     succession from his Apostles, to the end of the world, offers the
     instituted representations of them, in commemorative Sacrifice, to
     plead the merit, and pray for all the benefits of His Death and
     Passion, pardon of sins, increase of grace, and pledge of glory.--p.
     191.

    PHILPOTTS, BISHOP.--Charge, delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of
                                Exeter, 1836.

     And not only is the entrance into the Church by a visible sign, but
     that body is visible also in the appointed means of sustaining the
     new life, especially in that most sacred and sublime mystery of our
     religion, the Sacrament of the LORD'S Supper, the commemorative
     Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of CHRIST; in which the action and
     suffering of our great High Priest are represented and offered to
     GOD on earth, as they are continually by the same High Priest
     Himself in heaven; the Church on earth doing, after its measure, the
     same tiling as its Head in heaven; CHRIST in heaven presenting the
     Sacrifice, and applying it to its purposed end, properly and
     gloriously; the Church on earth commemoratively and humbly, yet
     really and effectually, by praying to GOD (with thanksgiving) in the
     virtue and merit of that Sacrifice which it thus exhibits.--pp. 43,
     44.

     Page 89, line 4, dele "and."
     Page 102, Notes 1 and 2, bottom line, in each dele marks of
     interrogation.
     Page 109, Note, add, Also Discourse on Ezra, vi. 10. pp. 379--382.
     Page 208, line 18, for "Sacrifice" read "Sacrificer."
     Page 280, Note 2, add, Compare Bishop Lake's Officium Eucharisticum,
     p. 46, where the same Prayers are inserted from Bishop Cosin.

                                   THE END

          GILBERT & RIVINGTON, Printers, St. John's Square, London.
   __________________________________________________________________

   Project Canterbury
