                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

     ON THE ROMAN BREVIARY AS EMBODYING THE SUBSTANCE OF THE DEVOTIONAL
                      SERVICES OF THE CHURCH CATHOLIC.

                                 [Number 75]

   [1]Full text available from Newmanreader.org
     __________________________________________________________________

     Teach her to know and love her hour of prayer,
     And evermore,
     As faith grows rare,
     Unlock her heart, and offer all its store,
     In holier love and humbler vows,
     As suits a lost returning spouse.--Christian Year.

     There is so much of excellence and beauty in the services of the
     Breviary, that were it skilfully set before the Protestant by Roman
     controversialists as the book of devotions received in their
     communion, it would undoubtedly raise a prejudice in their favour,
     if he were ignorant of the circumstances of the case, and but
     ordinarily candid and unprejudiced. To meet this danger is one
     principal object of the following pages; in which, whatever is good
     and true in those Devotions will be claimed, and on reasonable
     grounds, for the Church Catholic in opposition to the Roman Church,
     whose only real claim above other Churches is that of having adopted
     into the Service certain additions and novelties, ascertainable to
     be such in history, as well as being corruptions doctrinally. In a
     word, it will be attempted to wrest a weapon out of our
     adversaries' hands; who have in this, as in many other
     instances, appropriated to themselves a treasure which was ours as
     much as theirs; and then, on our attempting to recover it, accuse us
     of borrowing what we have but lost through inadvertence. The
     publication then of these selections, which it is proposed presently
     to give from these Services, is, as it were, an act of
     re-appropriation. Were however the Breviary ever so much the
     property of the Romanists, by retaining it in its ancient Latin
     form, they have defrauded the Church of that benefit which, in the
     vernacular tongue, it might have afforded to the people at large.

     Another reason for the selections which are to follow, lies in the
     circumstance, that our own daily Service is confessedly formed upon
     the Breviary; so that an inspection of the latter will be found
     materially to illustrate and explain our own Prayer-Book.

     It may suggest, moreover, character and matter for our private
     devotions, over and above what our Reformers have thought fit to
     adopt into our public Services; a use of it which will be but
     carrying out and completing what they have begun.

     And there is a further benefit which, it is hoped, will result from
     an acquaintance with the Breviary Services, viz. that the adaptation
     and arrangement of the Psalms therein made, will impress many person
     with a truer sense of the excellence and profitableness of those
     inspired compositions than it is the fashion of this age to
     entertain.

     Lastly, if it can be shown, as was above intimated, that the
     corruptions, whatever they be, are of a late date, another fact will
     have been ascertained, in addition to those which are ordinarily
     insisted on, discriminating and separating off the Roman from the
     primitive Church.

     With these views a sketch shall first be given of the history of the
     Breviary; then the selections from it shall follow.

     Introduction:--On the history of the Breviary.

     The word Breviarum first occurs in the work of an author of the
     eleventh century, and is used to denote a compendium or systematic
     arrangement of the devotional offices of the Church. Till that time
     they were contained in several independent volumes, according to the
     nature of each. Such, for instance, were the Psalteria, Homilaria,
     Hymnaria, and the like, to be used in the service in due course. But
     at this memorable era, and under the auspices of the Pontiff who
     makes it memorable, Gregory VII., an Order was drawn up, for the use
     of the Roman Church, containing in one all these different
     collections, introducing the separate members of each in its proper
     place, and harmonizing them together by the use of rubrics. Indeed,
     some have been led to conclude that in its first origin the word
     Breviary was appropriated to a mere collection of rubrics, not to
     the offices connected by them. But even taking it in its present
     sense, it will be obvious to any one who inspects the Breviary how
     well it answers to its name. Yet even thus digested, it occupies
     four thick volumes of duodecimo size.

     Gregory VII. did but restore and harmonize these offices; which seem
     to have exited more or less the same in constituent parts, though
     not in order and system, from Apostolic times. In their present
     shape they are appointed for seven distinct seasons in the
     twenty-four hours, and consist of prayers, praises, and
     thanksgivings of various forms; and, as regards both contents and
     hours, are the continuation of a system of worship observed by the
     Apostles and their converts. As to contents, the Breviary Services
     consist of the Psalms; of Hymns, and Canticles; of Lessons and texts
     from inspired and ecclesiastical authors; of Antiphons, Verses and
     Responses, and Sentences; and of Collects. And analogous to this
     seems to have been the usage of the Corinthian Christians, whom St.
     Paul blames for refusing to agree in some common order of worship;
     when they came together, every one of them having a Psalm, a
     doctrine, a tongue, a revelation, an interpretation. On the other
     hand, the Catholic seasons of devotion are certainly derived from
     Apostolic usage. The Jewish observance of the third, sixth and ninth
     hours for prayer, was continued by the inspired founders of the
     Christian Church. What Daniel had practised, even when the decree
     was signed forbidding it, "kneeling on his knees three times a day,
     and praying, and giving thanks unto his GOD," St. Peter and the
     other Apostles were solicitous in preserving. It was when "they were
     all with one accord in one place," at "the third hour of the day,"
     that the Holy Ghost came down upon them at Pentecost. It was at the
     sixth hour, that St. Peter "went up upon the house-top to pray," and
     saw the vision revealing to him the admission of the Gentiles into
     the Church. And it was at the ninth hour that "Peter and John went
     up together into the temple," being "the hour of prayer." But though
     these were the more remarkable seasons of devotion, there certainly
     were others besides them, in that first age of the Church., After
     our Saviour's departure, the Apostles, we are informed, "all
     continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the
     women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with His brethren:" and
     with this accords the repeated exhortation to pray together without
     ceasing, which occurs in St. Paul's Epistles. It will be
     observed that he insists in one passage on prayer to the abridgement
     of sleep; and one recorded passage of his life exemplifies his
     precept. "And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sand praises
     unto GOD, and the prisoners heard them." Surely it is more natural
     to suppose that this act of worship came in course, according to
     their wont, and was only not omitted because of their imprisonment,
     somewhat after Daniel's pattern, than that they should have
     gone aside to bear this sort of indirect testimony to the Gospel.

     Such was the Apostolic worship as far as Scripture happens to have
     preserved it; that it was as systematic, and as apportioned to
     particular times of the day, as in the aftertimes of peace and
     prosperity, is not to be supposed; yet it seems to have been, under
     ordinary circumstances, as ample and extended, as then. If St. Paul
     thought a prison and a prison's inmates no impediment to vocal
     prayer, we may believe it was no common difficulty which ever kept
     him from it.

     In subsequent times the Hours of prayer were gradually developed
     from the three, or (with midnight) the four seasons, above
     enumerate, to seven, viz. by the addition of Prime (the first hour),
     Vespers (the evening), and Compline (bed-time); according to the
     words of the Psalm, "Seven times a day do I praise Thee, because of
     Thy righteous judgments." Other pious and instructive reasons
     existed, or have since been perceived, for this number. It was a
     memorial of the seven days of creation; it was an honour done to the
     seven petitions given us by our Lord in His prayer; it was a mode of
     pleading for the influence of that Spirit who is revealed to us as
     sevenfold; on the other hand, it was a preservative against those
     seven evil spirits, which are apt to return to the exorcised soul
     more wicked than he who has been driven out of it; and it was a fit
     remedy of those seven successive falls, which the Scripture says
     happen to "the just man" daily.

     And, as the particular number of their Services admitted of various
     pious meanings, so did each in its turn suggest separate events in
     our Saviour's history. He was born, and He rose again at
     midnight. At prime, (or 7 A.M. according to our reckoning,) He was
     brought before Pilate. At the third, (or 9 A.M.) He was devoted to
     crucifixion by the Jews, and scourged. At the sixth, (or noon,) He
     was crucified. At the ninth, (or 3 P.M.) He expired. At Vespers He
     was taken down from the cross; at which hour He had the day before
     eat the Passover, washed His Apostles' feet, and consecrated
     the Eucharist. At Completorium, or Compline, He endured the agony in
     the garden.

     These separate Hours, however, require a more distinct notice. The
     night Service was intended for the end of the night, when it was
     still dark, but drawing towards day; and, considering that the hour
     for rest was placed soon after sunset, it did not infringe upon the
     time necessary for repose. Supposing the time of sleep to extend
     from 8 or 9 P.M. to 3 or 4 in the morning, the worshipper might then
     rise without inconvenience to perform to service which was called
     variously by the name of Nocturns, or Matins, as we still
     indifferently describe the hours in which it took place, as night or
     morning. It consists, when full, of three parts or Nocturns, each
     made up of Psalms and Lessons; and it ended in a Service, supposed
     to be used shortly before sunrise, and called Lauds, or Praises.
     This termination of the Nocturn Service is sometimes considered
     distinct from it, s as to make eight instead of seven hours in the
     day; as if in accordance with the text, "Give a portion to seven,
     and also to eight." Accordingly it is sometimes called by the name
     of Matins, instead of the Nocturns; and sometimes both together are
     so called.

     This subdivision of the night-service has the effect of dividing the
     course of worship into two distinct parts, of similar structure with
     each other; the three Nocturns, Lauds, and Prime, corresponding
     respectively to the three day hours (of the 3d, 6th, and 9th)
     Vespers and Compline. Of these the three day hours are made up of
     Psalms, Hymns, and Sentences. These are the simplest of the
     Services, and differ very little from each other though the year.
     Lauds answer to Vespers, the sun being about to rise or about to set
     in the one or the other respectively. Each contains five Psalms, a
     Text, a Hymn, Evangelical Canticle, Collect, and Commemoration of
     Saints. These hours are the most ornate of the Services, and are
     considered to answer to the morning and evening sacrifices of the
     Jews.

     Prime and Compline were introduced at the same time (the fifth
     century), and are placed respectively at the beginning of the day
     and the beginning of the night. In each there is a Confession, four
     Psalms, a Hymn, Text, and Sentences.

     The ecclesiastical day is considered to begin with the evening or
     Vesper service; according to the Jewish reckoning, as alluded to in
     the text, "In the evening, and morning, and at noon-day, will I
     pray, and that instantly." The ancient Vespers are regarded by some
     to be the most solemn hour of the day. They were sometimes called
     the Officium Lucernarum. Prayers were in some places offered while
     the lamps were lighting; and this rite was called lumen offere. The
     Mozarabic service supplies an instance of this, in which the Office
     ran as follows:

     "Kyrie eleyson, Christe eleyson, Kyris eleyson. Pater noster, &c. In
     nomine Domini Jesu Christi, lumen cum pace. R. Amen. Hoc est lumen
     oblatum. R. Deo gratias."

     On Festivals, the appropriate Services, beginning on the evening of
     the preceding day, are continued over the evening of the day itself;
     so that there are in such cases two Vespers, called the First and
     the Second, of which the First are the more solemn.

     This is the stated succession of the sacred offices through the day,
     but the observances of the precise hours has not been generally
     insisted on at any time, but has varied with local usages or
     individual convenience. Thus the Matin and Laud Services may be
     celebrated on the preceding evening, as is done (for instance) in
     the Sestine Chapel at Rome during Passion week, the celebrated
     Miserere being the first Psalm of Lauds. Prime may be used just
     before or after sunrise; the Third soon after; and soon after the
     Sixth; the Ninth near dinner; Vespers and Compline after dinner. Or
     Prime, the Third, Sixth, and Ninth may come together two or three
     hours after sunrise. Noon, which in most ages has been the hour for
     the meal of the day, is made to divide the Services; there is a
     rule, for instance, against Compline coming before dinner.

     Such is the present order and use of the Breviary Services, as
     derived more or less directly from Apostolic practice. Impressed
     with their antiquity, our Reformers did not venture to write a
     Prayer-Book of their own, but availed themselves of what was ready
     to their hands: in consequence our Daily Service is a compound of
     the portions of this primitive ritual, Matins being made up of the
     Catholic Matins, Lauds, and Prime, and Evensong of Vespers and
     Compline. The reason why these changes were brought about will be
     seen in the following sketch of the history of the Breviary from the
     time of Gregory VII.

     The word has already been explained to mean something between a
     directory and an harmony of offices; but it is to be feared there
     was another, and not so satisfactory reason for the use of it. It
     implied an abridgement or curtailment of Services, and so in
     particular of the Scripture readings, whether Psalms or Lessons, at
     least in practice. Of course there is no reason why the Church might
     not, in the use of her discretion, limit as well as select the
     portions of the inspired volume, which were to be introduced into
     her devotions; but there were serious reasons why she should not
     defraud her children of "their portion of meat in due season;" and
     it would seem, as if the eleventh or at least the twelfth century, a
     time fertile in other false steps in religion, must be charged also,
     as far as concerns Rome and its more intimate dependencies, with a
     partial removal of the light of the written Word from the Sanctuary.
     Whatever benefit attended the adjustment of the offices in other
     respects, so far as the reading of Scripture was omitted, it was the
     productive of evil, as least in prospect. An impulse was given
     however slight in itself, which was followed up in the centuries
     which succeeded, and in all those churches which either then, or in
     the course of time, adopted the usage of Rome.

     Even now that usage is not universally received in the Latin
     Communion, and it was in no sense enjoined on the whole Communion
     till after the Council of Trent; but from the influence of the papal
     see and of the monastic orders, it seems to have affected other
     countries from a much earlier date. This influence would naturally
     be increased by the circumstance that the old Roman Breviary had
     long before Gregory's time been received in various parts of
     Europe: in England, since the time of Gregory the Great, who, after
     the pattern of Leo, and Gelasius before him, had been a Reformer of
     it; in Basle, since the ninth century; in France and Germany by
     means of Pepin and Charlemagne; while Gregory VII. himself effected
     its reception in Spain. Other Breviaries however still were in use,
     as they are at this day. The Ambrosian Breviary used in the Church
     of Milan, derives its name from the great St. Ambrose; and in the
     ninth century Charles the Bald, while sanctioning the use of the
     Roman, speaks also of the usage of Jerusalem, of Constantinople, of
     Gaul, of Italy, and of Toledo.

     In Gregory's Breviary there are no symptoms of a neglect of
     Scripture. It contains the offices for festival-days, Sundays, and
     week-days; Matins on festivals having nine Psalms and nine Lessons,
     and on Sundays eighteen Psalms and nine Lessons, as at present. The
     course of the Scripture Lessons was the same as it had been before
     his time; as it is preserved in a manuscript of the thirteenth
     century. It will be found to agree in great measure both with the
     order of the present Breviary and with our own. From Advent to
     Christmas were read portions of the prophet Isaiah; from the Octave
     of the Epiphany to Septuagesima, St. Paul's Epistle to the
     Romans; from Septuagesima to the third Sunday in Lent, the book of
     Genesis, the i. xii. and xxvii. on the Sundays to which they are
     allotted in our own offices; on the fourth in Lent to Wednesday in
     Passion Week, Jeremiah; from Easter to the third Sunday after, the
     Apocalypse; from the third to the fifth, St. James; from the Octave
     of the Ascension to Pentecost, the Acts; after the Octave of Trinity
     to the last Sunday in July, the books of Kings; in August, Proverbs;
     in September, Job, Tobit, Judith, and Esther; in October, Maccabees;
     and in November, Ezekiel, Daniel, and other prophets.

     Well would it have been if this laudable usage, received from the
     first ages, and confirmed by Pope Gregory VII. had been observed,
     according to his design, in the Roman Church; but his own successors
     were the first to depart from it. The example was set in the
     Pope's chapel of curtailing the sacred Services, and by the end
     of the twelfth century it had been followed in all the churches in
     Rome, except that of St. John Lateran. The Fratres Minores,
     (Minorists or Franciscans,) adopted the new usage, and their
     Breviaries were in consequence remarkable for the title "secundum
     consuetudinem Romanae Curiae," contrary to the usage of such
     countries as conformed to the Roman Ritual, which were guided by the
     custom of the churches in the city. Haymo, the chief of this order,
     had the sanction of Gregory X. in the middle of the thirteenth
     century, to correct and complete a change, which, as having begun in
     irregularity, was little likely to have fallen of itself into an
     orderly system; and his arrangements, which were conducted on the
     pattern of the Franciscan Devotions, nearly correspond to the
     Breviary, as it at present stands.

     Haymo's edition, which was introduced into the Roman Church by
     Nicholas III. A.D. 1278, is memorable for another and still more
     serious fault. Graver and sounder matters being excluded, apocryphal
     legends of Saints were used to stimulate the popular mind; and a way
     was made for the use of those Invocations to the Virgin and other
     Saints, which heretofore were unknown in public worship. The
     addresses to the blessed Mary in the Breviary, as it is at present
     constituted, are such as the following: the Ave Mary, before
     commencing every office through the day and at the end of Compline;
     at the end of Lauds and Vespers, an Antiphon invocatory of the
     Virgin; the Officium B. Mariae, on the Sabbath or Saturday, and
     sundry other offices, containing Hymns and Antiphons in her honour.
     These portions of the Breviary carry with them their own plain
     condemnation, in the judgment of an English Christian; no
     commendation of the general structure and matter of the Breviary
     itself will have any tendency to reconcile him to them; and it has
     been the strong feeling that this is really the case, that has led
     the writer of these pages fearlessly and securely to admit the real
     excellences, and to dwell upon the antiquity, of the Roman Ritual.
     He has felt that, since the Romanists required an unqualified assent
     to the whole of the Breviary, and that there were passages which no
     Anglican could ever admit, praise the true Catholic portion of it as
     much as he might, he did not in the slightest degree approximate to
     a recommendation of Romanism. But to return;--these Invocations and
     Services to the Blessed Virgin have been above enumerated, with a
     view of observing that, on the very face of them, they do not enter
     into the structure of the Breviary; they are really, as they are
     placed, additions, and might easily have been added at some later
     period, as (e.g.) was the case with our own Thanksgiving, or the
     Prayer for the Parliament. This remark seems to apply to all the
     intrinsically exceptionable Addresses in the Breviary; for as to the
     Confession at Prime and Compline, in which is introduced the name of
     the Blessed Virgin and other Saints, this practise stands on a
     different ground. It is not a simple gratuitous Invocation made to
     them, but it is an address to Almighty GOD in His heavenly court, as
     surrounded by His Saints and Angels, answering to St. Paul's
     charge to Timothy, "before GOD and the LORD JESUS CHRIST and the
     elect Angels," and to Daniel and St. John's address to the
     Angels who were sent to them. The same may even be said of the
     Invocation "Holy Mary and all Saints," &c. in the Prime Service,
     which Gavanti describes as being of very great antiquity. These
     usages certainly now do but sanction and encourage that direct
     worship of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, which is the great
     practical offense of the Latin Church, and so are a serious evil;
     but it is worth pointing out, that, as on the one hand they have
     more claim to be considered an integral part of the service, so on
     the other, more can be said towards their justification than for
     those addresses which are now especially under our consideration.

     This is what occurs to observe on the first sight of these
     Invocations; but we are not left to draw a conjectural judgment
     about them. Their history is actually known, and their recent
     introduction into the Church Services is distinctly confessed by
     Roman ritualists.

     The Ave Mary, for instance, is made up of the Angel's
     salutation, "Hail, thou," &c. Elizabeth's "Blessed art thou
     among women," &c., and the words "Holy Mary, Mother of GOD, pray for
     us sinners, now and in the hour of our death." The last clause "now
     and," &c. was confessedly added by the Franciscans in the beginning
     of the sixteenth century; and the words preceding it, "Holy Mary,"
     &c. which Gavanti, after Baronius, wished to attribute to the
     Council of Ephesus (A.D. 431.) are acknowledged by the later
     critics, Grancolas and Merari, to have had no place in any form of
     prayer till the year 1508. Even the Scripture portion of the Ave
     Mary, which, as Merari observes, is an Antiphon rather than Prayer,
     and which occurs as such in the lesser Office of the Blessed Virgin,
     and in St. Gregory's Sacramentary in the Mass Service for the
     fourth Sunday in Advent, is not mentioned by any devotional writer,
     nor by Councils no Fathers, up to the eleventh century, though they
     do enjoin the universal and daily use of the Creed and Lord's
     Prayer, which are in the present Breviary used with it. It first
     occurs among forms of prayer prescribed for the people in the
     statutes of Otho, Bishop of Paris, A. D. 1195, who was followed
     after the interval of a hundred years, by the regulations of
     Councils at Oxford and elsewhere. Another space of at least fifty
     years intervenes before the introduction of rosaries and crowns in
     honour of the Virgin. As to the Roman Breviary, it did not contain
     any part of the Ave Mary, till the promulgation of it by Pope Pius
     V., after the Tridentine Council, A. D. 1550.

     The four Antiphons to the Blessed Virgin, used at the termination of
     the offices, are known respectively by their first words; the Alma
     Redemptoris, the Ave Regina, the Regina coeli, and the Salve Regina.
     Gavanti and Merari plainly tell us they are not to be found in
     ancient authors. The Alma Redemptoris is the composition of
     Hermannus Contractus, who died A. D. 1054. The author of the Ave
     Regina is unknown, as is that of the Regina coeli. The Salve Regina
     is to be attributed either to Hermannus, or to Peter of Compostella.
     Gavanti would ascribe the last words "O clemens, O pia, O dulcis,"
     &c. to St. Bernard, but Merari corrects him, the work in which they
     are contained being suppositious. These Antiphons seem to have been
     used by the Franciscans after Compline from the thirteenth century;
     but are found in no Breviary before A. D. 1520.

     The Saturday or Sabbath office of the Blessed Virgin was introduced,
     according to Baronius, by the monks of the Western Church, about A.
     D. 1056.

     The Officium Parvum B. V. M. was instituted by the celebrated Peter
     Damiani at the same date. It is said indeed to have been the
     restoration of a practice three hundred years old, and observed by
     John Damascene; which it may well have been: but there is nothing to
     show the identity of the Service itself with the ancient one, and
     that is the only point on which evidence would be important. Thirty
     years after its introduction by Damiani, it was made part of the
     daily worship by decree of Urban II.

     The Breviary then, as it is now received, is pretty nearly what the
     Services became in practice in Rome, and among the Franciscans, by
     the middle of the thirteenth century; the two chief points of
     difference between it and the ancient Catholic Devotions, being on
     the one hand its diminished allowance of Scripture reading, on the
     other its adoption of uncertain legends, and of Hymns and Prayers to
     the Virgin. However, the more grievous of these changes were not
     formally made in the Breviary itself, till the Pontificate of Pius
     V. after the Tridentine Council; at which time also it was imposed
     in its new form upon all the Churches in communion with Rome, except
     such as had used some other Ritual for above two hundred years. Not
     even at the present day, however, is this Roman novelty, as it may
     be called, in universal reception; the Paris Breviary, as corrected
     by the Archbishop of that city A. D. 1735, differs from it
     considerably in detail, though still disfigured by the Invocations.

     Before concluding this account of the Roman Breviary, it is
     necessary to notice one attempt which was made in the first part of
     the sixteenth century to restore it to a more primitive form. In the
     year 1536, Quignonius, Cardinal of Santa Crux, compiled a Breviary
     under the sanction of Clement VII., and published it under his
     successor, Paul III. This Ritual, the use of which was permitted,
     but not formally enjoined by the Holy See, was extensively adopted
     for forty years, when it was superseded by the Franciscan Breviary,
     as the now authorized one may be called, in consequence of a Bull of
     Pius V. The Cardinal's Breviary was drawn up on principles far
     more agreeable to those on which the Reformation was conducted, and
     apparently with the same mixture of right and wrong in the
     execution. With a desire of promoting the knowledge of Scripture, it
     showed somewhat of rude dealing with received usages, and but a
     deficient sense of what is improperly called the imaginative part of
     religion. His object was to adapt the Devotions of the Church for
     private reading, rather than chanting in choir, and so to encourage
     something higher than that almost theatrical style of worship,
     which, when reverence is away, will prevail, alternately with a
     slovenly and hurried performance, in the performance of Church
     Music. Accordingly he left out the Versicles, Responses, and Texts,
     which, however suitable in Church, yet in private took more time, as
     he says, to find out in the exiting formularies than to read when
     found. He speaks in his preface expressly of the "perplexus ordo,"
     on which the offices were frames. But his great reform was as
     regards the reading of Scripture. He complains that, whereas it was
     the ancient rule that the Psalms should be read through weekly and
     the Bible yearly, both practices had been omitted. The Ferial of
     week-day service, had been superseded by the Service for feast days,
     as being shorter; and for that reason every day, even through Lent
     was turned into a festival. To obviate the temptation which led to
     this irregularity, he made the Ferial Service about the length of
     that of the old feast day; and he found space in these contracted
     limits for the reading of the Psalms and the whole Bible, except
     part of the Apocalypse, in the week and the year respectively, by
     omitting the popular legends of the Saints which had been
     substituted for them. He observes, that these compositions had been
     sometimes introduced without any public authority, or sanction of
     the Popes, merely at the will of individuals. Those which he
     retained, he selected from authors of weight, whether of the Greek
     or Latin Church. Besides, he omitted the Officium Parvum B. M. V.,
     on the ground that there were sufficient services in her honour
     independently of it. In all his reforms he professes to be returning
     to the practice of antiquity; and he made use of the assistance of
     men versed "in Latin and Greek, in divinity, and the jus
     pontificium."




     This Breviary was published in Rome, A. D. 1536, under the sanction,
     as has been said, of Paul III. However, it was not of a nature to
     please the divines of an age which had been brought up in the
     practice of the depraved Catholicism then prevalent; and its real
     faults, as they would appear to be, even enabled them to oppose it
     with justice. The Doctors of the Sorbonne proceeded to censure it as
     running counter in its structure to antiquity and the Fathers; and
     though they seem at length to have got over their objections to it,
     and various editions at Venice, Antwerp, Lyons, and Paris, showed
     that it was not displeasing to numbers in the Roman Communion, it
     was at length superseded by the Bull of Pius V. establishing the
     Franciscan Breviary, which had been more or less grown into use in
     the course of the preceding three hundred years.

     This account of Cardinal Quignonius's Breviary, and the
     circumstances under which it was compiled, will remind the English
     reader of the introductory remarks concerning the Service of the
     Church, prefixed to our own Ritual: which he may read more
     profitably than heretofore, after the above illustrations of their
     meaning. For this reason they shall be here cited:

     "There was never any thing by the will of man so well devised, or so
     sure established, which in continuance of time hath not been
     corrupted; as, among other things, it may plainly appear by the
     Common Prayers in the Church, commonly called Divine Service. The
     first original and ground whereof, if a man would search out by the
     Ancient Fathers, he shall find, that the same was not ordained but
     of a good purpose, and for a great advancement of godliness. For
     they so ordered the matter, that all the whole Bible, (or the
     greatest part thereof,) should be read over once every year;
     intending thereby, that the Clergy, and especially such as were
     Ministers in the Congregation, should (by often reading and
     meditating on GOD'S Word) be stirred up to godliness
     themselves, and be more able to exhort others by wholesome doctrine,
     and to confute them that were adversaries to the truth; and further,
     that the people (by daily hearing of Holy Scripture read in the
     Church,) might continually profit more and more in the knowledge of
     GOD, and be the more inflamed with the love of His true religion.

     ³But these many years past, this godly and decent order of the
     ancient Fathers hath been so altered, broken, and neglected, by
     planting in uncertain Stories and Legends, with multitude of
     Responds, Verses, vain Repetitions, Commemorations, and Synodals;
     that commonly when any book of the Bible was begun, after three or
     four chapters wee read out, all the rest were unread. And in this
     sort the book of Isaiah was begun in Advent, and the book of Genesis
     in Septuagesima; but they were only begun, and never read through.
     After like sort were other books of Holy Scripture used. And
     furthermore, notwithstanding that the ancient Fathers have divided
     the Psalms into seven portions, whereof every one was called a
     Nocturn, now late time a few of them have been daily said, and the
     rest utterly omitted. Moreover, the number and hardness of the rules
     called the Pie, and the manifold changings of the service, was the
     cause, that, to turn the book only was so hard and intricate a
     matter, that many times there was more business to find out what
     should be read, than to read it when it was found out.

     "These inconveniences therefore considered, here is set forth such
     an Order, whereby the same shall be redressed. And for a readiness
     in this matter, here is drawn out a Calendar for that purpose, which
     is plain and easy to be understood; wherein (so much as may be) the
     reading of Holy Scripture is so set forth, that all things shall be
     done in order, without breaking one piece from another. For this
     cause be cut off Anthems, Responds, Invitatories, and such like
     things as did break the continual course of the reading of the
     Scripture."

     It remains but to enumerate the selections from the Breviary which
     follow. First has been drawn out, an Analysis of the Weekly Service,
     as well for Sunday as other days. This is followed by an ordinary
     Sunday Service at length, as it runs when unaffected by the
     occurrence of special feast or season, in order to ground the
     reader, who chooses to pursue the subject, in the course of daily
     worship as a whole. With the same object a Week-day Service has also
     been drawn out. Two portions of extraordinary Services are then
     added, one from the Service for the Transfiguration, the other for
     the Festival of St. Laurence, with a view of supplying specimens of
     a more elevated and impressive character. Next follows a design for
     a Service for March 21st, the day on which Bishop Ken was taken from
     the Church below, and another for a Service of thanksgiving and
     commemoration for the anniversaries of the days of death of friends
     or relations. These have been added, to suggest to individual
     Christians a means of carrying out in private the principle and
     spirit of these inestimable forms of devotion which are contained in
     our authorized Prayer-Book. The series is closed with an abstract of
     the Services for every day in Advent, fitting on to sections 2 and
     3, which contain respectively the types of the Sunday and Week-day
     Service. Except by means of some such extended portion, it is
     impossible for the reader to understand the general structure, and
     appreciate the harmony of the Breviary.

     Lastly, the writer of these pages feels he shall have to ask
     indulgence for such chance mistakes, in the detail of the following
     Services, as are sure to occur when an intricate system is drawn out
     and set in order, with no other knowledge of it than is supplied by
     the necessarily insufficient directions of a Rubric.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Project Canterbury

References

   1. http://www.newmanreader.org/works/times/tract75/index.html
