

                             Project Canterbury
                            Tracts for the Times

                               Tract Number 73
       On the Introduction of Rationalistic Principles into Religion.
     __________________________________________________________________

     IT is not intended in the following pages to enter into any general
     view of so large a subject as Rationalism, nor to attempt any
     philosophical account of it; but, after defining it sufficiently for
     the purpose in hand, to direct attention to a very peculiar and
     subtle form of it existing covertly in the popular religion of this
     day. With this view two writers, not of our own Church, though of
     British origin, shall pass under review, Mr. Erskine and Mr. Jacob
     Abbott.

     This is the first time that a discussion of (what may be called) a
     personal nature has appeared in these Tracts, which have been
     confined to the delineation and enforcement of principles and
     doctrines. However, in this case, while it was important to protest
     against certain views of the day, it was found that this could not
     be intelligibly done, without referring to the individuals who have
     inculcated them. Of these the two authors above mentioned seemed at
     once the most influential and the most original; and Mr. Abbott
     being a foreigner, and Mr. Erskine having written sixteen years
     since, there seemed a possibility of introducing their names without
     seriously encroaching on the province of a Review.

     It will be my business first to explain what I mean by Rationalism,
     and then to illustrate the description given of it from the writings
     of the two authors in question.

     ยง. 1--The Rationalistic and the Catholic Spirit compared together.

     To Rationalize is to ask for reasons out of place; to ask improperly
     how we are to account for certain things, to be unwilling to believe
     them unless they can be accounted for, i. e. referred to something
     else as a cause, to some existing system as harmonizing with them or
     taking them up into itself. Again, since whatever is assigned as the
     reason for the original fact canvassed, admits in turn of a like
     question being raised about itself, unless it be ascertainable by
     the senses, and be the subject of personal experience, Rationalism
     is bound properly to pursue onward its course of investigation on
     this principle, and not to stop till it can directly or ultimately
     refer to self as a witness, whatever is offered to its acceptance.
     Thus it is characterised by two peculiarities; its love of
     systematizing, and its basing its system upon personal experience,
     on the evidence of sense. In both respects it stands opposed to what
     is commonly understood by the word Faith, or belief in Testimony;
     for which it deliberately substitutes System (or what is popularly
     called Reason,) and Sight.

     I have said that to act the Rationalist is to be unduly set upon
     accounting for what is offered for our acceptance; unduly, for to
     seek reasons for what is told us, is natural and innocent in itself.
     When we are informed that this or that event has happened, we are
     not satisfied to take it as an isolated fact; we are inquisitive
     about it; we are prompted to refer it, if possible, to something we
     already know, to incorporate it into the connected family of truths
     or facts which we have already received. We like to ascertain its
     position relatively to other things, to view it in connexion with
     them, to reduce it to a place in the series of what is called cause
     and effect. There is no harm in all this, until we insist upon
     receiving this satisfaction as a necessary condition of believing
     what is presented for our acceptance, until we set up our existing
     system of knowledge as a legitimate test of the credibility of
     testimony, until we claim to be told the mode of reconciling alleged
     truths to other truths already known, the how they are, and why they
     are; and then we Rationalize.

     When the rich lord in Samaria said, "Though God shall make windows
     in heaven, shall this thing be?" he rationalized, as professing his
     inability to discover how Elisha's prophecy was to be fulfilled, and
     thinking in this way to excuse his unbelief. When Naaman objected to
     bathe in Jordan, it was on the ground of his not seeing the means by
     which Jordan was to cure his leprosy above the rivers of Damascus.
     "How can these things be?" was the objection of Nicodemus to the
     doctrine of regeneration; and when the doctrine of the Holy
     Communion was first announced "the Jews strove among themselves," in
     answer to their Divine Informant, "saying, How can this man give us
     His flesh to eat?" When St. Thomas doubted of our Lord's
     resurrection, though his reason for so doing is not given, it
     plainly lay in the astonishing, unaccountable nature of such an
     event. A like desire of judging for oneself is discernible in the
     original fall of man. Eve did not believe the Tempter, any more than
     God's word, till she perceived that "the fruit was good for food."

     So again, when infidels ask, how prayer can really influence the
     course of God's providence, or how everlasting punishment consists
     with God's infinite mercy, they rationalize.

     The same spirit shows itself in the restlessness of others to decide
     how the sun was stopped at Joshua's word, how the manna was
     provided, and the like; forgetting what our Saviour suggests to the
     Sadducees,--"the power of God."

     Rationalism then in fact is a forgetfulness of God's power,
     disbelief of the existence of a First Cause sufficient to account
     for any events or facts, however marvellous or extraordinary, and a
     consequent measuring of the credibility of things, not by the power
     and other attributes of God, but by our own knowledge; a limiting
     the possible to the actual, and denying the indefinite range of
     God's operations beyond our means of apprehending them. Mr. Hume
     openly avows this principle, declaring it to be unphilosophical to
     suppose that Almighty God can do any thing, but what we see he does.
     And, though we may not profess it, we too often, it is to be feared,
     act upon it at the present day. Instead of looking out of ourselves,
     and trying to catch glimpses of God's workings, from any
     quarter,--throwing ourselves forward upon Him and waiting on Him, we
     sit at home bringing everything to ourselves, enthroning ourselves
     as the centre of all things, and refusing to believe any thing that
     does not force itself upon our minds as true. Our private judgment
     is made everything to us,--is contemplated, recognized, and referred
     to as the arbiter of all questions, and as independent of every
     thing external to us. Nothing is considered to have an existence
     except so far forth as our minds discern it. The notion of half
     views and partial knowledge, of guesses, surmises, hopes and fears,
     of truths faintly apprehended and not understood, of isolated facts
     in the great scheme of providence, in a word, of Mystery, is
     discarded. Hence a distinction is drawn between what is called
     Objective and Subjective Truth, and Religion is said to consist in a
     reception of the latter. By Objective Truth is meant the Religious
     System considered as existing in itself, external to this or that
     particular mind: by Subjective, is meant that which each mind
     receives in particular, and considers to be such. To believe in
     Objective Truth is to throw ourselves forward upon that which we
     have but partially mastered or made Subjective; to embrace,
     maintain, and use general propositions which are greater than our
     own capacity, as if we were contemplating what is real and
     independent of human judgment. Such a belief seems to the
     Rationalist superstitious and unmeaning, and he consequently
     confines faith to the province of Subjective Truth, or to the
     reception of doctrine, as, and so far as it is met and apprehended
     by the mind, which will be differently in different persons, in the
     shape Of orthodoxy in one, heterodoxy in another; that is, he
     professes to believe in that which he opines, and he avoids the
     apparent extravagance of such an avowal by maintaining that the
     moral trial involved in faith does not lie in the submission of the
     reason to external truths partially disclosed, but in that candid
     pursuit of truth which ensures the eventual adoption of that opinion
     on the subject, which is best for us, most natural according to the
     constitution of our minds, and so divinely intended. In short he
     owns that faith, viewed with reference to its objects, is nevermore
     than an opinion, and is pleasing to God, not as an active principle
     apprehending different doctrines, but as a result and fruit, and
     therefore an evidence of past diligence, independent inquiry,
     dispassionateness, and the like. Rationalism takes the words of
     Scripture as signs of Ideas; Faith, of Things or Realities.

     For an illustration of Faith, considered as the reaching forth after
     and embracing what is beyond the mind or Objective, we may refer to
     St. Paul's description of it in the Ancient Saints; "These all died
     in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them
     afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and
     confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth;" or to
     St. Peter's; "Of which salvation the Prophets have inquired and
     searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come
     unto you, searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of
     Christ which was in them, did signify, when it testified beforehand
     the sufferings of Christ, the glory that should follow; unto whom it
     was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did
     minister the things which are now reported unto you by them that
     have evangelized you." Here the faith of the ancient Saints is
     described as employed, not on truths so far as mastered by the mind,
     but truths beyond it, and even to the end withheld from its clear
     apprehension.

     On the other hand, if we would know to what a temper of mind the
     Rationalistic Theory of subjective Truth really tends, we may study
     the following passage from a popular review. It will be found to
     make use of the wonders of nature, not as "declaring the glory of
     God, and showing His handywork," but in order to exalt and deify the
     wisdom of man. Of the almost avowed infidelity contained in it, I do
     not speak.

     "For the civil and political historian the past alone has existence,
     the present he rarely apprehends, the future never. To the historian
     of science it is permitted, however, to penetrate the depths of past
     and future with equal clearness and certainty; facts to come are to
     him as present, and not unfrequently more assured than facts which
     are past. Although this clear perception of causes and consequences
     characterizes the whole domain of physical science, and clothes the
     natural philosopher with powers denied to the political and moral
     inquirer, yet foreknowledge is eminently the privilege of the
     astronomer. Nature has raised the curtain of futurity, and displayed
     before him the succession of her decrees, so far as they affect the
     physical universe, for countless ages to come; and the revelations
     of which she has made him the instrument, are supported and verified
     by a never-ceasing train of predictions fulfilled. He [the
     astronomer] "shows us the things which will be hereafter;" not
     obscurely shadowed out in figures and in parables, as must
     necessarily be the case with other revelations, but attended with
     the most minute precision of time, place, and circumstance. He
     converts the hours as they roll into an ever-present miracle, in
     attestation of those laws which his Creator through him has
     unfolded; the sun cannot rise, the moon cannot wane, a star cannot
     twinkle in the firmament without bearing testimony to the truth of
     his [the astronomer's] prophetic records. It has pleased the "Lord
     and Governor" of the world, in his inscrutable wisdom, to baffle our
     inquiries into the nature and proximate cause of that wonderful
     faculty of intellect,-that image of his own essence which he has
     conferred upon us, &c. &c......But how nobly is the darkness which
     envelopes metaphysical inquiries compensated by the flood of light
     which is shed upon the physical creation! There all is harmony, and
     order, and majesty, and beauty. From the chaos of social and
     political phenomena exhibited in human records, phenomena
     unconnected to our imperfect vision by any discoverable law, a war
     of passions and prejudices governed by no apparent purpose, tending
     to no apparent end, and setting all intelligible order at
     defiance,-how soothing and yet how elevating it is to turn to the
     splendid spectacle which offers itself to the habitual contemplation
     of the astronomer! How favourable to the development of all the best
     and highest feelings of the soul are such objects! The only passion
     they inspire being the love of truth, and the chiefest pleasure of
     their votaries arising from excursions through the imposing scenery
     of the universe, scenery on a scale of grandeur and magnificence
     compared with which whatever we are accustomed to call sublimity on
     our planet, dwindles into ridiculous insignificancy. Most justly has
     it been said, that nature has implanted in our bosoms a craving
     after the discovery of truth, and assuredly that glorious instinct
     is never more irresistibly awakened than when our notice is directed
     to what is going on in the heavens, &c.

     Here desire after Truth is considered as irreconcileable with
     acquiescence in doubt. Now if we do not believe in a First Cause,
     then indeed we know nothing except so far as we know it clearly,
     consistency and harmony being the necessary evidence of reality; and
     so we may reasonably regard doubt as an obstacle in the pursuit of
     Truth. But, on the other hand, if we assume the existence of an
     unseen Object of Faith, then we already possess the main truth, and
     may well be content even with half views as to His operations, for
     whatever we have is so much gain, and what we do not know does not
     in that case tend at all to invalidate what we do know.

     A few words may be necessary to bring together what has been said.
     Rationalism then, viewed in its essential character, is a refusal to
     take for granted the existence of a First Cause, in religious
     inquiries, which it prosecutes as if commencing in utter ignorance
     on the subject. Hence it receives only so much as may be strictly
     drawn out to the satisfaction of the reason, advancing onwards in
     belief according to the range of the proof; it limits Truth to our
     comprehension of it, or subjects it to the mind, and admits it only
     so far as it is subjected. Hence again it considers faith to have
     reference to a thing or system, far more than to an agent, for an
     agent may be supposed as acting in unknown ways, whereas a system
     cannot be supposed to have existence beyond what is ascertained of
     it. Hence moreover it makes the credibility of any alleged truth to
     lie solely in its capability of coalescing and combining with what
     is already known.

     Mr. Hume, as has been observed, avowed the principle of Rationalism
     in its extent of Atheism. The writers, I shall have to notice, have
     religious sensibilities, and are far less clearsighted. Yet even Mr.
     Erskine maintains or assumes that the main object of Christian faith
     is, not Almighty God, but a certain work or course of things which
     He has accomplished; as will be manifest to any reader either of His
     Essay on Internal Evidence, or on Faith. He says, for instance, in
     the latter of these works,

     "I may understand many things which I do not believe: but I cannot
     believe any thing which I do not understand, unless it be something
     addressed merely to my senses, and not to my thinking faculty. A man
     may with great propriety say, I understand the Cartesian System of
     Vortices, though I do not believe in it. But it is absolutely
     impossible for him to believe in that system without knowing what it
     is. A man may believe in the ability of the maker of a system
     without understanding it; but he cannot believe in the system itself
     without understanding it. Now there is a meaning in the Gospel, and
     there is declared in it the system of God's dealings with men. This
     meaning, and this system, must be understood before we can believe
     the Gospel. We are not called on to believe the Bible merely that we
     may give a proof of our willingness to submit in all things to God's
     authority, but that we may be influenced by the objects of our
     belief, &c."

     Every word of this extract tells in illustration of what has been
     drawn out above. And it is cited here merely in illustration; what
     judgment is to be formed of it shall be determined in its place. To
     resume the thread of our discussion.

     We shall now perhaps be prepared to understand a very characteristic
     word, familiarly used by Mr. Erskine among others to designate his
     view of the Gospel dispensation. It is said to be a Manifestation,
     as if the system presented to us were such as we could trace and
     connect into one whole, complete and definite. Let me use this word
     "Manifestation," as a token of the philosophy under review; and let
     me contrast it with the word "Mystery" which on the other hand may
     be regarded as the badge or emblem of orthodoxy. Revelation
     considered as a Manifestation, is a doctrine variously received by
     various minds, but nothing more to each than that which it appears
     to be. Considered as a Mystery, it is a doctrine enunciated by
     inspiration, in human language, as the only possible medium of it,
     and suitably according to the capacity of language; a doctrine lying
     hid in language, to be received in that language from the first by
     every mind, whatever be its separate power of understanding; entered
     into more or less by this or that mind, as it may be; and admitting
     of being apprehended more and more perfectly according to the
     diligence of the person receiving it. It is one and the same,
     independent and real, of depth unfathomable, and illimitable in its
     extent.

     This is a fit place to make some remarks on the Scripture sense of
     the word Mystery. It may seem a contradiction in terms to call
     Revelation a Mystery; but is not the book of the Revelation of St.
     John as great a mystery from beginning to end as the most abstruse
     doctrine the mind ever imagined? yet it is even called a revelation.
     How is this? The answer is simple. No revelation can be complete and
     systematic, from the weakness of the human intellect; so far as it
     is not such, it is mysterious. When nothing is revealed, nothing is
     known, and there is nothing to contemplate or marvel at; but when
     something is revealed and only something, for all cannot be, there
     are forthwith difficulties and perplexities. A Revelation is
     religious doctrine viewed on its illuminated side; a Mystery is the
     self-same doctrine viewed on the side unilluminated. Thus Religious
     Truth is neither light nor darkness, but both together; it is like
     the dim view of a country seen in the twilight, with forms half
     extricated from the darkness, with broken lines, and isolated
     masses. Revelation, in this way of considering it, is not a revealed
     system, 'but consists of a number of detached and incomplete truths
     belonging to a vast system unrevealed, of doctrines and injunctions
     mysteriously connected together, that is, connected by unknown
     media, and bearing upon unknown portions of the system. And in this
     sense we see the propriety of calling St. John's prophecies, though
     highly mysterious, yet a revelation.

     And such seems to be the meaning of the word Mystery in Scripture, a
     point which is sometimes disputed. Campbell, in his work on the
     Gospels, maintains that the word means a secret, and that, whatever
     be the subject of it in the New Testament, it is always, when
     mentioned, associated with the notion of its being now revealed.
     Thus it is, in his view, a word belonging solely to the Law, which
     was a system of types and shadows, and is utterly foreign to the
     Gospel which has brought light instead of darkness. This sense might
     seem to be supported by our Lord's announcement, for instance, to
     His disciples that to them was given to know the mysteries of His
     kingdom; by His command to them at another time to speak abroad what
     they had heard from Him in secret. And St. Paul in like manner
     glories in the revelation of mysteries hid from the foundation of
     the world.

     But the sense of Scripture will more truly be represented as
     follows. What was hidden altogether before Christ came could not be
     a Mystery; it became a Mystery then, for the first time, by being
     disclosed at all, at His coming. What had never been dreamed of by
     "righteous men," before Him, when revealed, as being unexpected, if
     for no other reason, would be strange and startling. And such
     unquestionably is the meaning of St. Paul, when he uses the word;
     for he applies it, not to what was passed and over, but what was the
     then state of the doctrine revealed. Thus in the 1 Cor. xv. 51, 52,
     "Behold I show you a Mystery; we shall not all sleep, but we shall
     all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
     trump." The resurrection and consequent spiritualizing of the human
     body, was not dreamed of by the philosophy of the world till Christ
     came, and, when revealed, was "mocked," as then first becoming a
     mystery. Reason was just where it was; and, as it could not discover
     it beforehand, so now it cannot account for it, or reconcile it to
     experience, or explain the manner of it: the utmost it does is by
     some faint analogies to show it is not inconceivable. Again, St.
     Paul, speaking of marriage, says, "This is a great Mystery, I mean,
     in its reference to Christ and the Church;" that is, the ordinance
     of marriage has an inward and spiritual meaning, contained in it and
     revealed through it, a certain bearing, undefined and therefore
     mysterious, towards the heavenly communion existing between Christ
     and the Church:--as if for persons to place themselves in that human
     relation, interested themselves in some secret way in the divine
     relation of which it is a figure. Again: "Great is the Mystery of
     piety, God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
     seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
     world, received up into glory." 1 Tim. iii. 16. Now, is the
     revelation of these truths a Manifestation (as above explained) or a
     Mystery? Surely the great secret has, by being revealed, only got so
     far as to be a Mystery, nothing more; nor could become a
     Manifestation, (i. e. a system connected in its parts by the human
     mind,) without ceasing to be any thing great at all. It must ever be
     small and superficial, viewed only as received by man; and is vast
     only when considered as that external "truth into which each
     Christian may grow continually, and ever find fresh food for his
     soul. As to the unknown and marvellous system of things spoken of in
     the text just quoted, it is described again, in an almost parallel
     passage, as regards the subject, though differently worded, in the
     Epistle to the Hebrews, "Ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the
     city of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
     innumerable company of Angels, to the full concourse and assembly of
     the first-born enrolled in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and
     to the spirits of the perfected just, and to Jesus the Mediator of
     the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh
     better things than that of Abel." xii. 22--24. In like manner when
     St. Paul speaks of the election of the Gentiles as a Mystery re-'
     vealed, the facts of the case show that it was still a Mystery, and
     therefore but revealed to be a Mystery, not a secret explained. We
     know that the Jews did stumble at it: why if it was clear and
     obvious to reason? Certainly it was still a Mystery to them. Will it
     be objected that it had been plainly predicted? Surely not. The
     calling indeed of the Gentiles had been predicted, but not their
     equal participation with the Jews in all the treasures of the
     covenant of grace, not the destruction of the Mosaic system. The
     prophets every where speak of the Jews as the head of the Gentiles;
     it was a new doctrine altogether (at least to the existing
     generation) that the election henceforth was to have no reference
     whatever to the Jews as a distinct people. It had hitherto been
     utterly hidden and unexpected; it emerged into a stumbling block, or
     Mystery, when the Gospel was preached, as on the other hand it
     became to all humble minds a marvel or mystery of mercy. Hence St.
     Paul speaks of the Mystery "which in other ages was not made known
     to the sons of men .... that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs,
     and of the same body, and partakers of His promise in Christ by the
     Gospel."

     In these remarks on the meaning of the word Mystery, some of the
     chief doctrines of the Gospel revelation have been enumerated;
     before entering, however, into the particular subjects to be
     discussed, it may be right briefly to enumerate the revealed
     doctrines according to the Catholic, that is the anti-rationalistic
     notion of them. They are these: the Holy Trinity; the Incarnation of
     the Eternal Son; His atonement and merits; the Church as the medium
     and instrument through which He operates on the world in the
     communication of them; the Sacraments, and Sacramentals, (as Bishop
     Taylor calls them,) as the principal channels through which His
     merits are applied to individuals; Regeneration, the Communion of
     Saints, the Resurrection of the body, consequent upon their
     administration; and lastly, our faith and works, as a condition of
     the available-ness and success of these divine appointments. Each of
     these doctrines is a Mystery; that is, each stands in a certain
     degree isolated from the rest, unsystematic, connected with the rest
     by unknown intermediate truths, and bearing upon subjects unknown.
     Thus the Atonement, why it was necessary, how it operates, is a
     Mystery; that is, the heavenly truth which is revealed, extends on
     each side of it into an unknown world. We see but the skirts of
     GOD'S glory in it. The virtue of the Holy Communion; how it conveys
     to us the body and blood of the Incarnate Son crucified, and how by
     partaking it body and soul are made spiritual. The Communion of
     Saints; in what sense they are knit together into one body of which
     Christ is the head. Good works; how they, and how prayers again,
     influence our eternal destiny. In like manner what our relation is
     to the innumerable company of Angels, some of whom, as we are told,
     minister to us; what to the dead in Christ, the spirits of the just
     perfected, who are ever joined to us in a heavenly communion; what
     bearing the Church has upon the fortunes of the world, or, it may
     be, the universe.

     That there are some such mysterious bearings, not only the
     incomplete character of the Revelation, but even its documents
     assure us. For instance. The Christian dispensation was ordained,
     "to the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in
     heavenly places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of
     God." Eph. iii. 10. Such is its relation to the Angels. Again to
     lost spirits: "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
     principalities, against powers, against the rulers of darkness in
     this world, against spiritual wickedness in heavenly places." Eph.
     vi. 12. In like manner our Lord says, "the gates of hell shall not
     prevail against" the Church, Matt, xvi. 18. implying thereby a
     contest. Again in writing the following text, had not St. Paul
     thoughts in his mind, suggested by the unutterable sights of the
     third heaven, but to us unrevealed and unintelligible? "I am
     persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
     principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
     nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
     separate us" (that is the Church,) "from the love of God, which is
     in CHRIST JESUS our LORD." Rom. viii. 38, 39.

     The practical inference to be drawn from this view is, first, that
     we should be very reverent in dealing with revealed truth; next,
     that we should avoid all theorising and systematising as relates to
     it, which is pretty much what looking into the ark was under the
     Law: further, that we should be solicitous to hold it safely and
     entirely; moreover, that we should be zealous and pertinacious in
     guarding it; and lastly, which is implied in all these, that we
     should religiously adhere to the form of words and the ordinances
     under which it comes to us, through which it is revealed to us, and
     apart from which the revelation does not exist, there being nothing
     else given us by which to ascertain or enter into it.

     Striking indeed is the contrast presented to this view of the
     Gospel, by the popular theology of the day! That theology is as
     follows;--that the Atonement is the chief doctrine of the
     Gospel;--again, that it is chiefly to be regarded, not as a wonder
     in heaven, and in its relation to the attributes of God and the
     unseen world, but in its experienced effects on our minds, in the
     change it effects where it is believed. On this, as on the
     horizontal line in a picture, all the portions of the Gospel system
     are placed and made to converge; as if it might fearlessly be used
     to regulate, adjust, correct, complete, every thing else. Thus, the
     doctrine of the Incarnation is viewed as necessary and important to
     the Gospel, because it gives sacredness to the Atonement; of the
     Trinity, because it includes the revelation, not only of the
     Redeemer, but also of the Sanctifier, by whose aid and influence the
     Gospel message is to be blessed to us. It follows that faith is
     nearly the whole of religion, for through it the message or
     Manifestation is received; on the other hand, the scientific
     language of Catholicism is disparaged, as having no tendency to
     enforce the operation of the revelation of the Atonement on our
     minds, and the Sacraments are limited to the office of representing,
     and promising, and impressing on us the promise of divine
     influences, in no measure of conveying them. Thus the Dispensation
     is practically identified with its Revelation or rather
     Manifestation. Not that the reality of the Atonement is formally
     denied, but it is cast in the back ground, except so far as it can
     be discovered to be influential, viz. to show GOD'S hatred of sin,
     the love of CHRIST and the like; and there is an evident tendency to
     consider it as a mere Manifestation of the love of CHRIST, to the
     denial of all real virtue in it as an expiation for sin; as if His
     death took place, merely to show His love for us, as a sign of GOD'S
     infinite mercy, to calm and assure us, without any real connexion
     existing between it and GOD'S forgiveness of our sins. And the
     dispensation thus being hewn and chiselled into an intelligible
     human system is represented, when thus mutilated, as affording a
     remarkable evidence of the truth of the Bible, an evidence level to
     the reason, and superseding the testimony of the Apostles. That is,
     according to the above observations, that Rationalism, or want of
     faith, which has first invented a spurious gospel, next looks
     complacently on its own offspring, and pronounces it to be the very
     image of that notion of the Divine Providence according to which it
     was originally modelled; a procedure, which, besides more serious
     objections, incurs the logical absurdity of arguing in a circle.

             ยง 2. Remarks on Mr. Erskine's "Internal Evidence."

     THIS is in fact pretty nearly Mr. Erskine's argument in his Internal
     Evidence: an author, concerning whom personally I have no wish to
     use one harsh word, not doubting that he is better than his own
     doctrine, and is only the organ, eloquent and ingenious, of
     unfolding a theory, which it has been his unhappiness to mistake for
     the Catholic faith revealed in the Gospel. Let us now turn to the
     Essay in question.

     Mr. Erskine begins in the following words:

     "There is a principle in our nature, which makes us dissatisfied
     with unexplained and unconnected facts; which leads us to theorize
     all the particulars of our knowledge, or to form in our minds some
     system of causes sufficient to explain or produce the effects which
     we see; and which teaches us to believe or disbelieve in the truth
     of any system which may be presented to us, just as it appears
     adequate or inadequate to afford that explanation of which we are in
     pursuit. We have an intuitive perception, that the appearances of
     nature are connected by the relation of cause and effect; and we
     have also an instinctive desire to classify and arrange the
     seemingly confused mass of facts with which we are surrounded,
     according to this distinguishing relationship." pp. 1, 2.

     He then speaks of two processes of reasoning which the mind uses in
     searching after truth.

     "When we are convinced of the real existence of a cause in nature,
     and when we find that a class of physical facts is explained by the
     supposition of this cause, and tallies exactly with its ordinary
     operation, we resist both reason and instinct when we resist the
     conviction that this class of facts does result from this cause." p.
     2.

     Again:

     "There is another process of reasoning ... by which, instead of
     ascending from effects to a cause, we descend from a cause to
     effects. When we are once convinced of the existence of a cause, and
     are acquainted with its ordinary Diode of operation, we are prepared
     to give a certain degree of credit to a history of other effects
     attributed to it, provided we can trace the connexion between them."
     p. 3.

     Presently he says,

     "In [all] these processes of reasoning we have examples of
     conviction, upon an evidence which is, most strictly speaking,
     internal,--an evidence altogether independent of our confidence in
     the veracity of the narrator of the facts." p. 8.

     Now, before explaining the precise argument he draws from the
     contents of Scripture, be it observed, that in these passages, he
     countenances the principle of "believing or disbelieving in the
     truth of any system which may be presented to us," according as it
     contains in it or not, a satisfactory adjustment of causes to
     effects, the question of testimony being altogether superseded.
     Accordingly he says a little further on of the Apostles; "Their
     system is true in the nature of things, even were they proved to be
     impostors." p. 17. And it will appear from other passages of his
     work, that he does not hesitate to receive the other alternative
     contained in the original proposition with which he opens it, viz.
     that that professed revelation is to be rejected, which implies a
     system of causes and effects incongruous in man's judgment with each
     other. To proceed:

     His argument is as follows:--

     "The first faint outline of Christianity" he says, "presents to us a
     view of GOD operating on the characters of men through a
     manifestation of His own character, in order that, by leading them
     to participate in some measure of His moral likeness, they may also
     in some measure participate of His happiness." p. 12.

     Again:

     "If the actions attributed to God, by any system of religion, be
     really such objects as, when present to the mind, do not stir the
     affections at all, that religion cannot influence the character, and
     is therefore utterly useless." p. 23.

     "The object of Christianity is to bring the character of man into
     harmony with that of God." p. 49.

     "The reasonableness of a religion seems to me to consist in there
     being a direct and natural connexion between a believing the
     doctrines which it inculcates, and a being formed by these to the
     character which it recommends. If the belief of the doctrines has no
     tendency to train the disciple in a more exact and more willing
     discharge of its moral obligations, there is evidently a very strong
     probability against the truth of that religion .....What is the
     history of another world to me, unless it have some intelligible
     relation to my duties or happiness?" p. 59.

     Now in these passages there is, first, this great assumption, that
     the object of the Christian revelation is ascertainable by us. It is
     asserted that its object is "to bring the character of man into
     harmony with that of God." That this is an object, is plain from
     Scripture, but that it is the object is no where told us; no where
     is it represented as the object in such sense, that we may take it
     as a key or rule, whereby to arrange and harmonize the various parts
     of the revelation,--which is the use to which the author puts it.
     God's works look many ways; they have objects (to use that mere
     human word) innumerable; they are full of eyes before and behind,
     and like the cherubim in the Prophet's vision, advance forward to
     diverse points at once. But it is plainly unlawful and presumptuous
     to make one of those points, which happen to be revealed to us, the
     teloV eleiotaton of His providence, and to subject every thing else
     to it. It plainly savours of the Rationalism already condemned; for
     what is it but to resolve, that what is revealed to us, is and shall
     be a com-.plete system; to reject every thing but what is so
     complete; and to disallow the notion of revelation as a collection
     of fragments of a great scheme, the notion under which the most
     profound human philosophy is accustomed to regard it?

     "Christianity," says Bishop Butler, "is a scheme quite beyond our
     comprehension. The moral government of GOD is exercised by gradually
     conducting things so in the course of His providence, that every one
     at length and upon the whole shall receive according to his deserts;
     and neither fraud nor violence, but truth and right, shall finally
     prevail. Christianity is a particular scheme under this general plan
     of providence, and a part of it, conducive to its completion, with
     regard to mankind; consisting itself also of various parts and a
     mysterious economy, which has been carrying on from the time the
     world came into its present wretched state, and is still carrying on
     for its recovery by a divine person, the Messiah, who is to 'gather
     together in one the children of GOD, that are scattered abroad,' and
     establish 'an everlasting kingdom, wherein dwelleth righteousness.'
     .... Parts likewise of this economy, are the miraculous system of
     the Holy Ghost, and His ordinary assistance as given to good men;
     the invisible government which Christ exercises over His Church and
     His future return to judge the world in righteousness, and
     completely re-establish the kingdom of GOD..... Now little, surely,
     need be said to show, that this system or scheme of things is but
     imperfectly comprehended by us. The Scripture expressly asserts it
     to be so. And indeed, one cannot read a passage relating to this
     great mystery of godliness, but what immediately runs up into
     something which, shows us our ignorance in it, as every thing in
     nature shows our ignorance in the constitution of nature." [Anal.
     ii. 4.]

     In this passage the great philosopher, though led by his line of
     argument to speak of the Dispensation entirely in its reference to
     man, still declares that even then its object is not identical with
     man's happiness, but that it is justice and truth; while, viewed in
     itself, every part of it runs up into mystery.

     Right reason, then, and faith combine to lead us, instead of
     measuring a divine revelation by human standards, or systematizing,
     except so far as it does so itself, to take what is given as we find
     it, to use it and be content. E. g. Scripture says that Christ died
     for sinners,--so far we may systematize; that He rose for our
     justification, that He went that the Spirit might come. Such and
     such like portions of a scheme are revealed, and we may use them,
     but no farther. On the other hand the Catholic doctrine of the
     Trinity is a mere juxtaposition of separate truths, which to our
     minds involve inconsistency, when viewed together; nothing more
     being attempted, for nothing more is told us. Arrange and contrast
     them we may and do; systematize (i.e. reduce them into an
     intelligible dependence on each other, or harmony with each other)
     we may not; unless indeed any such oversight of Revelation, such
     right of subjecting it to our understandings, is committed to us by
     Revelation itself. What then must be thought of the confident
     assumption, without proof attempted, contained in the following
     sentence, already quoted?

     "The first faint outline of Christianity presents to us a view of
     GOD operating on the characters of men through a manifestation of
     His own character, in order that, by leading them to participate in
     some measure in His moral likeness, they may also in some measure
     participate in His happiness.

     That GOD intends us to partake in His moral likeness, that He has
     revealed to us His own moral character, that He has done the latter
     in order to accomplish the former (to speak as a man) I will grant,
     for it is in Scripture; bat that it is the leading idea of
     Christianity, the chief and sovereign principle of it, this I
     altogether deny. I ask for proof what seems to us an assumption, and
     (if an assumption) surely an unwarranted and presumptuous one.

     Notice was above taken of the selfishness of that philosophy, which
     resolves to sit at home and make every thing subordinate to the
     individual. Is not this painfully instanced in one of the foregoing
     passages? "What is the history of another world to me, unless it
     have some intelligible relation to my duties and happiness?" Was
     this Moses' temper, when he turned aside to see the great sight of
     the fiery bush?

     Further, be it observed, the above theory has undeniably a tendency
     to disparage, if not supersede the mysteries of religion, such as
     the doctrine of the Trinity. It lays exclusive stress upon the
     character of GOD, as the substance of the Revelation. It considers
     Scripture as a Manifestation of GOD'S character, an intentional
     subjecting of it in an intelligible shape to our minds, and nothing
     more. The author says:--

     "The reasonableness of a religion seems to me to consist in there
     being a direct and natural connexion between a believing [its]
     doctrines, and being formed by these to the character which it
     recommends."

     Again

     "These terms ["manifestation," and "exhibition,"] suit best with the
     leading idea which I wish to explain, viz. that the facts [i. e.
     doctrines, as is just before explained] of revelation are
     developments of the moral principles of the Deity, and carry an
     influential address to the feelings of man." p. 26.

     Now, is the theological doctrine of the Trinity such a development?
     Is it influentially addressed to our feelings? Is it "an act of the
     divine government," as the author expresses himself? Further, does
     he not also tell us the "reasonableness of a religion seems to
     consist in there being a direct and natural connexion between a
     believing the doctrines which it inculcates, and a being formed by
     these to the character which it recommends?" We need not dwell on
     the assumption hazarded in this passage; for surely it is
     conceivable that reasons may exist in the vast scheme of the
     Dispensation, (of the bearings of which we know nothing perfectly,)
     for doctrines being revealed, which do not directly and naturally
     tend to influence the formation of our characters, or at least which
     we cannot see to do so. We have at least the authority of Bishop
     Butler to support us in considering that,

     "we are wholly ignorant what degree of new knowledge it were to be
     expect, ed God would give mankind by Revelation, upon supposition of
     His affording one; or how far, or in what way, he would interpose
     miraculously, to qualify them to whom He should originally make the
     Revelation, or communicating the knowledge given by it; and to
     secure their doing it to the age in which they should live, and to
     secure its being transmitted to posterity." [Anal. ii. 3.]

     But even though Butler, and other deep thinkers, had not said a word
     on the subject, the immediate and inevitable result, or rather
     operation of Mr. Erskine's principle, when applied to the matter of
     the Scripture Revelation, is a sufficient refutation of it. It will
     be found to mean nothing, or to lead pretty nearly to Socinianism.
     Let us take an instance: he says that the reasonableness of a
     religion, and therefore its claim on our acceptance, consists in
     there being a direct and natural tendency in belief in its doctrines
     to form that moral character which it recommends. Now, I would
     ask,--do we never hear it asked,--have we never been tempted to ask
     ourselves,--"What is the harm of being e. g., a Sabellian?" And is
     not the habit of thought, from which such questionings proceed,
     owing to the silent influence of such books as this of Mr. E.'s?
     Further, do we not hear persons say, "As to the Athanasian doctrine,
     I do not deny there is a Mystery about the Manifestations of the
     Divine Nature in Scripture, but this Mystery, whatever it is, as it
     does not interfere with the practical view of the doctrine, so, on
     the other, it cannot subserve it. It is among the secret things of
     GOD, and must be left among them;"--as if we might unthankfully
     throw back again into the infinite abyss, any of the jewels which
     GOD has vouchsafed to bring us thence.

     The reader may at first sight be tempted to say, "This is an
     overstrained handling of Mr. Erskine's words. What he does mean, is,
     not that the want of connexion between doctrine and precept is an
     objection, (though his words strictly taken may say this,) but, that
     where such a connexion does exist, as we see it does in
     Christianity, there is a strong argument in behalf of the divinity
     of a professed Revelation." Probably this was his original meaning,
     and it would have been well had he kept to it. But it is the way
     with men, particularly in this day, to generalize freely, to be
     impatient of such concrete truth as existing appointments contain,
     to attempt to disengage it, to hazard sweeping assertions, to lay
     down principles, to mount up above GOD'S visible doings, and to
     subject them to tests derived from our own speculations. Doubtless
     He, in some cases, vouchsafes to us the knowledge of truths more
     general than those works of His which He has set before us; and when
     He does so, let us thankfully use the gift. This is not the case in
     the present instance. Mr. E. has been led on, from the plain fact,
     that in Christianity there is a certain general bearing of faith in
     doctrine upon character, and so far a proof of its consistency,
     which is a token of divine working,--led on, to the general
     proposition, that "in a genuine Revelation all doctrines revealed
     must have a direct bearing upon the moral character enjoined by it;"
     and next to the use of it as a test for rejecting such alleged
     doctrines of the gospel, e. g. the Catholic doctrine of the Trinity,
     as do not perceptibly come up to it.

     That I am not unfair upon Mr. Erskine will appear from the following
     passages.

     "The abstract fact that there is a plurality in the unity of the
     Godhead, really makes no address either to our understandings, or
     our feelings, or our consciences But the obscurity of the doctrine,
     as far as moral purposes are concerned, is dispelled, when it comes
     in such a form as this,--'GOD so loved the world, &c.' or this 'But
     the Comforter, which is, &c.'--Our metaphysical ignorance of the
     Divine Essence is not indeed in the slightest degree removed by this
     mode of stating the subject; but our moral ignorance of the Divine
     character is enlightened, and that is the thing with which we have
     to do." p. 96.

     Now I do not say that such a passage as this is a denial of the
     doctrine of the Athanasian Creed; but I ask, should a man be
     disposed to deny it, how would the writer refute him? Has he not, if
     a Trinitarian, cut away the ground from under him? Might not a
     Socinian or Sabellian convince him of the truth of their doctrine,
     by his own arguments? Unquestionably. He has laid down the
     principle, that a Revelation is only so far reasonable as it
     exhibits a direct and natural connexion between belief in its
     doctrines and conformity to its precepts. He then says, that in
     matter of fact the doctrine of the Trinity is only influential as it
     exhibits the moral character of God; that is, that so far as it does
     not, so far as it is abstract (as he calls it) and in scientific
     form, i. e. viewed as the Catholic Doctrine, it is not influential,
     or reasonable, or by consequence important, or even credible. He has
     cut off the Doctrine from its roots, and has preserved only that
     superficial part of it which he denominates a "Manifestation,"--only
     so much as bears visibly upon another part of the system, the
     character of man,--so much as is perceptibly connected with it, so
     far as may be comprehended.

     But he speaks so clearly on this subject that comment is perhaps
     needless.

     "In the Bible the Christian doctrines . . . stand as indications of
     the character of GOD, and as the exciting motives of a corresponding
     character in man."

     This assumption must not pass without notice; often they so stand,
     not always, as he would imply. When St. Paul bids Timothy hold fast
     the form of sound words, or St. Jude exhorts us to contend earnestly
     for the faith, these Apostles seem so to direct for the sake of the
     faith itself, not for any ulterior reason. When St. John requires us
     to reject any one who brings not the true doctrine, nothing is said
     of it as an "exciting motive" of a certain character of mind, though
     viewed on one side of it, that doctrine certainly is so. St. Paul
     glories in the doctrine of CHRIST crucified as being a strange
     doctrine and a stumbling block. St. John states the doctrine of the
     Incarnation in the first chapter of his gospel, as a heavenly truth,
     which was too glorious for men, and believed on only by the few, by
     which, indeed, the Father was declared, but which shone in darkness.
     But to return:

     "In the Bible, the Christian doctrines are always stated in this
     connexion) they stand as indications of the character of GOD, and as
     the exciting motives of a corresponding character in man. Forming
     thus the connecting link between the character of the Creator and
     the creature, they possess a majesty which it is impossible to
     despise, and exhibit a form of consistency and truth which it is
     difficult to disbelieve. Such is Christianity in the Bible; but in
     creeds and Church articles it is far otherwise. These tests and
     summaries originated from the introduction of doctrinal errors and
     metaphysical speculations into religion; and in consequence of this,
     they are not so much intended to be the repositories of the truth,
     as barriers against the encroachment of erroneous opinions. The
     doctrines contained in them, therefore, are not stated with any
     reference to their great object in the Bible,--the regeneration of
     the human heart by the knowledge of the Divine character. They
     appear as detached propositions, indicating no moral cause, and
     pointing to no moral effect. They do not look to GOD on the one hand
     as their source; nor to man on the other as the object of their
     moral urgency. They appear like links severed from the chain to
     which they belonged; and thus they lose all that evidence which
     arises from their consistency and all that dignity which is
     connected with their high design. I do not talk of the propriety or
     impropriety of having Church Articles, but the evils which spring
     from receiving impressions of religion exclusively or chiefly from
     this source." pp. 93, 94.

     It is always a point gained to be able to come to issue in a
     controversy, as I am able to do here with the writer under
     consideration. He finds fault with that disjoined and isolated
     character of the doctrines in the old Catholic creed, that want of
     system, which to the more philosophical mind of Bishop Butler would
     seem an especial recommendation from its analogy to the course of
     nature. He continues,

     "I may instance the ordinary statements of the doctrine of the
     Trinity, as an illustration of what I mean. It seems difficult to
     conceive that any man should read through the New Testament candidly
     and attentively, without being convinced that this doctrine is
     essential to, and implied in every part of the system: but it is not
     so difficult to conceive, that although his mind is perfectly
     satisfied on this point, he may yet, if his religious knowledge is
     exclusively derived from the Bible, feel a little surprised and
     staggered, when he for the first time reads the terms in which it is
     announced in the articles and confessions of all Protestant
     Churches. In these summaries, the doctrine in question is stated by
     itself, divested of all its Scriptural accompaniments, and is made
     to bear simply on the nature of the Divine essence, and the
     Mysterious fact of the existence of Three in One. It is evident that
     this fact, taken by itself, cannot in the smallest degree tend to
     develope the Divine character, and therefore cannot make any moral
     impression on our minds." pp. 94, 95.

     Now, here, if it were to the purpose, this author might be
     encountered on his own ground. Surely, if it were religious to do
     so, it might be asserted, in contradiction to his last remark, that
     the Catholic doctrine of the Trinity does "tend to develope the
     Divine character," does "make a moral impression on our minds;" for
     does not the notion of a Mystery lead to reverence, awe, wonder, and
     fear? and are these not moral impressions? He proceeds:

     "In the Bible it assumes quite a different shape; it is there
     subservient to the manifestation of the moral character of GOD. The
     doctrine of GOD'S combined justice and mercy, in the redemption of
     sinners, and of his continued spiritual watchfulness over the
     progress of truth through the world, and in each particular heart,
     could not have been communicated without it, so as to have been
     distinctly and vividly apprehended; but it is never mentioned,
     except in connection with these objects; nor is it ever taught as a
     separate subject of belief. There is a great and important
     difference between these two modes of statement. In the first, the
     doctrine stands as an isolated fact of a strange and unintelligible
     nature, and is apt even to suggest the idea, that Christianity holds
     out a premium for believing improbabilities. In the other, it stands
     indissolubly united with an act of Divine holiness and compassion,
     which radiates to the heart an appeal of tenderness most
     intelligible in its nature and object, and most constraining in its
     influence." p. 95, 96.

     Here, at length, Rationalism stands confessed, and we hear openly
     the "mouth speaking great things," described in prophecy. Again:

     "The hallowed purpose of restoring men to the lost image of their
     Creator, is in fact the very soul and spirit of the Bible; and
     whenever this object does not distinctly appear, the whole system
     becomes dead and useless."

     If so, what judgment are we to pass upon such texts as the
     following? "We are unto GOD a sweet savour of Christ, in them that
     are saved, and in them that perish; to the one we are the savour of
     death unto death; and to the other, the savour of life unto life."
     "What if GOD, willing to show His wrath and to make his power known,
     endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
     destruction, and that He might make known the riches of His glory on
     the vessels of mercy, which He had afore prepared unto glory?" "He
     hath appointed a day in which He will judge the world in
     righteousness, by that Man whom He hath ordained." "Behold I come
     quickly, and My reward is with Me, to give every man according as
     his work shall be." The glory of GOD, according to Mr. Erskine, and
     the maintenance of truth and righteousness, are not objects
     sufficient, were there no other, to prevent "the whole system" of
     revealed truth from "becoming dead and useless." Does not this
     philosophy tend to Universalism? can its upholders maintain for any
     long while the eternity of future punishment? Surely they speak at
     random, and have no notion what they are saying. He proceeds:

     "In Creeds and Confessions this great purpose is not made to stand
     forth with its real prominency; its intimate connexion with the
     different articles of faith is not adverted to; the point of the
     whole argument is thus lost, and Christianity is misapprehended to
     be a mere list of mysterious facts. One who understands the Bible
     may read them with profit, because his own mind may fill up the
     deficiencies, and when their statements are correct, they may assist
     inquiries in certain stages, by bringing under their eye a
     concentrated view of all the points of Christian doctrine; and they
     may serve, according to their contents, either as public invitations
     to their communion, or as public warnings against it; ... but they
     have not calculated to impress on the mind of a learner a vivid and
     useful apprehension of Christianity. Any person who draws his
     knowledge of the Christian doctrines, exclusively or principally
     from such sources, must run considerable risk of losing the benefit
     of them, by overlooking their moral objects; and, in so doing, he
     may be tempted to reject them altogether, because he will be blind
     to their strongest evidence, which consists in their perfect
     adaptation to these objects. The Bible is the only perfectly pure
     source of Divine knowledge, and the man who is unacquainted with it,
     is, in fact, ignorant of the doctrines of Christianity, however well
     read he may be in the schemes, and systems, and controversies, which
     have been written on the subject. .. The habit of viewing the
     Christian doctrine and the Christian character as two separate
     things has a most pernicious tendency. A man who in his scheme of
     Christianity, says, 'here are so many things to be believed, and
     here are so many things to be done,' has already made a fundamental
     mistake. The doctrines are the principles which must excite and
     animate the performance, &c." pp. 139--141.

     It is not the design of this Paper to refute Mr. Erskine's
     principles, so much as to delineate and contrast them with those of
     the Church Catholic. Since, however, he has already, in several of
     these extracts, assumed that Scripture ever speaks of revealed
     doctrines in a directly practical way,--not as objects of faith
     merely, but as motives to conduct,--I would call attention to the
     following passage, in addition to those which have been above
     pointed out. "Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I
     say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
     of God. Nicodemus saith unto Him, How can a man be born when he is
     old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb and be
     born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man
     be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom
     of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is
     born of the Spirit is Spirit. Marvel not that I said to thee, Ye
     must be born again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou
     hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh and
     whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.
     Nicodemus answered and said unto Him, How can these things be? Jesus
     answered and said unto Him, Art thou a master in Israel, and knowest
     not these things? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that We
     do know, and testify that We have seen; and ye receive not Our
     witness. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how
     shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly things? And no man
     ascended up to heaven, but He that came down from heaven, even the
     Son of man which is in heaven.

     Some persons, doubtless, are so imbued with modern glosses and the
     traditions of men, that they will discern in all this but a
     practical exhortation to conversion, change of heart, and the like;
     but any one who gets himself fairly to look at the passage in
     itself, will, I am persuaded, see nothing more or less than
     this,--that Christ enunciates a solemn Mystery for Nicodemus to
     receive in faith, that Nicodemus so understands His words, and
     hesitates at it; that our Lord reproves him for hesitating, tells
     him that there are even higher Mysteries than that He had set forth,
     and proceeds to instance that of the Incarnation. In what
     conceivable way would a supporter of Mr. E.'s views make the last
     awful verse "subservient to the manifestation of the moral character
     of GOD," or directly influential upon practice? unless, indeed, he
     explained its clauses away altogether, as if they meant nothing more
     than is contained in the next verses, "As Moses, &c." and "God so
     loved the world, &c." All this is too painful to dwell upon. The
     latter part, particularly the conclusion, of the sixth chapter of
     the same Gospel, would afford another instance in point.

     Now let us hear what Mr. Erskine says in like manner on the doctrine
     of the Atonement, which he would exalt, indeed, into the substance
     of the Gospel, but in his account of which, as well as of the other
     Mysteries of revelation, he will, I fear, be found wanting.

     "The doctrine of the Atonement through Jesus Christ, which is the
     corner-stone of Christianity, and to which all the other doctrines
     of Revelation are subservient,"--

     Here is the same, (what I must call,) presumptuous assumption,--

     "--has had to encounter the misapprehension of the understanding as
     well as the pride of the heart."

     Now let us observe, he is going to show how the understanding of the
     Church Catholic has misapprehended the doctrine.

     "This pride is natural to man, and can only be overcome by the power
     of truth; but the misapprehension might be removed by the simple
     process of reading the Bible with attention; because it has arisen
     from neglecting the record itself, and taking our information from
     the discourses or the systems of men, who have engrafted the
     metaphysical subtilties of the schools upon the unperplexed
     statement of the word of GOD. In order to understand the facts of
     Revelation, we must (sic) form a system to ourselves; but if any
     subtilty, of which the application is unintelligible to common
     sense, or, uninfluential on conduct, enters into our system, we may
     be sure that it is a wrong one."

     The author here alludes to the Catholic teaching in the words
     "systems of man;" indeed it has been fashionable of late so to speak
     of it; but let me ask, which teaching has the more of system in it,
     that which regards the doctrines of revelation as isolated truths,
     so far as they are not connected in Scripture itself, or that which
     pares away part, and forcibly deals with the rest, till they are all
     brought down to an end cognizable by the human mind? It must be
     observed that the author expressly sanctions the formation of a
     system, which Catholic believers do not. He proceeds,

     "The common-sense system of a religion consists in two
     connexions,--first the connexion between the doctrines and the
     character of God which they exhibit; and secondly, the connexion
     between these same doctrines and the character which they are
     intended to impress on the mind of man. When, therefore, we are
     considering a religious doctrine, our questions ought to be, first,
     What view does this doctrine give of the character of G OD in
     relation to sinners? And secondly, What influence is the belief of
     it calculated to exercise on the character of man? . . . . The first
     of these questions leads us to consider the Atonement as an act
     necessarily resulting from, and simply developing principles in the
     Divine mind, altogether independent of its effects on the hearts of
     those who are interested in it. The second leads us to consider the
     adaptation of the history of the Atonement, when believed, to the
     moral wants and capacities of the human mind. ..... There is
     something very striking and wonderful in this adaptation; and the
     deeper we search into it, the stronger reason shall we discover for
     admiration and gratitude, and the more thoroughly shall we be
     convinced that it is not a lucky coincidence, not an adjustment
     contrived by the precarious and temporizing wisdom of this world,
     but that it is stamped with the uncounterfeited seal of the
     universal Ruter, and carries on it the traces of that same mighty
     will, which has connected the sun with his planetary train, and
     fixed the great relations in nature, appointing to each atom its
     bound that it cannot pass." pp. 97--100.

     These last remarks are true of course in their place; so far as we
     think we see an adaptation, even though Scripture does not expressly
     mention it, let us praise God and be thankful;--but it is one thing
     to trace humbly and thankfully what we surmise to be GOD'S
     handywork, and so far as we think we see it, and quite another thing
     to propound our surmises dogmatically, not only as true, but as the
     substance of the revelation, the test of what is important in it,
     and what not; nay, of what is really part of it, and what not.
     Presently he says as follows:--

     "The doctrine of the Atonement is the great subject of Revelation.
     GOD is represented as delighting in it, as being glorified by it,
     and as being most fully manifested by it. All the other doctrines
     radiate from this as their centre. In subservience to it, the
     distinction in the unity of the Godhead has been revealed. It is
     described as the everlasting theme of praise and song amongst the
     blessed who surround the throne of GOD." pp. 101, 102.

     Now that the doctrine of the Atonement is so essential a doctrine
     that none other is more so, (true as it is,) does not at all hinder
     other doctrines in their own place being so essential that they may
     not be moved one inch from it, or made to converge towards that
     doctrine ever so little, beyond the sanction of Scripture. There is
     surely a difference between being prominent and being paramount. To
     take the illustration of the human body: the brain is the noblest
     organ, but have not the heart, and the lungs their own essential
     rights (so to express myself,) their own independent claims upon the
     regard of the physician? Will not he be justly called a theorist who
     resolves all diseases into one, and refers general healthiness to
     one organ as its seat and cause?

     One additional observation is to be made on Mr. Erskine's view of
     the Atonement. He considers, in common with many other writers of
     his general way of thinking, that in that most solemn and wonderful
     event, we have a Manifestation, not only of GOD'S love, but of His
     justice. E. g.

     "The distinction of persons in the Divine nature we cannot
     comprehend, but we can easily comprehend the high and engaging
     morality of that character of GOD, which is developed in the history
     of the New Testament. GOD gave His equal and well-beloved Son, to
     suffer in the state of an apostate world: and through this
     exhibition of awful justice, He publishes the fullest and freest
     pardon. He thus teaches us, that it forms no part of His scheme of
     mercy to dissolve the eternal connexion between sin and misery. No;
     this connexion stands sure; and one of the chief objects of Divine
     Revelation, is to convince men of this Truth; and Justice does the
     work of mercy, when it alarms us to a sense of danger, &c." p. 74.

     Again:

     "The design of the Atonement was to make mercy towards this offcast
     race consistent with the honour and the holiness of the Divine
     Government. To accomplish this gracious purpose, the Eternal Word,
     who was God, took on himself the nature of man, and as the elder
     brother and representative and champion of the guilty family, he
     solemnly acknowledged the justice of the sentence pronounced against
     sin, and submitted Himself to its full weight of woe, in the stead
     of His adopted kindred. God's justice found rest here; His law was
     magnified and made honourable, &c." pp. 102, 103.

     The view maintained in these and other extracts, and by others
     besides Mr. Erskine, is remarkable for several reasons. First, for
     the determination it evinces not to leave us any thing in the gospel
     system unknown, unaccounted for. One might have thought that here at
     least somewhat of awful Mystery would have been allowed to hang over
     it; here at least some "depth" of GOD'S counsels would have been
     acknowledged and accepted on faith. For though the death of Christ
     manifests GOD'S hatred of sin, as well as His love for man,
     (inasmuch as it was sin that made His death necessary, and the
     greater the sacrifice the greater must have been the evil that
     caused it,) yet how His death expiated our sins, and what
     satisfaction it was to GOD'S justice, are surely subjects quite
     above us. It is in no sense a great and glorious Manifestation of
     His justice, as men speak now-a-days; it is an event ever mysterious
     on account of its necessity, while it is fearful from the hatred of
     sin implied in it, and most transporting and elevating from its
     display of GOD'S love to man. But Rationalism would account for
     every thing.

     Next it must be observed, as to Mr. Erskine himself, that he is of
     necessity forced by his hypothesis thus to speak of it, however
     extravagant it may be to do so. For unless GOD'S justice mere
     manifested to our comprehension in the Atonement, the dispensation
     would not be a "Manifestation," the revealed scheme would be
     imperfect, doctrines would be severed from ascertain-able moral
     effects on the character,--which the Catholic Church indeed has ever
     considered, but which Mr. E. pronounces in the outset to be contrary
     to reason, and fatal to the claims of a professed revelation.

     An additional remark is in place. The difficulty here pointed out
     has been felt by writers who agree with Mr. Erskine, and they have
     contrived to get rid of the remaining Mystery of the Dispensation,
     resulting from the question of justice, as follows. They refer GOD'S
     justice to the well-being of His creation, as a final end, as if it
     might in fact be considered a modification of benevolence.
     Accordingly, they say GOD'S justice was satisfied by the Atonement,
     inasmuch as He could then pardon man consistently with the good of
     His creation; consistently with their salutary terror of His power
     and strictness; consistently with the due order of His Government.
     This should be carefully noted, as showing us the tendency of the
     Rationalistic principle under review towards Utilitarianism. The
     following passage is given in illustration, from the Essays of Mr.
     Scott of Aston Sandford.

     "The story of Zaleucus, prince of the Locrians, is well-known: to
     show his abhorrence of adultery, and his determination to execute
     the law he had enacted, condemning the adulterer to the loss of both
     his eyes, and at the same time to evince his love to his son who had
     committed that crime, he willingly submitted to lose one of his own
     eyes, and ordered at the same time one of his sons to be put out!
     Now what adulterer could hope to escape, when power was vested in a
     man whom neither self-love, nor natural affection in its greatest
     force, could induce to dispense with the law, or relax the rigour of
     its sentence?" Essay ix.

     True, this act would show intense energy of determination to uphold
     the existing laws, clearly enough; and so did Mucius Scaevola show
     intense energy in burning off his hand; but what is this to the
     question of justice?

     One more subject of examination, and that not the least important,
     is suggested by the foregoing passages. Mention has been made in
     them once or twice of the facts of revelation; the doctrines are
     said to be facts, and such facts to be all in all. Now according to
     Catholic teaching, doctrines are divine truths, which are the
     objects of faith, not of sight; we may call them facts, if we will,
     so that we recollect that they are sometimes facts of the unseen
     world, not of this, and that they are not synonymous with actions or
     works. But Mr. E., by a remarkable assumption, rules it that
     doctrines are facts of the revealed divine governance, so that a
     doctrine is made the same as a divine action or work. As Providence
     has given us a series of moral facts by nature, as in the history of
     nations or of the individual, from which we deduce the doctrines of
     natural religion, so Scripture is supposed to reveal a second series
     of facts, or works, in the course of the three dispensations,
     especially the Christian, which are the doctrines of religion, or at
     least, which together with the principle involved in them, are the
     doctrines. Thus Christ's death upon the cross is an historical fact;
     the meaning of it is what illustrates and quickens it, and adapts it
     for influencing the soul. Now if we ask, how on this theory the
     doctrine of the Trinity is a fact in the divine governance, we are
     answered that it must be thrown into another shape, if I may so
     express myself; it must be made subordinate, and separated into
     parts. The series of Christian facts passes from the birth to the
     death of Christ, and thence to the mission of the Holy Ghost. We
     must view the divinity of Christ in His death, the divinity of the
     Spirit in His mission. That they are therein exhibited, I grant; but
     the theory requires us to consider this the scriptural mode of their
     exhibition. This theory is supposed by some of its upholders to be
     sanctioned by Butler; for they seem to argue, that as the course of
     nature is a collection of manifested facts, so is the course of
     grace. But that great divine knew better than to infer, from what he
     saw, what was to be expected in a Revelation, were it to be granted.
     He asserts plainly the contrary; his whole argument is merely
     negative, defending Christianity as far as nature enables him to do
     so,--not limiting the course of the revelation to the analogy of
     nature. Accordingly the Church Catholic has ever taught, (as in her
     Creeds,) that there are facts revealed to us, not of this world, not
     of time, but of eternity, and that absolutely and independently; not
     merely embodied and indirectly conveyed in a certain historical
     course, not subordinate to the display of the Divine character, not
     revealed merely relatively to us, but primary objects of our faith,
     and essential in themselves, whatever dependence or influence they
     may have upon other doctrines, or upon the course of the
     Dispensation. In a word, it has taught the existence of Mysteries in
     religion, for such emphatically must truths ever be which are
     external to this world, and existing in eternity;--whereas this
     narrow-minded, jejune, officious, and presumptuous human system
     teaches nothing but a Manifestation, i. e. a series of historical
     works conveying a representation of the moral character of GOD; and
     it dishonours our holy faith by the unmeaning reproach of its being
     metaphysical, abstract, and the like,--a reproach, unmeaning and
     irreverent, just as much so as it would be on the other hand to call
     the historical facts earthly or carnal.

     I will quote some passages from Mr. E.'s work, to justify my account
     of his view, and then shall be able, at length, to take leave of
     him.

     "It may be proper to remark, that the acts attributed to the Divine
     Government are usually termed 'doctrines,' to distinguish them from
     the moral precepts of a religion." p. 25.

     Thus the doctrine of the Trinity, as such, is not a doctrine of the
     Gospel. Again:

     "It is not enough to show, in proof of its authenticity, that the
     facts which it affirms concerning the dealings of GOD with His
     creatures, do exhibit His moral perfections in the highest degree,
     it must also be shown that these facts, when present to the mind of
     man, do naturally, according to the constitution of his being, tend
     to excite and suggest that combination of feelings which constitutes
     his moral perfection. But when we read a history which
     authoritatively claims, to be an exhibition of the character of GOD
     in His dealings with men; if we find in it that which fills and
     overflows our most dilated conceptions of moral worth, &c.; . . .
     and if our reason farther discovers a system ofpowerful moral
     stimulants, embodied in the facts of this history; .... if we
     discern that the spirit of this history gives peace to the
     conscience, &c.; .... we may then well believe that GOD has been
     pleased in pity, &c. . . to clothe the eternal laws which K:gulate
     His spiritual government, in such a form as may be palpable to our
     conceptions, and adapted to the urgency of our necessities." pp. 18.
     19.

     "I mean to show that there is an intelligible and necessary
     connection between the doctrinal facts of revelation and the
     character of God ..... and farther that the belief of these
     doctrinal facts has an intelligible and necessary tendency to
     produce the Christian character, &c." p. 20, 21.

     "The object of this dissertation, is to analyse the component parts
     of the Christian scheme of doctrine, with reference to its bearings
     both on the character of GOD and on the character of man; and to
     demonstrate that its facts, not only present an expressive
     exhibition of all the moral qualities which can be conceived to
     reside in the divine mind, but also contain all those objects which
     have a natural tendency to excite and suggest in the human mind,
     that combination of moral feelings which has been termed moral
     perfection." p. 16.

     "God has been pleased to present to us a most interesting series of
     actions, in which His moral character, as far as we are concerned,
     is fully and perspicuously embodied. In this narration, &c." p. 55.

     "It [the Gospel] addresses the learned and the unlearned, the savage
     and the civilized, the decent and the profligate; and to all it
     speaks precisely the same language? What then is this universal
     language? It cannot be the language of metaphysical discussion, or
     what is called abstract moral reasoning......its argument consists
     in a relation of facts." p. 55.

     Now that in these passages, the doctrines of the Gospel are resolved
     into facts which took place in GOD'S governance, and that its
     mysteries are admitted, only so far as they are qualities or
     illustrations of these historical facts, seems to me, not only the
     true, but the only interpretation to be put upon his words. If they
     do riot mean this, let this at least be proposed, as an
     approximation to the real meaning; in the meanwhile, let it be
     observed that nothing which has been said in the former portions of
     this discussion is at all affected by any failing, if so, in having
     fully elicited it.

                ยง 3. Remarks on Mr. Abbott's "Corner Stone."

     HERE then we have arrived at a point where we part company with Mr.
     Erskine, and join Mr. Abbott, who advances further in a most
     perilous career. The principle with which Mr. E. began has been
     above discovered to issue in a view of the Gospel, which may be
     contemplated apart from that principle. That the human mind may
     criticise and systematise the divine revelation, that it may
     identify it with the Dispensation, that it may limit the uses of the
     latter to its workings through our own reason and affections, and
     such workings as we can ascertain and comprehend, in a word, that
     the Gospel is a Manifestation, this is the fundamental principle of
     Mr. Erskine's Essay. Mr. Jacob Abbott seems so fully to take this
     principle for granted, that it would be idle to do more than notice
     his doing so; it will he more to the purpose to direct attention to
     his treatment of the theory, in which Mr. Erskine's principle seems
     to issue, viz. that the Gospel is a collection of facts. I am now
     referring to Mr. Abbott's work called "the Corner Stone," which I do
     not hesitate to say approaches within a hair's breadth of
     Socinianism; a change which I would by no means urge against Mr. E.,
     whatever be the tendency of his speculations.

     In the work in question Mr. Abbott disclaims entering into
     theological questions, properly so called (Preface, p. vi.); nor is
     there any necessity for his entering into them, so that the line of
     discussion which he does take, does not intrude upon them or provoke
     them.

     "I have made this exhibition of the Gospel," he says, "with
     reference to its moral effect on human hearts, and not for the
     purpose of taking sides in a controversy between different parties
     of Christians."

     Again,

     "A system of theology is a map or plan, in which every feature of
     the country roust be laid down in its proper place and proportion;
     this work is on the other hand a series of views, as the traveller
     sees them in passing over a certain road. In this case, the road
     which I have taken, leads indeed through the heart of the country,
     but it does not by any means bring to view all which is interesting
     or important. The reader will perceive that the history of JESUS
     CHRIST is the clue which I have endeavoured to follow; that is, the
     work is intended to exhibit religious truth, as it is connected with
     the various events in the life of our Saviour, in first introducing
     Him to the scene, I consider His exalted nature as the great moral
     Manifestation of the Divinity to us. Then follows a view of His
     personal character, and of His views of religious duty, &c." pp. vi.
     vii.

     Let us observe here the similarity of language between the two
     writers I am speaking of. They are evidently of the same school.
     They both direct their view to the Gospel history as a Manifestation
     of the Divine Character; and though, in the above extracts, Mr.
     Abbott speaks more guardedly than Mr. Erskine, there will be found
     to be little or no practical difference between them. But there
     seems this most important distinction in their respective
     applications of their theory, though not very distinct or observable
     at first sight; that Mr. E. admits into the range of divine facts
     such as are not of this world, as the voluntary descent of Christ
     from heaven to earth, and his Incarnation, whereas Mr. A. virtually
     limits it to the witnessed history of Christ upon earth. This, so
     far as it exists, is all the difference between orthodoxy and
     Socinianism.

     For this encroachment Mr. E. indeed had prepared the way; for he
     certainly throws the high doctrines of religion into the background;
     and the word "Manifestation" far more naturally fits on to a history
     witnessed by human beings, than to dispositions belonging to the
     unseen world. But Mr. E. certainly has not taught this explicitly.

     If we wish to express the sacred Mystery of the Incarnation
     accurately, we should rather say that GOD is man, than that man is
     GOD. Not that the latter proposition is not altogether Catholic in
     its wording, but the former expresses the history of the Economy,
     (if I may so call it,) and confines our LORD'S personality to His
     divine nature, making His manhood an adjunct; whereas to say that
     man is GOD, does the contrary of both of these,--leads us to
     consider Him a man personally, with some vast and unknown dignity
     superadded, and that acquired of course after His coming into
     existence as man. The difference between these two modes of speaking
     is well illustrated in the recent work of a Socinian writer, whom on
     account of the truth and importance of his remarks, it is right,
     with whatever pain, to quote.

     "A quick child, though not acquainted with logic, . . . will
     perceive the absurdity of saying that Edward is John. .... As the
     young pupil must be prepared to infer from the New Testament, that a
     perfect man is perfect GOD, he ..... must be imperceptibly led to
     consider the word GOD as expressing a quality, or an aggregate of
     qualities, which may be predicted of more than one, as the name of a
     species; just as when we say John is man, Peter is man, Andrew is
     man. .... And so it is, with the exception of a few who, in this
     country, are still acquainted with that ingeniously perverse system
     of words, by means of which the truly scholastic Trinitarians (such
     as Bishop Bull and Waterland, who had accurately studied the fathers
     and the schoolmen,) appear to evade the logical contradictions with
     which the doctrine of the Trinity abounds; all, as I have observed
     for many years, take the word GOD, in regard to Christ, as the name
     of a species, and more frequently of a dignity."--Heresy and
     Orthodoxy, p. 91.

     It will be observed of this passage, that the writer implies that
     the orthodox mode of speaking of the Incarnation is not exposed to a
     certain consequence, to which the mode at present popular is
     exposed, viz. the tendency to explain away Christ's divinity. Man is
     GOD, is the popular mode of speech; GOD is man, is the Catholic. To
     return. It seems then that Mr. Erskine proceeds in the orthodox way,
     illustrating the doctrine that GOD became man; Mr. A. starting with
     the earthly existence of our LORD does but enlarge upon the doctrine
     that a man is GOD. Mr. Erskine enforces the Atonement, as a
     Manifestation of GOD'S moral character; Mr. A. the life of CHRIST
     with the same purpose,--with but slight reference to the doctrine of
     the Expiation, for of course he whose life began with his birth from
     Mary, had given up nothing, and died merely because other men die.
     Here then is something very like Socinianism at first sight.

     But again, let us see how he conducts his argument. Here again he
     differs from Mr. E. The latter considers the incarnation of the Son
     of God to be a manifestation of God's mercy. Here then in his view,
     which so far is correct, there is a double Manifestation,--of the
     Sonof God personally in human nature, and of God morally in the
     history and circumstances of His incarnation; though Mr. E/s
     argument leads him to insist on the latter. Mr. A. assumes the
     latter as the sole Manifestation, thus bringing out the tendency of
     Mr. E.'s argument. In other words, he considers our Lord Jesus
     Christ as a man primarily, not indeed a mere man, any more than the
     conversion of the world was a mere human work, but not more than a
     man aided by God, just as the conversion of the world was a human
     work aided and blessed by God; a man in intimate union, nay in
     mysterious union with God, as Moses might be on the Mount, but not
     more than Moses except in degree. He considers that certain
     attributes of the Godhead were manifested in Jesus Christ, in the
     sense in which the solar system manifests His power, or the animal
     economy His wisdom; which is a poorly concealed Socinianism.--So
     this, it appears, is what really comes of declaiming against
     "metaphysical" notions of the revelation, and enlarging on its moral
     character!

     That I may not be unfair to Mr. A., I proceed to cite his words:

     "In the first place, let us take a survey of the visible universe,
     that we may see what manifestations of God appear in it. Let us
     imagine that we can see with the naked eye all that the telescope
     would show us; and then, in order that we may obtain an
     uninterrupted view, let us leave this earth, and, ascending from its
     surface, take a station where we can look, without obstruction, upon
     all around. As we rise above the summits of the loftiest mountains,
     the bright and verdant regions of the earth begin to grow dim. City
     after city, &c. As the last breath of its atmosphere draws off from
     us, it leaves us in the midst of universal night, with a sky
     extending without interruption all around us, and bringing out to
     our view, in every possible direction, innumerable and interminable
     vistas of stars......Our globe itself cuts off one half of the
     visible universe at all times, and the air spreads over us a deep
     canopy of blue, which during the day, shuts out entirely the other
     half. But were the field open, we should see in every direction the
     endless perspective of suns and stars, as I have described them ...
     The conception of childhood, and it is one which clings to us in
     maturer years, that above the blue sky there is a heaven concealed,
     where the Deity sits enthroned, is a delusive one. God is
     everywhere..... The deity is the All-pervading Power, which lives
     and acts throughout the whole. He is not a separate existence,
     having a special habitation in a part of it.... The striking and
     beautiful metaphors of the Bible never were intended to give us this
     idea. God is a Spirit, it says, in its most emphatic tone. A Spirit;
     that is, he has no form, no place, no throne. Where He acts, there
     only can we see Him. He is the wide-spread omnipresent power, which
     is every where employed, but which we can never see, and never know,
     except so far as He shall manifest Himself by His doings.

     "If we thus succeed in obtaining just conceptions of the Deity, as
     the invisible and universal power, pervading all space, and existing
     in all time, we shall at once perceive that the only way by which He
     can make Himself known to His creatures, is by acting Himself out,
     as it were, in His works; and of course the nature of the
     Manifestation which is made will depend upon the nature of the
     works. In the structure of a solar system, with its blazing centre
     and revolving worlds, the Deity, invisible itself, acts out its
     mighty power, and the unerring perfection of its intellectual skill.
     At the same time, while it is carrying on these mighty movements, it
     is exercising, in a very different scene, its untiring industry, and
     unrivalled taste, in clothing a mighty forest with verdure, &c.
     &c..... And so everywhere this unseen and universal essence acts out
     its various attributes by its different works. We can learn its
     nature only by the character of the effects which spring from it ...

     "This universal essence, then, must display to us its nature, by
     acting itself out in a thousand places, by such manifestations of
     itself as it wishes us to understand. Does God desire to impress us
     with the idea of His power? He darts the lightning, &c. &c. Does He
     wish to beam upon us in love? What can be more expressive than the
     sweet summer sunset, &c.....How can He make us acquainted with His
     benevolence and skill? Why, by acting them out in some mechanism
     which exhibits them. He may construct an eye or a hand for man, &c.
     How can He give us some conception of His intellectual powers? He
     can plan the motions of the planets, &c. &c....... But the great
     question, after all, is to come. It is the one to which we have
     meant that all we have been saying should ultimately tend. How can
     such a Being exhibit the moral principle by which His mighty
     energies are all controlled?" pp. 6--14.

     It is impossible to do justice to one's feelings of distress and
     dismay on studying this passage,--to explain what one thinks of it,
     and why,--to convince a careless reader that one's language about it
     is not extravagant. Nor is it necessary perhaps, as it does not
     directly bear upon the subject before us,--to which I will hasten
     on. I interrupt the course of his exposition merely to put in a
     protest against the doctrine of it, which, to speak shortly and
     plainly, is pantheistic, and against the spirit of it, which
     breathes an irreverence approaching to blasphemy. Should the reader
     think the tone of this paragraph is out of keeping with the remarks
     as yet made, he will see in a little time that Mr. Abbott does not
     allow one to preserve that didactic or critical air, which is
     commonly appropriate to a discussion such as the present. To
     proceed, however, with our immediate subject, the author's views,
     not of natural, but revealed religion:--

     "He is an unseen, universal power, utterly invisible to us, and
     imperceptible, except so far as He shall act out His attributes in
     what He does. How shall He act out moral principle? It is easy, by
     his material creation, to make any impression upon us, which
     material objects can make; but how shall He exhibit to us the moral
     beauty of justice and benevolence and mercy between man and man? . .
     . . He might declare His moral attributes as He might have declared
     His power; but if He would bring home to us the one as vividly and
     distinctly as the other, He must act out His moral principles by a
     moral manifestation, in a moral scene; and the great beauty of
     Christianity is, that it represents Him as doing so. He brings out
     the purity, and spotlessness, and moral glory of the Divinity,
     through the workings of a human mind, called into existence for this
     purpose, and stationed in a most conspicuous attitude among men.
     Thus the moral perfections of divinity show themselves to us in the
     only way by which, so far as we can see, it is possible directly to
     show them, by coming out in action, in the very field of human duty,
     by a mysterious union with a human intellect and human powers. It is
     God manifest in the flesh; the visible moral image of an
     all-pervading moral Deity, Himself for ever invisible." pp. 14, 15.

     On this explanation of the Incarnation, now alas, not unpopular even
     in our own Church, viz. that "God manifest in the flesh" is "the
     visible moral image" of God, let us hear the judgment of one who was
     a Trinitarian, and has lately avowed Socinianism. He thus relates
     the change in his own religious profession:

     "In my anxiety to avoid a separation from the Church by the
     deliberate surrender of my mind to my old Unitarian convictions, I
     took refuge in a modification of the Sabellian theory, and availed
     myself of the moral unity which I believe to exist between God the
     Father and Christ, joined to the consideration that Christ is called
     in the New Testament the Image of God, and addressed my prayers to
     God as appearing in that Image. I left nothing untried to cultivate
     and encourage this feeling by devotional means. Rut such efforts of
     mere feeling (and I confess with shame their frequency on my part
     for the sake of what seemed most religious) were always vain and
     fruitless. Sooner or later my reason has not only frustrated but
     punished them. In the last mentioned instance, the devout
     contrivance would not hear examination. Sabellianism is only
     Unitarianism disguised in words: and as for the worship of an image
     in its absence, the idea is most unsatisfactory. In this state,
     however, I passed five or six years; but the return to the clear and
     definite Unitarianism in which I had formerly been, was as easy as
     it was natural."--Heresy and Orthodoxy, p. viii.

     This passage proves thus much, not that the philosophising in
     question leads to Socinianism, but that it is one under which
     Socinianism may lie hid, even from a man's own consciousness; and
     this is just the use I wish to make of it against Mr. Abbott. He
     ends as follows:

     "The substance of the view, which I have been wishing to impress
     upon your minds, is, that we are to expect to see Him solely through
     the manifestations He makes of Himself in His works. We have seen in
     what way some of the traits of His character are displayed in the
     visible creation, and how at last He determined to manifest His
     moral character, by bringing it into action through the medium of a
     human soul. The plan was carrier! into effect, and the mysterious
     person thus formed appears for the first time to our view in the
     extraordinary boy, &c." pp. 15, 16.

     In these passages it seems to be clearly maintained that our Lord is
     a Manifestation of God in precisely that way in which His creatures
     are, though in a different respect, viz. as regards His moral
     attributes,--a Manifestation, not having any thing in it essentially
     peculiar and incommunicable, and therefore "a Manifestation" as he
     in one passage expresses himself, not the Manifestation of the
     Father.

     Further he expressly disclaims any opinion concerning the essential
     and superhuman relation, or (as he calls it) the "metaphysical"
     relation of the Son to the Father, in a passage which involves a
     slight upon other doctrines of a most important, though not of such
     a sacred character.

     "Another source of endless and fruitless discussion, is disputing
     about questions which can be of no practical consequence, however
     they may be decided; such as the origin of sin,"

     does this mean original sin?

     "the state of the soul between death and the resurrection, the
     salvation of infants."

     is it possible he should thus talk!

     "The precise metaphysical relationship of the Son to the Father." p.
     323

     Why called metaphysical, I do not understand, but we have been
     already introduced to this word by Mr. Erskine, whose original
     fallacy also, be it observed, is faithfully preserved in this
     passage;--"questions which can be of no practical consequence," as
     if we have any warrant thus to limit, or to decide upon, the
     gracious revelations of God. He continues,

     "We have said they are of no practical consequence; of course an
     ingenious reason can contrive to connect practical consequences with
     any subject whatever, and in his zeal he will exaggerate the
     importance of the connexion;"

     I interrupt the reader, to remind him that the subjects spoken of in
     this careless self-satisfied way, are those which from the first
     have been preserved in Creeds and Confessions as the most necessary,
     most solemn truths;--

     "in fact every subject in the moral world is more or less connected
     with every other one; nothing stands out entirely detached and
     isolated, and consequently a question which its arguers will admit
     to be merely a theoretical one, will never be found." p. 32, 4.

     But if so, who shall draw the line between truths practical and
     theoretical? Shall we trust the work to such as Mr. A.? Surely this
     passage refutes his own doctrine. We also say that there are no two
     subjects in religion but may be connected by our minds, and
     therefore, for what we know, perchance are connected in fact. All we
     maintain in addition, is, that evidence of the fact of that
     connexion is not necessary for the proof of their importance to us,
     and further, that we have no right to pronounce that they are
     revealed merely with a view to their importance to us.

     He disposes of the Catholic doctrine of Christ's eternal Son-ship by
     calling it metaphysical: how he escapes from the Catholic doctrine
     of the Incarnation we have already seen,--he resolves it into a
     moral Manifestation of God in the person of Christ. But his view
     requires a few more words of explanation. First he speaks of God in
     pantheistic language, as an Anima Mundi, or universal essence, who
     has no known existence except in His works, as an all-pervading
     power or principle not external to the created world, but in it, and
     developed through it. He goes on to say that Almighty God, who is
     thus illimitable and incomprehensible, is exhibited in personal
     attributes in Christ, as if all the laws and provisions in which He
     energizes in nature impersonally, were condensed and exemplified in
     a real personal being. Hence he calls our Lord by a strange term,
     the personification of God, i. e. (I suppose) the personal image, or
     the manifestation in a person. In other words God, whose person is
     unknown in nature, in spite of His works, is revealed in Christ, who
     is the express image of His person; and just in this, and (as I
     conceive) nothing more, would he conceive there was a difference
     between the manifestation of God in Christ and the Manifestation of
     Him in a plant or flower. Christ is a personal Manifestation.
     Whether there be any elements of truth in this theory, I do not
     concern myself to decide; thus much is evident, that he so applies
     it as utterly to explain away the real divinity of our Lord. The
     passages are as follow:--

     "It is by Jesus Christ that we have access to the Father. This vivid
     exhibition of His character, this personification of His moral
     attributes, opens to us the way. Here we see a manifestation of
     divinity, an image of the Invisible God, which comes as it were down
     to us; it meets our feeble faculties with a personification," &c. p.
     40.

     "We accordingly commenced with His childhood, and were led at once
     into a train of reflection on the nature and the character of that
     eternal and invisible essence, whose attributes were personified in
     Him." p. 192.

     "The human mind . . . reaches forward for some vision of the
     Divinity, the great unseen and inconceivable essence. Jesus Christ
     is the personification of the divinity for us, the brightness of His
     glory and the express image of His person." p. 200.

     Next, as to his opinions concerning the doctrine of the Atonement. I
     will not deny that some of his general expressions are correct, and
     taken by themselves, would be satisfactory; but they are invalidated
     altogether by what he has at other times advanced. It may be
     recollected that Mr. E., in his treatise on Internal Evidence, lays
     such a stress upon the use of the Atonement as a Manifestation, as
     to throw the real doctrine itself into the shade.

     Viewed in itself, Christ's death is, we believe, a sacrifice acting
     in some unknown way for the expiation of human sin; but Mr. E. views
     it, (as indeed it may well be viewed, but exclusively as it should
     not be viewed,) as a mark and pledge of God's love to us, which it
     would be, though it were not an Expiation. Even though Christ's
     incarnation issued in nothing more than His preaching to the world
     and sealing His doctrine with His blood, it would be a great sign of
     His love, and a pledge now of our receiving blessings through Him;
     for why should He die except He meant to be merciful to us? but this
     would not involve the necessity of an expiation. St. Paul died for
     the Church, and showed his love for it in this sense. When then the
     view of the Christian is limited, as Mr. E. would almost wish it to
     be, to the Manifestation of the Atonement, or the effect of the
     Atonement on our minds, no higher doctrine is of necessity elicited
     than that of its being a sign of God's mercy, as the rainbow might
     be, and a way is laid, by obscuring, to obliterate the true doctrine
     concerning it. So far Mr. E. proceeds, not denying it (far from it)
     but putting it aside in his philosophical evidence: Mr. A., upon the
     very same basis, is bolder in his language, and almost, if not
     altogether gets rid of it.

     In the following passage he applies Mr. Erskine's doctrine of the
     moral lesson, taught in Christ's death, of the justice and mercy of
     God; and he will be found distinctly to assert that the virtue of it
     lay in this, viz. that it was a declaration of God's hatred of sin,
     the same in kind as the punishment of the sinner would have been,
     only more perfect, a means of impressing on us His hatred of sin;
     not as if it really reconciled us to an offended Creator.

     "The balm for your wounded spirit is this, that the moral impression
     in respect to the nature and tendencies of sin, which is the only
     possible reason God can have in leaving you to suffer its
     penalties,"

     one should think the reason might be that "the wages of sin is
     death,"

     "is accomplished far better by the life and death of His Son;--"

     surely it is a greater balm to know that Christ has put away the
     wrath of God, as Scripture says, than to theorize about "moral
     impressions" beyond the word of Scripture. Observe too he says "the
     life and death," excluding the proper idea of Atonement, which lies
     in the death of Christ, and so tending to resolve it into a
     Manifestation.

     "God never could have wished to punish you for the sake of doing
     evil;"

     how unspeakably bold; when God says he does punish the sinner, not
     indeed for the sake of evil, but as a just and holy God!

     "and all the good which He could have accomplished by it, is already
     effected in another and a better way." p. 179

     Here is the same assumption which was just now instanced from the
     writings of Mr. Scott, of Aston Sandford, that God cannot inflict
     punishment except for the sake of a greater good, or, (as Mr. A.
     himself has expressed it just before) "because the welfare of His
     government requires" it, which is an altogether gratuitous
     statement.

     Again:

     "A knowledge of the death of Christ, with the explanation of it
     given in the Scriptures, touches men's hearts, it shows the nature
     and tendencies of sin, it produces fear of God's displeasure, and
     resolution to return to duty; and thus produces effects by which
     justice is satisfied,"--

     observe, not by an expiation, but by the repentance of the offender
     in consequence of the "moral impression" attendant on the
     "Manifestation" of Christ's death,--

     "and the authority of the law sustained far better in fact, than it
     would be by the severest punishment of the guilty sinner." p. 174.

     "Look at the moral effect of this great sacrifice, and feel that it
     takes off all the necessity of punishment, and all the burden of
     your guilt." p. 190.

     The necessity of punishment is (according to Mr. A.) the well being
     of the Universe: and the virtue of the great sacrifice is, not
     expiation, atonement in God's sight, but the moral effect of
     Christ's death on those who believe in it. So again, in a passage
     lately quoted for another purpose:

     "It is by Jesus Christ that we have access to the Father. This vivid
     exhibition of His character, this personification of His moral
     attributes, opens to us the way." p. 40.

     Lastly, we have the same stress laid upon the facts of the Gospel as
     in Mr. Erskine's work, with this difference, that Mr. Erskine
     supposes the orthodox doctrine, or what he considers such, to be
     conveyed in the facts; Mr. Abbott, with the liberalism to which his
     predecessor leads, but which is more characteristic of this day than
     of fifteen years ago, seems to think that various theories may be
     raised about the facts, whether orthodox or otherwise, but that the
     facts alone are of consequence to us.

     "Such are the three great Manifestations of Himself to man, which
     the one Unseen All-pervading Essence has made, and exhibited to us
     in the Bible, and in our own experience and observation,"--

     --This sentence, be it observed in passing, savours strongly of
     Sabellianism; he has spoken of what he calls three Manifestations of
     Almighty God, as our natural Governor, as influencing the heart, and
     as in Jesus Christ, without there being any thing in his way of
     speaking to show, that he attributed these Manifestations
     respectively to Three Persons. He proceeds:

     "Though there have been interminable disputes in the Christian
     Church about the language which has been employed to describe these
     facts, there has been comparatively little dispute among even
     nominal Christians about the facts themselves." p. 39.

     Such is the theology to which Mr. E.'s principle is found to lead in
     the bands of Mr. Abbott; a theology, (so to name it,) which
     violently robs the Christian Creed of all it contains, except those
     outward historical facts through which its divine truths were
     fulfilled and revealed to man.

     This brief explanation of Mr. Abbott's theological system may be
     fitly followed up by some specimens of the temper and tone of his
     religions sentiments. In this way we shall be able to ascertain the
     state of mind which such speculations presuppose and foster.

     "Jesus Christ had a taste for beauty, both of nature and art; He
     admired the magnificent architecture of the Temple, and deeply
     lamented the necessity of its overthrow, and his dress was at least
     of such a character, that the disposal of it was a subject of
     importance to the well paid soldiers who crucified him." P. 50, 51.

     I put aside the utter unreasonableness of this last remark; but let
     us think seriously, is CHRIST GOD, or is He not? if so, can we dare
     talk of Him as having "a taste for nature?" It is true Mr. A. does
     speak in this way of the Almighty Father also; so that it may be
     said rather to prove that He has a grovelling conception of GOD than
     of CHRIST. Perhaps it will be more truly said that his irreverence
     towards the Saviour, has led on to the other more direct
     profaneness. Yet a "taste for beauty of art.'" This of the Eternal
     Son of GOD, the Creator; will it be said that He is man also?
     true;--but His personality is in His Godhead, if I may express
     myself in theological language. He did not undo what He was before,
     He did not cease to be the Infinite GOD, but He added to Him the
     substance of a man, and thus participated in human thoughts and
     feelings, yet without impairing (God forbid) His divine perfection.
     The Incarnation was not "a conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but
     a taking of the manhood into GOD." It seems there is need of the
     Athanasian creed in these dangerous times. A mystery, indeed,
     results from this view, for certain attributes of Divinity and of
     manhood seem incompatible; and there may be some revealed instances
     in our Lord's history on earth of less than divine thought and
     operation: but because of all this we never must speak, we have
     utterly no warrant to speak, of the Person of the Eternal Word as
     thinking and feeling like a mere man, like a child, or a boy, as
     simply ignorant, imperfect, and dependent on the creature, which is
     Mr. A.'s way. In saying this, I am quite aware that the
     sensitiveness of a Christian mind will at once, without argument,
     shrink from a passage such as that commented on, but I say it by way
     of accounting for its aversion, which, perhaps, it may not be able
     to justify to others. To proceed:--

     "Jesus Christ was in some respects the most bold, energetic,
     decided, and courageous man that ever lived; but in others he was
     the most flexible, submissive, and yielding." p. 51.

     The Son of God made flesh, though a man, is beyond comparison with
     other men; His person is not human; but to say "most of all men" is
     to compare.

     "There never was a mission, or an enterprise of any kind, conducted
     with a more bold, energetic, fearless spirit, than the Saviour's
     mission." p. 52.

     This sentence may not seem objectionable to many people, and as it
     is similar to many others in the work, it may be right to remark
     upon it. The truth is, we have got into a way of, what may be
     called, panegyrizing our Lord's conduct, from our familiarity with
     treatises on External Evidence. It has been the fashion of the day
     to speak as to unbelievers, and, therefore, to level the sacred
     history to the rank of a human record, by way of argument. Hence we
     have learned to view the truth merely externally, i. e. as an
     unbeliever would view it; and so to view and treat it even when we
     are not arguing; which involves, of course, an habitual disrespect
     towards what we hold to be divine, and ought to treat as such. This
     will in part account for the tone in which the history of the Jews
     is sometimes set forth. And it is remarkably illustrated in the work
     before us, which though pointedly addressed only to those, who "have
     confessed their sins and asked forgiveness," who "strive against
     temptation, and seek help from above," (vid. p. l.) yet is
     continually wandering into the external view of CHRIST'S conduct,
     and assumes in a didactic treatise, what is only accidentally
     allowable in controversy.

     "There is something very bold and energetic in the measures He
     adopted in accomplishing His work.... In fact, there perhaps never
     was so great a moral effect produced in three years, on any
     community so extensive, if we consider at all the disadvantages
     incident to the customs of those days. There was no press, no modes
     of extensive written communication, no regularly organized channels
     of intercourse whatever between the different portions of the
     community. He acted under every disadvantage." p. 53, 54.

     Under no disadvantage, if He were GOD. But this is only part of one
     great error under which this writer lies. "There was no press!" What
     notions he has concerning the nature, the strength, and the
     propagation of moral truth!

     "He sought solitude, He shrunk from observation; in fact, almost the
     only enjoyment which he seemed really to love, was His lonely ramble
     at midnight, for rest and prayer.... It is not surprising, that
     after the heated crowds and exhausting labours of the day, He should
     love to retire to silence and seclusion, to enjoy the cool and balmy
     air, the refreshing stillness, and all the beauties and glories of
     midnight among the solitudes of the Galilean hills, to find there
     happy communion with his Father, &c." p. 55.

     The more ordinary and common-place, the more like vulgar life, the
     more carnal the history of the Eternal Son of GOD is made, the more
     does this writer exult, in it. He exults in sinking the higher
     notion of Christ, and in making the flesh the hgemonikon of a Divine
     Essence. Even a prophet or apostle might be conceived to subdue the
     innocent enjoyments of His lower nature to the sovereignty of faith,
     and enjoy this world as an emblem and instrument of the unseen. But
     it is the triumph of Rationalism to level every thing to the lowest
     and most tangible form into which it can be cast, and to view the
     Saviour Himself, not in His mysterious greatness, acting by means of
     human nature, and ministered unto by Angels in it, but as what I
     dare not draw out, lest profane words be necessary,--as akin to
     those lower natures which have but an animal existence.

     "Another thing which exhibits the boldness and enterprise that
     characterized his plans for making an impression on the community,
     was the peculiarly new and original style of public speaking He
     adopted." p. 55.

     "This then is the key to the character of JESUS CHRIST in respect to
     spirit and decision." p. 57.

     "For the real sublimity of courage, the spectacle of this deserted
     and defenceless sufferer coming at midnight to meet the betrayer and
     his band, far exceeds that of Napoleon urging on his columns over
     the bridge of Lodi, or even that of Regulus returning to his
     chains." p. 59, 60.

     One seems to incur some ceremonial pollution by repeating such
     miserable words.

     "He evidently observed, and enjoyed nature. There are many allusions
     to His solitary walks in the fields, and on the mountains, and by
     the sea side, but the greatest evidence of His love for nature is to
     he seen in the manner in which He speaks of its beauties. A man's
     metaphors are drawn from the sources with which he is most familiar,
     or which interest him most." p. 60.

     "We learn in the same manner how distinct were the impressions of
     beauty or sublimity, which the works of nature made upon the
     Saviour, by the manner in which He alluded to them ... Look at the
     lilies of the field, says He.. . . A cold heartless man, without
     taste or sensibility, would not have said such a thing as that. He
     could not; and we may be as sure, that JESUS CHRIST had stopped to
     examine and admire the grace and beauty of the plant, &c." p. 61,
     62.

     "Now JESUS CHRIST noticed these things. He perceived their beauty
     and enjoyed it." p. 62.

     Surely such passages as these are direct evidence of Socinianism.
     Does any one feel curiosity, or wonder, does any one search and
     examine, in the case of things fully known to Him? Could the Creator
     of nature "stop to examine" and "enjoy the grace and beauty" of His
     own work? Were indeed this said of Him, we should say, "Here is one
     of the Mysteries which attend on the Incarnation," but since we
     cannot suspect such writers as Mr. A. of inventing a Mystery for the
     sake of it, we must take it evidence of a carnal and Socinian view
     of the Saviour of mankind.

     "He observed every thing, and His imagination was stored with an
     inexhaustible supply of images, drawn from every source, and with
     these He illustrated and enforced His principles in a manner
     altogether unparalleled by any writings, sacred or profane." p. 63.

     So this is the ashes to be given as children's meat, to those who
     "confess" and repent, and try to know GOD'S will in the Gospel.

     "Even His disciples, till they came to see Him die, had no
     conception of His love. They learned it at last, however. They saw
     Him suffer and die; and inspiration from above explained to them
     something about the influence of His death. They enjoyed its
     benefits long before."--

     All this is presumptuous and unsatisfactory, but let it pass.

     "It is hard to tell which touches our gratitude most sensibly; the
     ardent love which led Him to do what He did, or the delicacy with
     which He refrained from speaking of it, to those who were to reap
     its fruits." p. 94.

     that is, the delicacy towards sinners of an injured Creator, coming
     to atone in some mysterious way by His own sufferings for their sins
     in the sight of GOD and His Father.

     "There is in fact no moral or spiritual safety without these
     feelings, and our Saviour knew this full well.'' p. 204.

     "Jesus Christ understood human nature better.... He was wiser than
     the builders of the pyramids... .The Saviour did the work, and did
     it better, by a few parting words." p. 217.

     Such are the feelings which this writer ventures to express
     concerning Him, who is his Lord and his God. In condemning, however,
     his most unclean and miserable imaginings, I have neither wish nor
     occasion to speak against him as an individual. We have no concern
     with him. We know nothing of his opportunities of knowing better,
     nor how far what appears in his writings is an index of his mind. We
     need only consider him as the organ, involuntary (if you will) or
     unwitting, but still the organ, of the spirit of the age, the voice
     of that scornful, arrogant, and self-trusting spirit, which has been
     unchained during these latter ages, and waxes stronger in power day
     by day, till it is fain to stamp under foot all the host of heaven.
     This spirit we may steadily contemplate to our great edification;
     but to do more than denounce it as such, to judge or revile its
     instruments, would involve another sin besides uncharitableness. For
     surely, this is a spirit which has tempted others besides those who
     have yielded to its influences; and like an infection of the air, it
     has perchance ere now, in some degree, not perhaps as regards the
     high doctrines of the gospel, but in some way or other, breathed
     upon those, who, at the present crisis of things, feel themselves
     called upon solemnly to resist it. The books of the day are so full
     of its evil doctrine in a modified shape, if not in its grosser
     forms, the principles (I may say,) of the nation are so instinct
     with it or based in it, that the best perhaps that can be said of
     any of us, or at most of all but a few, is that they have escaped
     from it, "so as by fire," and that the loudness of their warning is
     but a consequence of past danger, terror, and flight.

     I view the works, then, of this writer, whether in their
     publication, or in their general reception, as signs of the
     religious temper of this Age. What shall be said of the praise that
     has been lavished on them? the popularity they have acquired?
     Granting that there are many things in them, from which a religious
     mind may gain something (for no one accuses Mr. A. of being
     deficient in quickness and intelligence, and he evidently has had
     opportunities of studying human nature, whatever success has
     attended him in it,--and it must be confessed that his first work
     published here was of a less objectionable character, and might well
     interest at first sight those who "thought no evil"), but, allowing
     all this, yet it may be fairly asked, is the book from which I have
     cited, one which can come very near to Christian minds without
     revolting them? How is it then that so many men professing strict
     religion, have embraced and dwelt on its statements without smelling
     the taint of death which is in them? And is there not something of a
     self-convicted mischief in that View of religion, which its
     upholders, independent of each other, and disagreeing with each
     other materially in other points of doctrine and discipline, attempt
     to support by editing a book, as conducive to it, which turns out to
     be all but Socinian? The reason (I believe), why many pious persons
     tolerate a writer such as this, is, that they have so fully
     identified spirituality of mind with the use of certain phrases and
     professions, that they cannot believe that a person who uses them
     freely and naturally can be but taught of the Holy Spirit: to
     believe it otherwise, would be unsettling their minds from the very
     foundation,--which indeed must take place sooner or later whether
     they will or not.

     With some quotations from the preface of one of Mr. A.'s editors,
     one of the most learned, orthodox, and moderate of the Dissenters of
     the day, I will bring this discussion to an end.

     "Mr. Abbott has so much of originality in his manner of thinking,
     and of unguarded simplicity in his style of expression," [as render
     a friendly editor useful.] "There might be peril that, without such
     a precaution, some readers would take a premature alarm, when they
     found some essential doctrines of Christianity conveyed in terms of
     simplicity, and elucidated by very familiar analogies, which appear
     considerably removed from our accredited phraseology. .... Whatever
     use we make of the language of the theological schools, we should
     never go beyond our ability to translate it into the plain speech of
     common life."

     As far as the words go, this means, when duly explained, though the
     writer could not of course intend it, that Mr. A.'s merit consists
     in having translated Trinitarianism into Socinianism. And that this
     is no unfair interpretation of the words, is plain from what
     presently follows, in which he speaks of the prejudice which the
     orthodox language and doctrine of divinity create against orthodoxy
     in the minds of those who are orthodox, all but receiving these
     orthodox statements. In other words, expressly specifying the
     Socinians, he requires us to adopt Mr. A.'s language in order to
     reconcile them to us. I quote his words.

     "But there is one department in the inseparable domain of theology
     and religion, upon Mr. Abbott's treatment of which, I should be very
     blameable, were I to withhold my convictions. Among us, as well as
     in the New England States, there is a body, large and respectable if
     considered absolutely, but far from large when viewed in comparison
     with the numbers of other professed Christians. It consists of those
     who disbelieve the doctrines held, as to their essential principles,
     by all other Christian denominations, with respect to the way in
     which sinful, guilty, degraded mankind may regain the favour of GOD
     and the pure felicity of the world to come;--the doctrines of a
     divine Saviour, His assumption of our nature, His propitiation and
     righteousness, and the restoration of holiness and happiness by His
     all-gracious Spirit. This class of persons is treated, by some
     public men, and in some influential writings, chiefly periodical,
     with scorn and contumely, and are held up to hatred, not to say
     persecution; they are continually represented as blasphemers and
     infidels, alike dangerous to the state, and inimical to all vital
     religion. Hence, thousands of excellent persons, deriving their only
     knowledge from the source to which I have alluded, regard this
     portion of their neighbours with horror, never think of treating
     them with tenderness, never attempt to obtain a lodgment for truth
     and holy affections in their hearts. Ah, little think these well
     meaning persons, &c... . .The circumstances of my life have put me
     into a condition of more correctly knowing this class of our fellow
     professors of Christianity; I know that there are among them
     serious, thoughtful, amiable persons, whose minds are prepossessed
     with prejudices against us and our system, much to the same extent
     as we are against them and theirs. I know, not merely how they
     reason, but how they feel. They in general have extremely erroneous
     conceptions of the orthodox system of faith. They have imbibed those
     misconceptions in early years; and subsequent circumstances have
     contributed to strengthen them. For some of those circumstances, of
     no trivial power to confirm prejudice, we have to blame ourselves.
     This is a state of things full of mischief and danger. Surely it is
     a pressing duty, to do all that we can for clearing away the clouds
     of ignorance and misrepresentation which, with so dire effect,
     discolour and distort the objects seen through them. For this
     purpose, it is to me an heartfelt pleasure to say that Mr. Abbott's
     "Corner Stone" is admirably adapted. Notions producing feelings, and
     those feelings of deep and wide activity in the formation of
     religious sentiments, have been derived from Pelagius, Socinus, and
     Episcopius, from Clarke, Law, and Watson, from Lardner, Priestley,
     and Channing; and it is the thoroughly pervading influence on the
     mind of those mutually acting feelings and sentiments, which
     produces all that is formidable in the theoretical objections, and
     much of that which is effective in the practical repugnance, which
     are entertained by many against the doctrines of grace and holiness,
     through the Atonement and the Spirit of Christ. How desirable to
     meet those feelings in their germinating principle; to anticipate
     those sentiments, by the dissolution of the causes which would form
     them. This is what our author has done. His reasonings and
     illustrations upon the personal and official attributes of our Lord
     and Saviour, are such as may be compared to the correctness of
     anatomical knowledge, the delicacy of touch, find the astonishing
     preciseness of applying the probe and the knife, which we admire in
     the first surgeons of the age."

     A correct and memorable witness indeed, to the kind of treatment
     offered by these religionists to Him, whom, after His exposure on
     the cross, His true disciples reverently "took down," and "wrapped
     in fine linen," and "laid in a sepulchre wherein never man before
     was laid."

     I will conclude by summing up in one sentence, which must be
     pardoned me, if in appearance harsh, what the foregoing discussion
     is intended to show. There is a widely spread, though variously
     admitted School of doctrine among us, within and without the Church,
     which intends and professes peculiar piety, as directing its
     attention to the heart itself, not to any thing external to us,
     whether creed, actions, or ritual. I do not hesitate to assert that
     this doctrine is based upon error, that it is really a specious form
     of trusting man rather than God, that it is in its nature
     Rationalistic, and that it tends to Socinianism. How the individual
     supporters of it will act as time goes on is another matter,--the
     good will be separated from the bad; but the School, as such, will
     pass through Sabellianism, to that "god-denying Apostasy," to use
     the ancient phrase, to which in the beginning of its career it
     professed to be especially opposed.

     OXFORD.

     The Feast of the Purification.

     N. B. For reasons, not necessary here to explain, it may be proper
     to observe, that this Tract was written before the commencement of
     1836.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 Postscript.

     Since the above Essay was in type, an account of Dr.
     Schleiermacher's view of the doctrine of the Trinity, as contained
     in an American Periodical, has been put into the writer's hands, and
     raises very painful feelings. [The Biblical Repository, Nos. 18 and
     19; in which is translated and reviewed "Schleiermacher's Comparison
     of the Athanasian and Sabellian views of the Trinity."]

     It seems, indeed, impossible to doubt that a serious doctrinal error
     is coming as a snare over the whole of the Protestant part of
     Christendom, (every part, at least, which is not fallen into worse
     and more avowed heterodoxy,) being the result of an attempt of the
     intellect to delineate, philosophise, and justify that religion, (so
     called) of the heart and feelings, which has long prevailed. All
     over the Protestant world,--among ourselves, in Ireland, in
     Scotland, in Germany, in British America,--the revival of religious
     feeling during the last century has taken a peculiar form, difficult
     to describe or denote by any distinct appellation, but familiarly
     known to all who ever so little attend to what is going on in the
     general Church. It has spread, not by talents or learning in its
     upholders, but by their piety, zeal, and sincerity, and its own
     incidental and partial truth. At length, as was natural, its
     professors have been led to a direct contemplation of it, to a
     reflection upon their own feelings and belief, and the genius of
     their system; and thence has issued that philosophy of which Mr.
     Erskine and Mr. Abbott have in the foregoing pages afforded
     specimens.

     The American publication above alluded to, is a melancholy evidence
     that the learning and genius of Germany are to be made to bear, by
     the theologians of the United States, in favour of this same (as the
     writer must call it) spurious Christianity. Some passages from it
     shall be here extracted, which will be found to tend to one or other
     of these three objects, all of them more or less professed in the
     two works above analysed.

     1. That the one object of the Christian Revelation, or Dispensation,
     is to stir the affections, and soothe the heart.

     2. That it really contains nothing which is unintelligible to the
     intellect.

     3. That misbelievers, such as Socinians, &c., are made so, for the
     most part, by the Creeds, which are to be considered as the great
     impediments to the spread of the Gospel, both as being
     stumbling-blocks to the reason, and shackles and weights on the
     affections.

     "With regard to Schleiermacher's views as a Trinitarian, I can truly
     say that I have met with scarcely any writer, ancient or modern, who
     appears to have a deeper conviction of, or more hearty belief in,
     the doctrine of the real Godhead of the Father, Son, and Holy
     Spirit.... 'God manifest in the flesh," seems to be inscribed, in
     his view, on every great truth of the Gospel, and to enter as a
     necessary ingredient into the composition of its essential nature.
     Yet Schleiermacher was not made a Trinitarian by creeds and
     confessions. Neither the Nicene nor Athanasian symbol, nor any
     succeeding formula of Trinitarian doctrine, built on this, appears
     to have had any influence in the formation of his views. From the
     Scriptures, and from arguments flowing, as he believed, out of
     Scriptural premises, he became, and lived, and died, a hearty and
     constant believer in the One Living and True God, revealed to us as
     Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.... He ventured to inquire whether, in
     the vehemence of dispute, and in the midst of philosophical mists,
     the former survey had been in all respects made with thorough and
     exact skill and care, and whether a report of it in all respects
     intelligible and consistent had been made out."--Translator, No. 18.
     p. 268, 9.

     "After defending in various places, in the most explicit manner, and
     with great ability, the doctrine of the Godhead of the Son and
     Spirit, and showing that such a development of the Deity is demanded
     by our moral wants, as sinners, in order that we may obtain peace
     and sanctification; he concludes, &c." ibid.

     "Of his view of the Trinity, we may at least say that it is
     intelligible. But who will venture to say, that any of the
     definitions heretofore given of personality in the Godhead in itself
     considered, I mean such definitions as have their basis in the
     Nicene or Athanasian Creeds, are intelligible and satisfactory to
     the mind?" p. 277.

     "The sum of Schleiermacher's opinions... is that... the Unity ... is
     God in se ipso;... but as to the Trinity, the Father is God as
     revealed in the works of creation, providence, and legislation: the
     Son is God in human flesh, the divine Logos incarnate; the Holy
     Ghost is God the sanctifier, who renovates the hearts of sinners,
     and dwells in the hearts of believers. The personality of the
     Godhead consists in these developments, made in time, and made to
     intelligent and rational beings. Strictly speaking, personality is
     not in his view eternal; and from the nature of the case as thus
     viewed, it could not be, because it consists in developments of the
     Godhead to intelligent beings, &c." p. 317.

     "That God has developed himself in these three different ways, is
     what they [Sabellius and Schleiermacher,] believe to be taught in
     the Scriptures, and to be commended to our spiritual consciousness
     by the nature of our wants, woes, and sins." No. 19, p. 81.

     "Dr. Schleiermacher asks, with deep emotion, what more is demanded?
     what more is necessary? what more can further the interest of
     practical piety?" p. 82.

     "I can see no contradiction, no absurdity, nothing even incongruous
     in the supposition, that the Divine Nature has manifested itself as
     Father, &c." p. 88.

     "Why should it ever have any more been overlooked that the names
     Father, &c. are names that have a relative sense.... than that such
     names as Creator, &c." p. 110.

     "It may be proper for me to say, that the results of this
     re-examination of the doctrine of the Trinity are, in their
     essential parts, the same which I some years since advocated in my
     letters addressed to the Rev. Dr. Channing, &c." p. 115.

     These extracts are perhaps sufficient to justify the apprehensions
     above expressed, as far as the more religious part of Protestant
     Germany is concerned. It is believed that Protestant France could be
     made to afford similar evidence of the Sabellian tendencies of the
     day.

                              (SECOND EDITION.)
   These Tracts are published Quarterly, and sold at the price of 2d. for
                      each sheet, or 7s. for 50 copies.
                  LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. G. & F. RIVINGTON,
                 ST. PAUL'S CHURCH YARD, AND WATERLOO PLACE.
          GILBERT & RIVINGTON, Printers, St. John's Square, London.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Project Canterbury
