                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                         THE MINISTERIAL COMMISSION.

             A TRUST FROM CHRIST FOR THE BENEFIT OF HIS PEOPLE.

                                 [Number 17]
     __________________________________________________________________

     IT will be acknowledged by all who have followed the Jewish Church
     through her days of suffering, and who have learnt the deep feeling
     of our own impressive Litany, that the main strength of the Church
     of GOD, in her times of trial and danger, is in the lowliness of her
     humiliation before her heavenly guardian for her many imperfections
     and sins. But there is another element of her strength, which, it is
     to be feared, is sometimes forgotten, though not less essential to
     her character; I mean, her firm and unshaken reliance upon the
     promises of GOD made to her. We find in Daniel's prayer the most
     heart-broken confessions of sin in the name of his Church and
     people; but, at the same time, there is throughout a stedfast hope
     of GOD'S mercy, as pledged to His holy city and temple. "O LORD,
     righteousness belongeth unto Thee, but unto us confusion of face, as
     at this day; to our kinds, to our princes, and to our fathers,
     because we have sinned against Thee." "O LORD, according to all Thy
     righteousness, I beseech Thee, let Thine anger and Thy fury be
     turned away from Thy city Jerusalem, Thy holy mountain; because for
     our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and Thy
     people are become a reproach to all that are about us. O LORD, hear:
     O LORD, forgive; O LORD, hearken and do; defer not, for Thine own
     sake, O my GOD: for Thy city and Thy people are called by Thy Name."
     It can scarcely be necessary to remind the members of our own
     Church, how beautifully the close of her Litany breaches the spirit
     of Daniel's prayer: how, in the midst of reiterated supplications
     for GOD'S forgiveness and mercy, now addressed more especially to
     the SON, now to the FATHER, now to every person of the Blessed and
     Holy Trinity, now in the prevailing words which CHRIST Himself has
     taught us-supplications so deeply expressive of "the sighing of a
     contrite heart, the desire of such as be sorrowful,"-there still
     breaks in a gleam of faith and hope in the memory of the noble works
     which we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared
     unto us, a strong yet humble confidence, that GOD will yet again
     arise and help us, and deliver us for His Name's sake, and for His
     Honour.

     Now this is a point which it is of great importance to have strongly
     impressed upon our minds; because it is to be feared, that there are
     many of our brethren, in the present day, who allow the thoughts of
     present and past transgressions, of our own sins, and those of our
     fathers, to banish entirely the remembrance of the glorious promises
     and privileges which belong to us. They see so much neglected, and
     so much to be done, that they think it were better for us each to
     work apart in lonely humiliation, "in fear and in much trembling,"
     than to endeavour to magnify our office and cheer one another with
     the songs of Zion. now, I would ask, if this notion exist in any of
     our brethren, whether, under the semblance of good, it does not
     argue something of mistaken feeling, and that in more than one
     essential point.

     1. Does not this opinion seem to imply the supposition that the
     dignity conferred on the Ministerial Office, is something given for
     the exaltation of the Clergy, and not for the benefit of the people?
     as if there were a different interest in the two orders, and, in
     maintaining their Divine appointment, the Clergy would make
     themselves "lords over GOD'S heritage?" I do not now enter upon the
     point, that to magnify the office is not necessarily to exalt the
     individual who bears it; nay, that the thought which will most
     deeply humble the individual, most oppress him with the overwhelming
     sense of his own sufficiency, is the consciousness "into how high a
     dignity, and to how weight an office and charge" he has been called;
     an office "of such excellency, and of so great difficulty." I would
     now rather ask, for whose benefit this high and sacred Office has
     been instituted. For the Clergy, or for the people? The Apostle will
     decide this point: "He gave some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; and
     some, Evangelists; and some, Pastors and Teachers; for the
     perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
     edifying of the body of CHRIST." (Eph. iv. l l, 12.) " All things
     are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas." (l Cor. iii. 21.)
     And this, it should be well observed, the Apostle says on purpose to
     put an end to that exaltation of individuals, which the Church of
     Corinth had fallen into from forgetting that their pastors and
     teachers were all "Ministers of CHRIST," Ministers by whom they
     believed "even as the LORD gave to every man." And so again to the
     same Church, and in reference to the same subject, St. Paul says,
     "All things are for YOUR sakes, that the abundant grace might,
     through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of GOD." (2
     Cor. iv. 15.) Scripture then is express upon this point, that
     whatever power and grace CHRIST has given to His Ministers, He has
     given them for the good of His people, and the glory of His heavenly
     FATHER. And do not our own understandings and consciences bear
     witness to the same truth? For what is our commission? Is it not a
     "Ministry of reconciliation?"-"to wit, that GOD was in CHRIST,
     reconciling the world unto Himself;" and hath committed to us the
     proclamation of the pardon? Let us put the case on which the
     Apostle's language is founded; the case, I mean, of a people in
     rebellion against their Sovereign, visited with the news that their
     king is willing, nay, even anxiously desirous to grant them
     forgiveness and favour. In such a case, would not the first question
     be, what authority does this report go upon? who are the persons who
     bring it? is it merely a matter of their individual belief, or are
     they duly authorized and commissioned from the Court; are they come
     as volunteers, or have they been sent by their Master? "Now then WE
     are Ambassadors for CHRIST;" we are sent to "bring good tidings and
     to publish peace," "to preach deliverance to the captives, and the
     opening of the prison to them that are bound;" and if we allow our
     commission to be questioned, nay, if we do not most unequivocally
     and prominently assert it, whom are we robbing? not ourselves of
     honour, but the people, to whom we are sent, of the blessedness and
     joy of knowing, that GOD "desireth not the death of a sinner, but
     rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live;" and that,
     in token of this desire, He "hath given power and commandment to His
     Ministers to declare and pronounce to His people, being penitent,
     the absolution and remission of their sins." We are sent to preach
     good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the broken-hearted, to
     comfort all that mourn; and it is the meek, and the broken-hearted,
     and the mourners, that will feel the loss, if our blessed Office be
     set at nought, or disregarded. Let us well consider this point.
     There is a humble and fearful member of CHRIST'S flock, who desires
     to strengthen and refresh his soul by the Body and Blood of CHRIST;
     but he cannot quiet his own conscience; he requires further comfort
     and counsel. Surely it is to his comfort, that there is a duly
     commissioned Minister of GOD'S Word at hand; to whom he may come and
     open his grief, and receive the benefit of the sentence of GOD'S
     pardon, and so prepare himself to approach the holy Table "with a
     full trust in GOD'S mercy, and with a quiet conscience;" and thus
     draw near with faith, and take that holy Sacrament to his comfort.
     And then again when he lieth sick upon his bed, does not his SAVIOUR
     "make all his bed in his sickness," when his Minister comes to him,
     to receive the confession of his sins, and to relieve his conscience
     of the "weighty" things which press it down: and then, ("if he
     humbly and heartily desire it,") by virtue of CHRIST'S authority
     committed to him, assures him of the pardon of all his sins, that
     so, as his sufferings abound, his consolation also may abound
     through CHRIST; and as his outward man perisheth, the inward man may
     be renewed day by day. How then ought we to look upon the power
     which has been given us by CHRIST, but as a sacred treasure, of
     which we are Ministers and Stewards; and which it is our duty to
     guard for the sake of those little ones, for whose edification (2
     Cor. xiii. 10.) it was that our LORD left power with His Church. And
     if we suffer it to be lost to our Christian brethren, how shall we
     answer it, not only to those that might now rejoice is its holy
     comfort, but to those also who are to come after us? "For the
     promise is unto you and to your children, and unto all that are afar
     off, even as many as the LORD our GOD shall call."

     2. But if we are thus bound by our duty to the Christian flock, are
     we not also still more solemnly bound by our obligation to its Chief
     Shepherd, and Bishop? For we are "Ministers of CHRIST and Stewards
     of the mysteries of GOD;" and "in Stewards it is required that a man
     be found faithful." It becomes us, therefore well to consider and
     know, what is the full amount of the riches which have been
     committed to our care; what is the height and depth of the Mysteries
     which have been entrusted to our keeping; for we serve a Master who
     will strictly require at our hands every talent that He has left
     with us, and rigorously examine whether we have been afraid and hid
     it in a napkin, or have diligently put it out to usury and turned it
     to full account. Let us turn our thoughts again to the
     representation, which St. Paul gives us, of our character and
     calling, "We are Ambassadors for CHRIST." Now what should we think
     of the Ambassador of an earthly king, who when he came among the
     people to whom he was sent, should seem to regard it as a matter of
     slight importance, whether he were indeed commissioned or not, or
     appear willing to conceal the full powers with which he was vested,
     and speak only as an individual? Would this be to be faithful to him
     that appointed him? would his Master own him as a "good and faithful
     servant?" And if we are Ambassadors for CHRIST, His "deputies for
     the reducing of man to the obedience of GOD," we must follow the
     example which our Master has set us, and, as He was, so must we be
     in this world. For He has Himself declared to us, "as My FATHER hath
     sent me, even so send I you." How then did CHRIST fulfil the office
     which His FATHER had committed to Him? Let us look to His discourses
     as recorded in St. John's Gospel, and to the solemn prayer with
     which He concluded His earthly Ministry. We there find Him again and
     again proclaiming that He had been sent from the FATHER; it was for
     this end that He prayed so earnestly for the unity and holiness of
     His Church, that the world might believe that the FATHER had sent
     Him; it was because His chosen disciples had believed that the
     FATHER had sent Him, that He poured forth such fervent thanksgivings
     on their behalf. "I am not come of Myself, but He sent Me." " I have
     not spoken of Myself, but the FATHER which sent Me, He gave Me a
     commandment, what I should say and what I should speak." They have
     known that all things are of Thee; they have known that I came out
     from Thee; they have believed that Thou didst send Me." Thus did
     CHRIST stand in the midst of His generation as an Apostle, as one
     sent from GOD; and so must His deputies likewise stand among their
     brethren; as men sent to a rebellious house, whether they will hear
     or whether they will forbear, speaking with authority-"as though GOD
     did beseech you by us, we pray you in CHRIST'S stead, be ye
     reconciled unto GOD." And if we are asked by what authority we
     speak, and who gave us this authority, we have our credentials at
     hand; "whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whosesoever
     sins ye retain, they are retained." "Verily I say unto you,
     whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and
     whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." "He
     that heareth you, heareth Me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth
     Me; and he that despiseth Me despiseth Him that sent Me." (Vid. St.
     John xx. St. Matt. xviii St. Luke x.)

     If ever, then, we are tempted to be ashamed of CHRIST and o His
     words, or to allow His high and heavenly mission to be thought
     lightly of in the person of His Deputies and Ministers, let us re
     member, that it is no matter of personal consideration, that two
     sacred interests are involved, the glory of GOD, and the edifying of
     His people. Let us remember that, as CHRIST received of the FATHER
     "a commandment," so we too have received a commandment from Him, the
     "commandment" as well as the "power" to declare to His people the
     message of forgiveness; that CHRIST has commanded us to teach all
     nations to observe whatsoever He has commanded us, and then He will
     be with us alway, even to the end of the world. And above all, let
     us not be silenced by the sense of past unworthiness and neglect,
     whether is ourselves individually, or in the Church at large; this
     would be but to add sin to sin. Rather, seeing we have this
     Ministry, this glorious ministration of righteousness (2 Cor. iv. 1.
     comp. ch. iii.), let us not faint; but strive how we may show
     ourselves "dutiful and thankful to that LORD who hath placed us in
     so high a dignity." The world would fain silence our glorying, and
     would have CHRIST rebuke his disciples, but let us not be ashamed of
     the good confession; for with such powers and graces, given to us by
     CHRIST Himself, as Ambassadors for Him, and Workers together with
     GOD, if we should hold our peace, the very stones would immediately
     cry out.
