                            Tracts for the Times
     __________________________________________________________________

                   ON THE CONTROVERSY WITH THE ROMANISTS.

                       (Against Romanism.---No. 1.)

                                 [Number 71]
     __________________________________________________________________

     THE controversy with the Romanists has overtaken us "like a summer's
     cloud." We find ourselves in various parts of the country preparing
     for it, yet, when we look back, we cannot trace the steps by which
     we arrived at our present position. We do not recollect what our
     feelings were this time last year on the subject,---what was the
     state of our apprehensions and anticipations. All we know is, that
     here we are, from long security ignorant why we are not Roman
     Catholics, and they on the other hand are said to be spreading and
     strengthening on all sides of is, vaunting of their success, real or
     apparent, and taunting us with our inability to argue with them.

     The Gospel of Christ is not a matter of mere argument; it does not
     follow that we are wrong, and they are right, because we cannot
     defend ourselves. But we cannot claim to direct the faith of others,
     we cannot check the progress of what we account error, we cannot be
     secure (humanly speaking) against the weakness of our own hearts
     some future day, unless we have learned to analyse and to state
     formally our own reasons for believing what we do believe, and thus
     have fixed our creed in our memories and our judgments This is the
     especial duty of Christian Ministers, who, as St. Paul in the Acts
     of the Apostles, must be ready to dispute, whether with Jews or
     Greeks. That we are at present very ill practised in this branch of
     our duty, (a point it is scarcely necessary to prove) is owing in a
     very great measure to the protection and favour which have long been
     extended to the English clergy by the state. Statesmen have felt
     that it was their interest to maintain a Church, which, absorbing
     into itself a great portion of the religious feeling of the country,
     sobers and chastens what it has so attracted, and suppresses by its
     weight the intractable elements which it cannot persuade; and, while
     preventing the political mischiefs resulting whether from fanaticism
     or selfwill, is altogether free from those formidable qualities
     which distinguish the ecclesiastical genius of Rome. Thus the clergy
     have been in that peaceful condition in which the civil magistrate
     supersedes the necessity of struggling for life and ascendency; and
     amid their privileges it is not wonderful that they should have
     grown secure, and have neglected to inform themselves on subjects on
     which they were not called to dispute. It must be added, too, that a
     feeling of the untenable nature of the Roman doctrines, a contempt
     for their arguments, and a notion that they could never prevail in
     an educated country, have not a little contributed to expose us to
     our present surprise.

     In saying all this, it is not forgotten that there is still
     scattered about the Church much learning upon the subject of
     Romanism, and much intelligent opposition to it: nor on the other
     hand does the present series of Tracts pretend to be more than an
     attempt towards a suitable consideration of it on the part of
     persons who feel in themselves, and see in others a deficiency of
     information.

     It will be the object, then, of these Tracts, should it be allowed
     the editor to fulfil his present intention, to consider variously,
     the one question, with which we are likely to be attacked, why, in
     matter of fact, we remain separate from Rome. Some general remarks
     on the line of argument hence resulting, will be the subject of this
     paper.

     Our position is this. We are seated at our own posts, engaged in our
     own work, secular or religious, interfering with no one, and
     anticipating no harm, when we hear of the encroachments of Romanism
     around us. We can but honour all good Romanists for such aggression;
     it marks their earnestness, their confidence in their own cause, and
     their charity towards those whom they consider in error. We need not
     be bitter against them; moderation, and candour, are virtues under
     all circumstances. Yet for all that, we may resist them manfully,
     when they assail us. This then, I say, is our position, a defensive
     one; we are assailed, and we defend ourselves and our flocks. There
     is no plea for calling on us in England to do more than
     this,---to defend ourselves. We are under no constraint to go out
     of our way spontaneously to prove charges against the Romanists;
     but, when asked about our faith, we give a reason why we are this
     way of thinking, and not that. This makes our task in the
     controversy incomparably easier, than if we were forced to exhibit
     an offensive front, or volunteered articles of impeachment against
     the rival communion. "Let every man abide in the same calling
     wherein he was called," is St. Paul's direction. We find
     ourselves under the Anglican regimen; let every one of us, cleric
     and layman, remain in it, till our opponents have shown cause why we
     should change, till we have reason to suspect we are wrong. The onus
     probandi plainly lies with them. This, I say, simplifies our
     argument, as allowing us to content ourselves with less of
     controversy than otherwise would be incumbent on us. We have the
     strength of possession and prescription. We are not obliged to prove
     them incurably corrupt and heretical; no, nor our own system
     unexceptionable. It is in our power, if we will, to take very low
     ground; it is quite enough to ascertain that reasons cannot be
     brought why we should go over from our side to theirs.

     But besides this, there are the Apostle's injunctions against
     disorder. Did we go over to the Roman Catholics, we should be
     fomenting divisions among ourselves, which would be a prima facie
     case against us. Of course there are cases where division is
     justifiable. Did we believe, for instance, the English Church to be
     absolutely heretical, and Romanism to be pure and Catholic, it would
     be a duty, as the lesser evil, to take part in a division which
     truth demanded. Else it would be a sin. Those dissenters who
     consider union with the state to be apostasy, or the doctrine of
     baptismal regeneration a heresy, are wrong, not in that they
     separate from us, but in that they so think.

     And further, a debt of gratitude to that particular branch of the
     Church Catholic through which God made us Christians, through which
     we were new born, instructed, and (if so be) ordained to the
     ministerial office; a debt of reverence and affection towards the
     saints of that Church; the tie of that invisible communion with the
     dead as well as the living, into which the sacraments introduce us;
     the memory of our great teachers, champions, and confessors, now in
     Paradise, especially of those of the seventeenth century,---
     Hammond's name alone, were there no other, or Hooker's, or
     Ken's,---bind us to the Anglican Church, by cords of love,
     except something very serious can be proved against it. But this
     surely is impossible. The only conceivable causes for leaving its
     communion are, I suppose, the two following; first, that it is
     involved in some damnable heresy, or secondly, that it is not in
     possession of the sacraments: and so far we join issue with the
     Romanist, for these are among the chief points which he attempts to
     prove against us.

     However, plain and satisfactory as is this account of our position,
     it is not sufficient, for various reasons, to meet the need of the
     multitude of men. The really pious and sober among our flocks will
     be contented with it. They will naturally express their suspicion
     and dislike of any doctrine new to them, and it will require some
     considerable body of proof to convince them that they ought even to
     open their ears to it. But it must be recollected, that there is a
     mass of persons, easily caught by novelty, who will be too impetuous
     to be restrained by such advice as has been suggested. Curiosity and
     feverishness of mind do not wait to decide on which side of a
     dispute the onus probandi lies. The same feelings which carry men
     now to dissent, will carry them to Romanism, novelty being an
     essential stimulant of popular devotion, and the Roman system, to
     say nothing of the intrinsic majesty and truth which remain in it
     amid its corruptions, abounding in this and other stimulants of a
     most potent and effective character. And further, there will ever be
     a number of refined and affectionate minds, who, disappointed in
     finding full matter for their devotional feelings in the English
     system, as at present conducted, betake themselves, through human
     frailty, to Rome. Besides, ex parte statements may easily suggest
     scruples even to the more sensible and sober portion of the
     community; and though they will not at all be moved ultimately from
     the principle above laid down, viz. not to change unless clear
     reason for change is assigned, yet they may fairly demand of their
     teachers and guides what they have to say in answer to these
     statements, which do seem to justify a change, not indeed at once,
     but in the event of their not being refuted.

     Thus then we stand as regards Romanism. Strictly speaking, and in
     the eyes of soberly religious men, it ought not to be embraced, even
     could it be made appear in some points superior to (what is now
     practically) the Anglican system; St. Paul even advising a slave to
     remain a slave, though he had the option of liberty. If all men were
     rational, little indeed would be necessary in the way of argument,
     only so much as would be enough to set right the misconceptions
     which might arise on the subject in dispute. But the state of things
     being otherwise, we must consult for men as they are; and in order
     to meet their necessities, we are obliged to take a more energetic
     and striking line in the controversy than can in strict logic be
     required of us, to defend ourselves by an offensive warfare, and to
     expose our opponents' argument with a view of recommending our
     own.

     This being the state of the case, the arguments to be urged against
     Romanism ought to be taken from such parts of the general
     controversy as bear most upon practice, and at the same time kept
     clear of what is more especially sacred, and painful to dispute
     about. Its adherents' assault on us will turn (it is to be
     presumed) on strictly practical considerations. They will admit that
     the English Church approaches in many points very near to
     themselves, and for that very reason was wrong in separating from
     them:---that it is in danger far more as being schismatical than
     as heretical:---that our Lord commanded and predicted that His
     Church should be one; therefore, that the Roman and the Anglican
     communions cannot both be His Church, but that one must be external
     to it:---that the question to be considered by us is, what our
     chance is of being the true Church; and, in consequence, of
     possessing the sacraments:---that we confess Rome to be a branch
     of Christ's Church, and admit her orders, but that Rome does
     not acknowledge us; hence that it is safer for us to unite to
     Rome:---that we are, in matter of fact, cut off from the great
     body of the Church Catholic, and stand by our

     selves:---that we suffer all manner of schism and heresy to
     exist, and to propagate itself among us, which it is inconceivable
     that the true Church, guided by the Holy Spirit, should ever
     do:--- that this circumstance, if there were no other, being an
     inconsistency, involves a prima facie case against us, for the
     consideration of those who are not competent to decide in the matter
     of doctrine:---that, if our creed were true, God would prosper us
     in maintaining it, according to the promise:---moreover, were
     there no other reason, that our forms of administering the
     sacraments are not such as to make us sure that we receive
     God's grace in them. These, and the like arguments, we may
     suppose, will be urged upon the attention of our members, being not
     of a technical and scholastic, but of a powerfully practical
     character; and such must be ours to oppose them. Much might be said
     on this part of the subject. There are a number of arguments which
     are scarcely more than ingenious exhibitions, such as would be
     admired in any game where skill is every thing., but which as
     arguments tell only with those on our own side, while an adversary
     thinks them unfair. Their use is not here denied in matter of fact,
     viz. in confirming those in an opinion, who already hold it, and
     wish reasons for it. When a man is (rightly or wrongly) of one
     particular way of thinking, he needs, and (it may be added)
     allowably needs very little argument to support him in it to
     himself. Still it is right that that argument should be
     substantially sound; substantially, because for major reasons,
     certain accidental peculiarities in the form of it may be necessary
     from the peculiarities of his mind, which has been accustomed to
     more in some one line and not in another. If the argument is
     radically unreal, or (what may be called) rhetorical or sophistical,
     it may serve the purpose of encouraging those who are already
     convinced, though scarcely without doing mischief to them, but
     certainly it will offend and alienate the more acute and sensible;
     while those who are in doubt, and who desire some real and
     substantial ground for their faith, will not bear to be put off with
     such shadows. Thus, for instance, to meet the Romanists' charge
     against us of scepticism, because we do not believe this or that
     portion of their doctrine, an argument has been sustained by
     Protestants, in proof of the scepticism of the Roman system. Who
     does not see that Romanism erring on the whole in superstition not
     in unbelief, this is an unreal argument, which will but offend
     doubting and distressed minds, as if they were played with; however
     plausibly and successfully it might be sustained in a trial of
     strength, and whatever justice there really may be in it? Nor is it
     becoming, over and above its inexpediency, to dispute for victory
     not for truth, and to be careless of the manner in which we urge
     conclusions, however sound and important. Again, when it is said
     that the saints cannot hear our prayers, unless God reveal them to
     them; so that Almighty God, upon the Roman theory, conveys from us
     to them those requests which they are to ask back again of Him for
     us, we are certainly using an unreal, because an unscriptural
     argument; Moses on the Mount having the sin of his people first
     revealed to him by God, that he in turn might intercede with God for
     them. Indeed, it is through Him "in whom we live, and move, and have
     our being," that we are able in this life to hear the requests of
     each other, and to present them to Him in prayer. Such an argument
     then, while shocking and profane to the feelings of a Romanist, is
     shallow even in the judgment of a philosopher. Here may be mentioned
     the warrantable application of texts, such as that of John v. 39.
     "Search the Scriptures," in disproof of the Roman doctrine that the
     Apostles have handed down some necessary truths by Catholic
     Tradition; or again, Eccles. xi. 3. "If the tree fall towards the
     south, or towards the north, in the place where the tree falleth,
     there it shall be," a palmary objection to Purgatory.

     The arguments, then, which we use, must be such as are likely to
     convince serious and earnest minds, which are really seeking for the
     truth, not amusing themselves with intellectual combats, or desiring
     to support an existing opinion any how. However popular these latter
     methods may be, of however long standing, however easy both to find
     and to use, they are a scandal; and, while they lower our religious
     standard from the first, they are sure of hurting our cause in the
     end. But again, our arguments must not only be true and practical,
     they must avoid being abstract arguments and on abstract points. For
     instance, it will do us little good with the common run of men, in
     the question of the Pope's power, to draw the distinction, true
     though it is, between his primacy in honour and authority, and his
     sovereignty or his universal jurisdiction. The force of the
     distinction is not here questioned, but it will be unintelligible to
     minds unpractised in ecclesiastical history. Either the Bishop of
     Rome has really a claim upon our deference, or he has not; so it
     will be urged; and our safe argument at the present day will lie in
     waiving the question altogether, and saying that, even if he has,
     according to the primitive rule, ever so much authority, (and that
     he has some, e. g. the precedence of other bishops, need not be
     denied,) that it is in matter of fact altogether suspended, and
     under abeyance, while he upholds a corrupt system against which it
     is our duty to protest. At present all will see he ought to have no
     "jurisdiction, power, superiority, preeminence, or authority, within
     this realm." It will be time enough to settle his legitimate claims,
     and make distinctions, when he removes all existing impediments to
     our acknowledging him; it will be time enough to argue on this
     subject, after first deciding the other points of the controversy.
     Again, the question of the Rule of Faith is an abstract one to men
     in general, till the progress of the controversy opens its bearings
     upon them. True, the intelligible argument of ultra-Protestantism
     may be taken, and we may say, "The Bible, and nothing but the
     Bible," but this is an unthankful rejection of another great gift,
     equally from God, such as no true Anglican can tolerate. If, on the
     other hand, we proceed to take the sounder view, that the Bible is
     the record of necessary truth, or of matters of faith, and the
     Church Catholic's tradition is the interpreter of it, then we
     are in danger of refined and intricate questions, which are
     uninteresting and uninfluential with the many. It is not till they
     are made to see that certain notable tenets of Romanism depend
     solely on the Apocrypha, or on Tradition, not on Scripture, that
     they will understand why the question of the Rule of Faith is an
     important one.

     It has been already said that our arguments must also keep clear, as
     much as possible, of the subjects more especially sacred. This is
     our privilege in these latter days, if we understand it, that with
     all that is painful in our controversies, we are spared that
     distressing necessity which lay upon the early Church, of discussing
     questions relative to the divine nature. The doctrines of the
     Trinity and Incarnation, form a most distressing subject of
     discussion, for two reasons; first, as involving the direct
     contemplation of heavenly things, when one should wish to bow the
     head and be silent; next as leading to arguments about things
     possible and impossible with God, that is (practically) to a
     rationalistic line of thought. How He is Three and yet One, how He
     could become man, what were the peculiarities of that union, how He
     could be every where as God, yet locally present as man, in what
     sense God could be said to suffer, die, and rise again,---all
     these questions were endured as a burden by the early Christians for
     our sake, who come after; and with the benefit of their victories
     over error, as if we had borne the burden and heat of the day, it
     were perverse indeed in us, to plunge into needless discussions of
     the same character. This consideration will lead us to put into the
     background the controversy about the Holy Eucharist, which is almost
     certain to lead to profane and rationalistic thoughts in the minds
     of the many, and cannot well be discussed in words at all, without
     the sacrifice of "godly fear," while it is weld nigh anticipated by
     the ancient statements, and the determinations of the Church
     concerning the Incarnation. It is true that leaned men, such as
     Stillingfleet, have drawn lines of distinction between the doctrine
     of transubstantiation, and that high mystery; but the question is,
     whether they are so level to the intelligence of the many, as to
     secure the Anglican disputant from fostering irreverence, whether in
     himself or his hearers, if he ventures on such an argument. If
     transubstantiation must be opposed, it is in another way; by
     showing, as may well be done, and as Stillingfleet himself has done,
     that, in matter of fact, it was not the doctrine of the early
     Church, but an innovation at such or such a time; a line of
     discussion which requires learning both to receive and to
     appreciate.

     In order to illustrate the above view, the following are selected by
     way of specimen of those practical grievances, to which Christians
     are subjected in the Roman Communion, and which should be put into
     the foreground in the controversy.

     1. The denial of the cup to the laity. Considering the great
     importance of the holy eucharist to our salvation, this seems a very
     serious consideration for those who seek to be saved. Our Lord says,
     "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His blood, ye
     have no life in you." If it be recriminated, as it sometimes is,
     that we think it no risk to sprinkle instead of immersing in
     baptism, it is obvious to answer that we not only do not forbid, we
     enjoin immersion; we only do not forbid sprinkling in the case of
     infants, and that the laity are defrauded, if defrauded, by their
     own fault, or the fault of the age, not the fault of the Church.

     2. The necessity of the priest's intention to the validity of
     the Sacraments. The Church of Rome has determined, that a Sacrament
     does not confer grace unless the priest means it to do so; so that
     if he be an unbeliever, nay, if he, from malice or other cause,
     withholds his intention, it is not a means of salvation. Now,
     considering what the Romanists themselves will admit, the great
     practical corruption of the Church at various
     times,---considering that infidels and profligates have been in
     the Papal Chair, and in other high stations,---who can answer, on
     the Church of Rome's own ground, that there is still preserved
     to it the Apostolical succession as conveyed in its sacrament of
     Orders? what individual can answer that he himself really receives
     in the consecrated wafer, even that moiety of the great Christian
     blessing which alone remains to him in the Roman Communion? We
     indeed, believe, (and with comfort) that the administration of the
     Sacrament is effectual in those Churches, in spite of their
     undermining their own claim to the gift. Still let it be
     recollected, no one can become a Romanist without believing that the
     Church he has joined has no truer certainty of possessing it than
     that communion which, probably on the very account of its
     uncertainty in this matter, he has deemed it right to abandon.

     3. The necessity of confession. By the council of Trent, every
     member of the Church must confess himself to a priest once a year at
     least. This confession extends to all mortal sins, that is, to all
     sins which either are done willingly or are of any magnitude.
     Without this confession, which must be accompanied by hearty sorrow
     for the things confessed, no one can be partaker of the Holy
     Communion. Here is a third obstacle in the way of our receiving the
     grace of the Sacraments in the Roman Church, which surely requires
     our diligent examination, before it be passed over. That there is no
     such impediment sanctioned in Scripture, is plain, yet to believe in
     it is a point of faith with the Romanist. The practice is grievous
     enough; but it is not enough to submit to it; you must believe that
     it is part of the gospel doctrine, or you are committing one of
     those mortal sins which are to be confessed; and you must believe,
     moreover, that every one who does not believe it, is excluded from
     the hope of salvation. But, not to dwell on the belief in the
     necessity of confession itself, consider the number of points of
     faith which the Church of Rome has set up. You must believe every
     one of them; if you have allowed yourself to doubt any one of them,
     you must repent of it, and confess it to the priest. If you
     knowingly omit any one such doubt you have entertained, and much
     more if you still cherish it, your confession is worse than useless;
     nay, such conduct is considered sacrilege, or the sin against the
     Holy Ghost. Further, if, under such circumstances, you partake of
     the Communion, it is a partaking of it unworthily to your
     condemnation.

     4. The unwarranted anathemas of the Roman Church is a subject to
     which the last head has led us. Here let us put aside, at present,
     the prejudice which has been excited in the minds of Protestants,
     against the principle itself of anathematizing, by the variety and
     comparative unimportance of the subjects upon which the Roman Church
     has applied it m practice. Let us consider sincerely the state of
     the case in that Church. Every Romanist is, by, the creed of his
     Church, in mortal sin, unless he believes every one else excluded
     from Christian salvation, who, with means of knowing, yet declines
     any one of those points which have been ruled to be points of faith.
     If a man for instance, who has had the means of instruction, doubts
     the Church's power of granting indulgences, he is exposed,
     according to the Romanists, to eternal ruin. Now this consideration,
     one would think, ought to weigh with those of our own Church who may
     be half converts to the Roman; not that our own salvation is not our
     first concern, but that such cruelty as this is, such narrowing, the
     Scripture terms of salvation, (for no one can say this doctrine is
     found in Scripture,) is a presumption against the purity of that
     Church's teaching. But a further reflection may be added to the
     above. Such as have not had an opportunity of knowing the truth,
     are, it must be observed, not exposed to this condemnation. This at
     first sight would seem a comfort to those whose relations and
     friends have died in Protestantism. But observe, the Church of Rome,
     we know, retains the practice of praying for the dead. It will be
     natural for a convert from Protestantism, first of all, to turn his
     thoughts towards those dearest relations, say his parents, who have
     lived and diet in involuntary ignorance of Catholicism. He is not
     allowed to do so, he can only pray for the souls in Purgatory; none
     have the privilege of being in Purgatory but such as have died in
     the communion of the Roman Church, and his parents died in
     Protestantism.

     5. Purgatory may be mentioned as another grievous doctrine of
     Romanism. Here again, if Scripture, as interpreted by tradition,
     taught it, we should be bound to receive it; but, knowing as we do,
     that even St. Austin questioned the doctrine in the fifth century,
     we may well suspect the evidence for it. The doctrine is this; that
     a certain definite punishment is exacted by Almighty God for all
     sins committed after baptism; and that they who have not by
     sufferings in this life, whether trouble, penance, and the like, run
     through it, must complete it during the intermediate state in a
     place called Purgatory. Again, all who die in venial sin, that is,
     in sins of infirmity, such as are short of mortal, go to Purgatory
     also. Now what a light does this throw upon the death of beloved and
     revered friends! Instead of their "resting from their labours," as
     Scripture says, there are (ordinarily speaking) none who have not to
     pass a time of trial and purification, and, as Romanists commonly
     believe, in fire, or a torment analogous to fire. There is no one
     who can for himself look forward to death with hope and humble
     thankfulness. Tell the sufferer upon a sick bed that his earthly
     pangs are to terminate in Purgatory, what comfort can he draw from
     religion? If it be said, that it is a comfort in the case of bad
     men, who have begun to repent on their death bed; this is true, I do
     not deny it; still the doctrine, in accordance, be it observed, with
     the ultra-Protestantism of this age, evidently sacrifices the better
     part of the community to the less deserving. Should the foregoing
     reasoning seem to dwell too much on the question of comfortableness
     and uncomfortableness, not of truth, I reply, first, that I have
     already stated that Scripture, as interpreted by tradition, does not
     teach the doctrine; next, that I am arguing against the Romanists,
     who are accustomed to recommend their communion on the very ground
     of its being safer, more satisfactory, and more comfortable.

     6. The Invocation of Saints. Here again the practice should be
     considered, not the theory. Scripture speaks clearly and solemnly
     about Christ as the sole Mediator. When prayer to the Saints is
     recommended at all times and places, as ever present guardians, and
     their good works pleaded in God's sight, is not this such an
     infringement upon the plain word of God, such a violation of our
     allegiance to our only Saviour, as must needs be an insult to Him?
     His honour He will not give to another. Can we with a safe
     conscience do it? Should we act thus in a parallel case even with an
     earthly friend? Does not St. John's example warn us against
     falling down before angels? Does not St. Paul warn us against a
     voluntary humility and worshipping of angels? And are not these
     texts indications of God's will, which ought to guide our
     conduct? Is it not safest not to pay them this extraordinary honour?
     As an illustration of what I mean, I will quote the blessing
     pronounced by the Pope on the assembled people at Easter:---

     "The holy Apostles Peter and Paul, from whom has been derived our
     power and authority, themselves intercede for us to the Lord. Amen."

     "For the prayers and righteous deeds of the blessed Mary, ever
     Virgin, of the blessed Michael the Archangel, of the blessed John
     the Baptist, of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all the
     saints, Almighty God have mercy upon you, and Jesus Christ absolve
     you from all your sins, and bring you to life everlasting. Amen."

     "The Almighty and merciful Lord, grant to you pardon, absolution,
     and remission of all your sins, time for true and fruitful
     penitence, an ever penitent heart, and amendment of life, the grace
     and comfort of the Holy Ghost and final perseverance in good works
     Amen."

     "And the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
     Ghost, come down upon you and remain with you always. Amen."

     7. The Worship of Images might here be added to these instances of
     grievances which Christians endure in the Communion of Rome, were it
     not that in England its rulers seem, at present, to have suspended
     the practice out of policy, though it is expressly recommended by
     the Council of Trent, as if an edifying usage. In consequence of
     thing decree of the Church, no one can become a Romanist, without
     implying his belief that the usage is edifying and right; and this
     itself is a grievance, even though the usage be in this or that
     place dispensed with.

     Such and such-like are the subjects which, it is conceived, should
     be brought into controversy, in disputing with Romanists at the
     present day. An equally important question remains to be discussed;
     viz. What the sources are, whence we are to gather our opinions of
     Popery. Here the Romanists complain of their opponents, that,
     instead of referring to the authoritative documents of their Church,
     Protestants avail themselves of any errors or excesses of
     individuals in it, as if the Church were responsible for acts and
     opinions which it does not enjoin. Thus the legends of relics,
     superstitions about images, the cruelty of particular prelates or
     kings, or the accidental fury of a populace, are unfairly imputed to
     the Church itself. Again, the profligacy of the Popes, at various
     periods, is made an argument against their religious pretensions as
     successors to St. Peter; whereas Caiaphas himself had the gift of
     prophecy, and it is, as they consider, a memorable and instructive
     circumstance, that in matter of fact, among their worst popes are
     found the instruments, in God's hand, of some of the most
     important and salutary acts of the Church. Accordingly they claim to
     be judged by their formal documents, especially by the decrees of
     the Council of Trent.

     Now here we shall find the truth to lie between the two contending
     parties. Candour will oblige us to grant that the mere acts of
     individuals should not be imputed to the body; certainly no member
     of the English Church can in common prudence as well as propriety do
     otherwise, since he is exposed to an immediate retort, in
     consequence of the errors and irregularities which have in
     Protestant times occurred among ourselves. King Henry the VIIIth,
     the first promoter of the Reformation, is surely no representative
     of our faith or feelings; nor Hoadly, in a later age, who was
     suffered to enjoy his episcopate for 46 years; to say nothing of the
     various parties and schools which have existed, and do exist, among
     us.

     So much then must be granted to the Romanists; yet not so much as
     they themselves desire. For though the acts of individuals are not
     the acts of the Church, yet they may be the results, and therefore
     illustrations of its principles. We cannot consent then to confine
     ourselves to a mere reference to the text of the Tridentine decrees,
     as Romanists would have us, apart from the teaching of their
     doctors, and the practice of the Church, which are surely the
     legitimate comment upon them. The case stands as follows. A certain
     system of teaching and practice has existed in the churches of the
     Roman communion for many centuries; this system was discriminated
     and fixed in all its outlines at the Council of Trent. It is
     therefore not unnatural, or rather it is the procedure we adopt m
     any historical research, to take the general opinions and conduct of
     the Church in elucidation of their Synodal decrees; just as we take
     the tradition of the Church Catholic and Apostolic as the legitimate
     interpreter of Scripture, or of the Apostles' Creed. On the
     other hand, it is as natural that these decrees, being necessarily
     concise and guarded, should be much less objectionable than the
     actual system they represent. It is not wonderful then, yet it is
     reasonable, that Romanists should protest against our going beyond
     these decrees in adducing evidence of their Church's doctrine,
     on the ground that nothing more than an assent to them is requisite
     for communion with her: e. g. the Creed of Pope Pius, which is
     framed upon the Tridentine decrees, and is the Roman Creed of
     Communion, only says "I firmly hold there is a Purgatory, and that
     souls therein detained are aided by the prayers of the faithful,"
     nothing being said of its being a place of punishment, nothing, or
     all but nothing, which does not admit of being explained of merely
     an intermediate state.

     Now supposing we found ourselves in the Roman Communion, of course
     it would be a great relief to find that we were not bound to believe
     more than this vague statement, nor should we (I conceive) on
     account of the received interpretation about Purgatory superadded to
     it, be obliged to leave our Church. But it is another matter
     entirely, whether we who are external to that Church, are not bound
     to consider it as one whole system, written and unwritten, defined
     indeed and adjusted by general statements, but not limited to them
     or coincident with them.

     The conduct of the Catholics during the troubles of Arianism affords
     us a parallel case, and a direction in this question. The Arian
     Creeds were often quite unexceptionable, differing from the orthodox
     only in this, that they omitted the celebrated word [homoousion],
     and in consequence did not obviate the possibility of that perverse
     explanation of them, which in fact their framers adopted. Why then
     did the Catholics refuse to subscribe them? Why did they rather
     submit to banishment from one end of the Roman world to the other?
     Why did they become confessors and martyrs? The answer is ready.
     They interpreted the language of the creeds by the professed
     opinions of their framers. They would not allow error to be
     introduced into the Church by an artifice. On the other hand, when
     at Ariminum they were seduced into a subscription of one of these
     creeds, though unobjectionable in its wording, their opponents
     instantly triumphed, and circulated the news that the Catholic world
     had come over to their opinion. It may be added that, in
     consequence, ever since that era, phrases have been banished from
     the language of theology which heretofore had been innocently used
     by orthodox teachers.

     Apply this to the case of Romanism. We are not indeed allowed to
     take at random the accidental doctrine or practice of this or that
     age, as an explanation of the decrees of the Latin Church; but when
     we see clearly that certain of these decrees have a natural tendency
     to produce certain evils, when we see those evils actually existing
     far and wide in that Church, in different nations and ages, existing
     especially where the system is allowed to act most freely, and only
     absent where external checks are present, sanctioned moreover by its
     celebrated teachers and expositors, and advocated by its
     controversialists with the tacit consent of the whole body, under
     such circumstances surely it is not unfair to consider our case
     parallel to that of the Catholics during the ascendancy of Arianism.
     Surely it is not unfair in such a case to interpret the formal
     document of belief by the realized form of it in the Church, and to
     apprehend that, did we express our assent to the creed of Pope Pius,
     we should find ourselves bound hand and foot, as the fathers at
     Ariminum, to the corruptions of those who profess it.

     To take the instances of the Adoration of Images and the invocation
     of Saints. The Tridentine Decree declares that it is good and useful
     suppliantly to invoke the Saints, and that the Images of Christ, and
     the Blessed Virgin and the other Saints should "receive due honour
     and veneration;" words, which themselves go to the very verge of
     what could be received by the cautious Christian, though possibly
     admitting of a honest interpretation. Now we know in matter of fact
     that in various parts of the Roman Church, a worship approaching to
     idolatrous is actually paid to Saints and Images, in countries very
     different from each other, as for instance, Italy and the
     Netherlands, and has been countenanced by eminent men and doctors,
     and that, without any serious or successful protest from any
     quarter: further that, though there may be countries where no
     scandal of the kind exists, yet these are such as have, in their
     neighbourhood to Protestantism, a practical restraint upon the
     natural tendency of their system.

     Moreover, the silence which has been observed, age after age, by the
     Roman Church, as regards these excesses, is a point deserving of
     serious attention;---for two reasons: first, because of the very
     solemn warnings pronounced by our Lord and His Apostle, against
     those who introduce scandals into the Church, warnings which seem
     almost prophetic of such as exist in the Latin branches of it. Next
     it must be considered that the Roman Church has had the power to
     denounce and extirpate them. Not to mention its use of its
     Apostolical powers in other matters, it has had the civil power at
     its command, as it has shown in the case of errors which less called
     for its interference; all of which shows it has not felt sensitively
     on the subject of this particular evil.

     This may be suitably illustrated by an example. Wake, in his
     controversy on the subject of Bossuet's Exposition, observes
     that a Jesuit named Crasset, had published an account of the worship
     due to the Virgin Mary, quite opposed to that which Bossuet had
     expounded as the doctrine of the Roman Church. Bossuet replies, "I
     have not read the book, but neither did I ever hear it mentioned
     there was any thing in it contrary to mine, and that Father would be
     much troubled I should think there was." Wake, in answer, expresses
     his great surprise that Bossuet should not have heard any mention of
     a fact so notorious.

     Bossuet replies, "I still continue to say that I have never read
     Father Crasset's book which they bring against me." "I will
     only add here," he continues, "that Father Crasset himself troubled
     and offended that any one should report his doctrine to be different
     from mine, has made complaints to me; and in preface to the second
     edition of his book, has declared, that he varied in nothing from
     me, unless perhaps in the manner of expression; which, whether it be
     so or no, I leave them to examine, who will please to give
     themselves the trouble." Bossuet is known as the special champion of
     a more moderate exposition of the doctrines of Romanism than that
     which has generally been put upon them. Now he either did agree with
     the Jesuit or he did not. If he did, not a word more need be said
     against the Roman doctrine, as will appear when I proceed to quote
     his words; if he did not, let the reader judge of the peculiar
     sensitiveness of a faith, (as illustrated in a prelate, who for his
     high qualities is a very fair representative of his Church,) which
     can anathematize a denial of Purgatory, or a disapproval of the
     Invocation of Saints, yet can pass sub silentio a class of
     blasphemies, of which the following extracts are an instance.

     It must be first observed that Father Crasset's book is an
     answer to a Cologne tract entitled, "Salutary Advertisements of the
     Blessed Virgin to her indiscreet Adorers;" which is said, by Wake,
     truly, or not, (for this is nothing to the purpose,) to agree with
     Bossuet in its exposition of doctrine. This tract was sent into the
     world with the approbation of the Suffragan Bishop of Cologne, of
     the Vicar-general, the Censure of Ghent, the Canons and Divines of
     Mechlin, the University of Louvain, and the Bishop of Toumay. Father
     Crasset's answer was printed at Paris, licensed by the
     Provincial, approved by three fathers of the Jesuits' body
     appointed to examine it, and authorized by the King. I mention these
     circumstances to show that this controversy was not conducted in a
     corner; to which I may add that, according to Crasset, learned men
     of various nations had also written against the Tract, that the Holy
     See had condemned the author, and that Spain had prohibited him and
     his work from its dominions. We have nothing to do with the doctrine
     of this Tract, good or bad, but let us see hat this Crasset's
     doctrine is on the other hand, thus put forth by the Jesuits in a
     notorious controversy, and accepted on hearsay by Bossuet, wish a
     studious abstinence from the sight of it after the matter of it had
     been brought before him.

     "Whether a Christian that is devout towards the blessed Virgin can
     be damned? Answer. The servants of the blessed Virgin have an
     assurance, morally infallible, that they shall be saved.

     "Whether God ever refuses anything to the blessed Virgin? Answer. 1.
     The Prayers of a Mother so humble and respectful are esteemed a
     command by a Son so sweet and so obedient. 2. Being truly our
     Saviour's mother, as well in heaven as she rag on earth, she
     still retains a kind of natural authority over His person, over His
     goods, and over His omnipotence; so that, as Albertus Magnus says,
     she can not only entreat Him for the salvation of her servants, but
     by her motherly authority can command him; and as another expresses
     it, the power of the Mother and of the Son is all one, she being by
     her omnipotent Son made herself omnipotent.

     "Whether the blessed Virgin has ever fetched any out of hell?
     Answer. 1. As to purgatory, it is certain that the Virgin has
     brought several souls from thence, as well as refreshed them whilst
     they were there. 2. It is certain she fetched many out of hell: i.
     e. from a state of damnation before they were dead 3. The Virgin
     can, and has fetched men that were dead in mortal sin out of hell,
     by restoring them to life again, that they might repent...........

     "The practice of devotion towards her. 1. To wear her scapulary;
     which whoso does shall not be damned, hut this habit shall be for
     them a mark of salvation, a safeguard in dangers, and a sign of
     peace and eternal alliance.

     "They that wear this habit, shall be moreover delivered out of
     Purgatory the Saturday after their death. 2. To enter her
     congregation. And if any man be minded to save himself, it is
     impossible for him to find out any more advantageous means, than to
     enrol himself into these companies. 3. To devote oneself more
     immediately to her service, &c. &c.

     "Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that
     offences come, but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!
     Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off and cast
     them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or
     maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into
     everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend thee pluck it out, and
     cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one
     eye, rather than having two eyes, to be cast into hell fire."

     Bossuet's name has been mentioned in evidence of the really
     existing connection between the decrees of Trent and the popular
     opinions and practices in the Roman Church, as regards the matters
     they treat of. But the labours of that celebrated divine in the
     cause of his Church introduce us to very varied and extensive
     illustrations of another remark which has been incidentally made in
     the course of our discussion.

     It was observed that the legitimate meaning of the Tridentine
     decrees might be fairly ascertained by comparing together those of
     the Latin Churches, where the system was allowed to operate freely,
     and those in which the presence of Protestantism acted as a check
     upon it. This has been remarkably exemplified in the history of the
     controversy during the last one hundred and fifty years, that is,
     since the time of Bossuet, who seems to have been nearly the first
     who put on the Tridentine decrees a meaning more consonant with
     Primitive Christianity, distinguishing between the doctrines of the
     Church, and of the Schools. This new interpretation has been widely
     adopted by the Romanists, and, as far as our own islands are
     concerned, may be considered to be the received version of their
     creed; and one should rejoice in any appearance of amelioration in
     their system, were not the present state of Italy and Spain, where
     no check exists, an evidence what that system still is, and that, in
     course of time, it would, in all probability, be among ourselves,
     did an universal reception of it put an end to the restraint which
     controversy at present imposes on them.

     Bossuet's Exposition, which contains the modified doctrine
     above spoken of, was looked at with great suspicion at Rome, on its
     first appearance, and was with difficulty acknowledged by the Pope.
     It is said to have been written originally with the purpose of
     satisfying Marshal Turenne, who became, in consequence, a convert to
     Romanism. It was circulated in manuscript several years, and was
     considered to be of so liberal a complexion, according to the
     doctrine of that day, as to scandalize persons of his own communion,
     and to lead Protestants to doubt whether the author dare ever own
     it. In the year 1671, it was, with considerable alterations,
     committed to the Press with the formal approbation of the Archbishop
     of Rheims and nine other Bishops, but on objections being urged
     against it by the Sorbonne the press was stopped, and not till after
     various alterations was it resumed, with the suppression of the
     copies which had already been struck off. It is affirmed by Wake
     without contradiction (I believe) from his opponents, that even with
     these corrections it was of so novel an appearance to the Romanists
     of that day, that an answer from one of Bossuet's own communion
     was written to it, before the Protestants began to move, though the
     publication was suppressed. The Roman See at last accorded its
     approbation, but not before the conversions which it effected had
     recommended it to its favour.

     It may be instructive to specify some instances of this change of
     doctrine, or of interpretation of doctrine, (if it must so be
     called,) which Bossuet is accused of introducing.

     1. In the private impression of his Exposition, as the suppressed
     portion of the edition may be called, Bossuet says,

     "Furthermore, there is nothing so unjust as to accuse the Church of
     placing all her piety in these devotions to the Saints; since on the
     contrary she lays no obligation at all on particular persons to join
     in this practice ......By which it appears clearly that the Church
     condemns only those, who refuse it out of contempt, or by a spirit
     of dissension and revolt."

     In the second or published edition, the words printed in italics
     were omitted, the first clause altogether, and the second with the
     substitution of "out of disrespect or error."

     2. Again, in the private impression he had said,

     "So that it (the Mass) may very reasonably be called a sacrifice."

     He raised his doctrine in the second as follows;

     "So that there is nothing wanting to it to make it a true
     sacrifice."

     In giving these instances, I am far from insinuating that there is
     any unfairness in such alterations. Earnestly desiring the
     conversion of Protestants, Bossuet did but attempt to place the
     doctrines of his Church in the light most acceptable to them. But
     they seem to show thus much: first that he was engaged in a novel
     experiment, which circumstances rendered necessary, and was trying
     how far he might safely go; secondly that he did not carry with him
     the body of the Gallican divines. In other words, we have no
     security that this new form of Romanism is more stable than one of
     the many forms of Protestantism which rise and fall around us in our
     own country, which are matters of opinion, and depend upon
     individuals.

     3. But again, after all the care bestowed on his work, Bossuet says
     in his exposition as ultimately published:

     When the Church pays an honour to the Image of an Apostle or Martyr,
     the intention is not so much to honour the image, as to honour the
     apostle or martyr in the presence of the image.... Nor do we
     attribute to them any other virtue but that of exciting in us the
     remembrance of those they represent. p. 8.

     To this his Vindicator adds,

     The use we make of images or pictures is purely as representatives,
     or memorative signs, which call the originals to our remembrance. p.
     35.

     Now with these passages contrast the words of Bellarmine, who, if
     any one, might be supposed a trustworthy interpreter of the Roman
     doctrine.

     "The images of Christ and of the saints are to be venerated not only
     by accident and improperly, but properly and by themselves, so that
     they themselves are the end of the veneration [ut ipsae terminent
     venerationem] as considered in themselves, and not only as they are
     copies." De Imagin. lib. ii. c. 21.

     Again, in the Pontifical we are instructed that to the wood of the
     Cross "divine worship (latria) is due;" and that saving virtues for
     soul and body proceed from it; which surely agrees with the doctrine
     of Bellarmine as contained in the above extract, not with that of
     Bossuet.

     4. The Vindicator of Bossuet speaks of the Mass to the following
     effect:

     "The council tells us it was instituted only to represent that which
     was accomplished on the Cross, to perpetuate the memory of it to the
     end of the world, and apply to us the saving virtue of it, for those
     sins which we commit every day .......When we say that Christ is
     offered in the Mass, we do not understand the word offer in the
     strictest sense, but as we are said to offer to God what we present
     before him. And thus the Church does not doubt to say, that she
     offers up our Blessed Jesus to His Father in the Eucharist, in which
     He vouchsafes to render Himself present before Him."

     But the Tridentine Fathers say in their Canons that,

     "the Mass is a true and proper sacrifice; a sacrifice not only
     commemoratory of that of the Cross, but also truly and properly
     propitiatory for the dead and the living."

     And Bellarmine says,

     "A true and real sacrifice requires a true and real death or
     destruction of the thing sacrificed." De Missa lib. i. c. 27.

     And then he proceeds to show how this condition of the notion of a
     sacrifice is variously fulfilled in the Mass.

     Leaving Bossuet, let us now turn to the history of the controversy
     in our own country, whether in former or recent times; and here I
     avail myself of an article of a late lamented Prelate of our Church,
     in a periodical work ten years since. As to the particular instances
     adduced, it must be recollected that they are not dwelt on as a
     sufficient evidence by themselves of that difference of view between
     members of the Roman Church at various times and places, which is
     under consideration, but as mere illustrations of what is presumed
     to be an historical fact.

     The following extract from Dr. Doyle's Evidence before the
     Committee of the House of Commons on the subject of the Roman
     Catholic doctrines:

     "The Committee find, in a treatise called ;A Vindication of the
     Roman Catholics,' the following curse; ;Cursed is every
     goddess worshipper, that believes the Virgin Mary to be any more
     than a creature, that honours her, worships her, or puts his trust
     in her more than in God; that honours her above her Son, or believes
     that she can in any way command Him.' Is that acknowledged?
     Ans. That is acknowledged; and every Roman Catholic in the world
     would say with Gother, accursed be such person."

     Such is the received Romanism of the English Papists at this day;
     and accordingly Dr. Challoner has translated the famous words in the
     office of the blessed Virgin:

     "Monstra te esse Matrem
     Sumat per te preces,"

     by

     "Exert the Mother's care,
     And us thy children own,
     To Him convey our prayer, &c."

     On the other hand consider the following passage in the controversy
     between Jewell and Harding. Jewell accused the Roman Church with
     teaching that the blessed Virgin could command her Son. Harding
     replies as follows,

     "If now any spiritual man, such as St. Bernard was, deeply
     considering the great honour and dignity of Christ's mother, do
     in excess of mind, spiritually sport with her, bidding her to
     remember that she is a Mother, and that thereby she has a certain
     right to command her Son, and require, in a most sweet manner; that
     she use her right; is this either impiously or impudently spoken? Is
     not he, rather, most impious and impudent that findeth fault
     therewith?"

     Again, we find in Peter Damiani, a celebrated divine of the eleventh
     century, the following words:

     "She approaches to that golden tribunal of divine Majesty, not
     asking, but commanding, not a handmaid but a Mistress."

     Albertus Magnus in like manner,

     "Mary prays as a daughter, requests as a sister, commands as a
     mother."

     Another writer says,

     "The blessed Virgin, for the salvation of her supplicants, can not
     only supplicate her Son, as other saints do, but also by her
     maternal authority command her Son. Therefore the Church prays,
     "Monstra te esse Matrem;" as if saying to the Virgin, Supplicate for
     us after the manner of a command, and with a mother's
     authority."

     After these instances the article from which I cite asks, not
     unreasonably, "Upon whom does the anathema of Gother fall?"

     Another instance of this unsteady, and (if it may so be called)
     untrustworthy conduct of the Roman Church, occurs in respect to
     their doctrine of Repentance; which is well pointed out by a recent
     writer in the British Magazine. His account is as follows.

     "The Romish tenet most pregnant with moral mischief is, probably,
     that which promises salvation to mere Attrition, [i.e. sorrow for
     sin arising from a view of its turpitude, or fear of
     punishment]..... Now it should be generally known that a Romish
     divine pressed in argument is very likely to pronounce salvability
     from Attrition only, as nothing more than a Scholastic doctrine, to
     which his Church does not stand committed. He might be reminded of
     the Trentine Catechism, which declares real Contrition, [i. e.
     hearty sorrow for sin proceeding immediately from the love of God
     above all things, and joined with a firm purpose of amendment,] to
     be found in very few; and hence deduces the necessity of an easier
     way for the salvation of men in general. His answer would be, that
     the Catechism is not a decree of the Council, and, therefore, not
     like one binding as an article of faith. It is indeed true, that the
     Council here has spoken more vaguely and guardedly than the
     Catechism. Pallavicino represents the Trentine Fathers accordingly
     as intending merely to condemn an opinion of their adversaries,
     which branded the fear of punishment with baseness...... However a
     nice scrutiny may dispose of this doctrine, it is in fact broadly
     asserted in the manual drawn up for instructing ordinary clergymen,
     under authority of the Trentine Council, though not completed till
     that body was dissolved. This manual too was promulged under papal
     sanction, expressly conferred upon the Roman see for that very
     purpose by the Council. The Catechismus ad Parochos has been
     accordingly ever since, what it was intended to be, a text book for
     the Romish clergy .... Nor is it doubtful that it speaks the feeling
     and intention of this council upon the question of Attrition; only
     the Trentine fathers here knew themselves to be on treacherous
     ground, and therefore they discreetly left a vague outline which
     might be filled up by better, because less responsible hands."

     The following are farther illustrations of the distinction observed
     in the Roman Church between Catholic verities and the opinions of
     the schools. In presenting them to the reader, I have no purpose of
     denying that there is a distinction really, and that it may properly
     be insisted on, but I deny it exists in the particular cases, in
     which what is professed to be but an opinion, is more or less the
     genuine practical meaning of the Tridentine decrees.

     "It is de fide to believe that there is a purgatory; it is not de
     fide to believe that the fire of purgatory is true and proper, or of
     the same species as the material element,---or that it is in this
     or that place, or that it lasts for this or that period. It is de
     fide that the saints may well and profitably be invoked; it is not
     de fide that they hear our prayers, though it be certain and true.
     It is de fide that the relics of the saints should be venerated; it
     is not de fide that these or those relics are genuine. It is de fide
     that man is justified by inherent righteousness; it is not de fide
     that justifying righteousness is a habit or quality."

     Enough, perhaps, has nor been said on the mode in which it is
     expedient at the present day to carry on the controversy with
     Romanism,---which of its doctrines are to be selected for attack,
     what authorities are to be used in ascertaining them, and what
     arguments are to be employed against them. Some remarks shall be
     added before concluding, as to the best mode of conducting the
     defence of our own Church.

     Let it be observed that, in our argument with the Romanists, we
     might, if needful, be very liberal in our confessions about
     ourselves, without at all embarrassing our position in consequence.
     While we are able to maintain the claim of our clergy to the
     ministration of the Sacraments, and our freedom from any deadly
     heresy, we have nothing to fear from any historical disclosures
     which the envy of adversaries might contrive against our Church, or
     from any external appearances which it may present at this day to
     the superficial observer. Whatever may be the past mistakes of
     individual members of it, or the tyranny of aliens over it, or its
     accidental connexion with Protestant persuasions, still these hinder
     not its having "the ministration of the Word and Sacraments;" and
     having them, it has sufficient claims on our filial devotion and
     love. This being understood then, the following remarks are made
     with a view of showing how far, if necessary, we may safely go in
     our admissions.

     1. We may grant in the argument that the English Church has
     committed mistakes in the practical working of its system; nay is
     incomplete even in its formal doctrine and discipline. We require no
     enemy to show us the probability of this, seeing that her own
     Article expressly states that the primitive Churches of Antioch and
     Alexandria, as well as that of Rome, have erred, "not only in their
     living and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of faith." Much
     more is a Church exposed to imperfection, which embraces but a
     narrow portion of the Catholic territory, has been at the distance
     of 1500 to 1800 years from the pure fountains of tradition, and is
     surrounded by political influences of a highly malignant character.

     2. Again, the remark may seem paradoxical at first sight, yet surely
     it is just, that the English Church is for certain deficient in
     particulars, because it does not profess itself infallible. I mean
     as follows. Every thoughtful mind must at times have been beset by
     the following doubt: "How is it that the particular Christian body
     to which I belong happens to be the right one? I hear every one
     about me saying his own society is alone right, and others wrong: is
     not every one as much justified in saying so as every one else? is
     not any one as much justified as I am? In other words, the truth is
     surely no where to be found pure, unadulterate and entire, but is
     shared through the world, each Christian body having a portion of
     it, none the whole of it." A certain liberalism is commonly the
     fruit of this perplexity. Men are led on to gratify the pride of
     human nature, by standing aloof from all systems, forming a truth
     for themselves and countenancing this or that denomination of
     Christians according as each maintains portions of that which they
     have already assumed to be the truth. Now the primitive Church
     answered this question, by appealing to the simple fact that all the
     Apostolic Churches all over the world did agree together. True there
     were sects in every country, but they bore their own refutation on
     their forehead, in that they were of recent origin; but all those
     societies in every count, which the Apostles had founded, did agree
     together in one, and no time short of the Apostles' could be
     assigned, with any show of argument, for the use of their existing
     doctrine. This doctrine in which they agreed was accordingly called
     Catholic truth, and there was plainly no room at all for asking,
     "Why should my own Church be more true than
     another's?"---But at this day, it seed not be said, such an
     evidence is lost, except as regards the articles of the Creeds. It
     is a very great mercy that the Church Catholic over the world, as
     descended from the Apostles, does at this day speak one and the same
     doctrine about the Trinity and Incarnation, as it has always spoken
     it, excepting in one single point, which rather probat regulam than
     interferes with it, viz. as to the procession of the Holy Ghost from
     the Son. With this solitary exception, we have the certainty of
     possessing the entire truth as regards the high theological
     doctrines, by an argument which supersedes the necessity of arguing
     from Scripture against those who oppose them. It is quite impossible
     that all countries should have agreed to that which was not
     Apostolic. They are a number of concordant witnesses to certain
     definite truths, and while their testimony is one and the same from
     the very first moment they publicly utter it, so on the other hand,
     if there be bodies which speak otherwise, we can show historically
     that they rose later than the Apostles. This majestic evidence,
     however, does not extend to any but to the articles of the Creed,
     especially those relating to the Trinity and Incarnation. The
     primitive Church was never called upon, whether in Council or by its
     divines, to pronounce upon other points of faith, and the later
     Church has differed about them; especially about those on which the
     contest turns between Romanism and ourselves. Here neither Rome nor
     England can in the same sense appeal to Catholic testimony; and,
     this being the case, a member of the one or the other Church might
     fairly have the antecedent scruple rise in his mind, why his own
     communion should have the whole truth, why on the contrary the rival
     communion should not have a share of it, and the truth itself lie
     midway between them. This is the question of a philosophical mind,
     and the Church of Rome meets it with a theory, perfectly
     satisfactory, provided only it be established as a fact, viz. the
     theory of infallibility. The actual promise made, as they contend,
     to St. Peter's chair as the centre of unity, would undoubtedly
     account for truth being wholly in the Roman Communion, not in the
     English, and solve the antecedent perplexity in question. But the
     English Church, taking no such high ground as this, certainly is
     open to the force, such as it is, of the objection, or (as it was
     just now expressed) on the prima facie view of the case is unlikely
     to have embraced the whole counsel of GOD, because she does not
     assume infallibility; and consequently no surprise or distress
     should be felt by her dutiful sons, should that turn out to be the
     fact, which her own principles, rightly understood, would lead them
     to anticipate. At the same time it must carefully be remembered,
     that this admission involves no doubt or scepticism as regards the
     more sacred subjects of theology, of which the Creed is the summary;
     these having been witnessed from the first by the whole
     Church,---being witnessed too at this moment, in spite of later
     corruptions, both by the Latin and Greek Communions.

     A consideration has been suggested in the last paragraph on which
     much might be said on a fitting occasion; it is (what may be called)
     a great Canon of the Gospel, that Purity of faith depends on the
     Sacramentum Unitatis. Unity is the whole body of the Church, as it
     is the divinely blessed symbol and pledge of the true faith, so also
     it is the obvious means (even humanly speaking) of securing it. The
     Sacramentum was first infringed during the quarrels of the Greeks
     and Latins; it was shattered in that great schism of the sixteenth
     century which issued in some parts of Europe in the Reformation, in
     others in the Tridentine Decrees, our own Church keeping the nearest
     of any to the complete truth. Since that era at least, Truth has not
     dwelt amply and securely in any visible Tabernacle. This view of the
     subject will illustrate for us the last words of Bishop Ken
     contained in his will:---"As for my religion, I die in the Holy
     Catholic and Apostolic faith, professed by the whole Church before
     the disunion of East and West; more particularly I die in the
     communion of the Church of England, as it stands distinguished from
     all Papal and Puritan innovations, and as it adheres to the doctrine
     of the Cross."

     3. Another antecedent ground for anticipating wants and
     imperfections in the English Church lies in the circumstances under
     which the reformation of its doctrine and worship was effected. It
     is now universally admitted as an axiom in ecclesiastical and
     political matters that sudden and violent changes must be injurious;
     and though our own revolution of opinion and practice was happily
     slower and more carefully considered than those of our neighbours,
     yet it was too much influenced by secular interests, sudden external
     events, and the will of individuals, to carry with it any vouchers
     for the perfection and entireness of the religious system thence
     emerging. The proceedings for instance of 1536, remind us at once of
     the dangers to which the Church was exposed, and of its providential
     deliverance from the worst part of them: the articles then framed
     being, according to Burnet, "in several places corrected and
     tempered by the king's" (Henry's) "own hand." Again, the
     precise structure of our present liturgy, so primitive and edifying
     in its matter, is confessedly owing to the successive and
     counteracting influences exerted on it, among others, by Bucer and
     Queen Elizabeth. The Church did not make the circumstances under
     which it found itself, and therefore is free from the responsibility
     of imperfections to which these gave rise. These imperfections
     followed in two ways. First, the hurry and confusion of the times
     led, as has been said, to a settlement of religion incomplete and
     defective: secondly, the people, not duly apprehending even what was
     soundly propounded as being new to them, and unable to digest
     healthy food after long desuetude, gave a false meaning to it, went
     into opposite extremes, and fashioned into unseemly habits and
     practices those principles which in themselves conveyed a wholesome
     and edifying doctrine. These considerations cannot fairly be taken
     in disparagement of the celebrated men who were the instruments of
     Providence in the work, and who doubtless felt far more keenly than
     is here expressed the perplexities of their situation; but they will
     serve perhaps to reconcile our minds to our circumstances in these
     latter ages of the Church, and will cherish in us a sobriety of
     mind, salutary in itself, and calculated more than any thing else to
     arm us against the arguments of Rome, and to turn in affection and
     sympathy towards the afflicted Church, which has been the "Mother of
     our new-birth." They will but lead us to confess that she is in a
     measure in that position which we fully ascribe to her Latin sister,
     in captivity; and they will make us understand and duly use the
     prayers of our wisest doctors and rulers, such as Bishop Andrews,
     that God would please to "look down upon His holy Catholic and
     Apostolic Church, in her captivity; to visit her once more with His
     salvation, and to bring her out to serve Him in the beauty of
     holiness."

     4. A further antecedent reason for anticipating practical
     imperfections in the Anglican system, (and to those mainly allusion
     is here made), arises from the circumstance that our Articles, so
     far as distinct from the ancient creeds, are scarcely more than
     protests against specific existing errors of the 16th century, and
     neither are nor profess to be a system of doctrine. It is not
     unnatural however that they should have practically superseded that
     previous Catholic teaching altogether, which they were but modifying
     in part, and, though but corrections, should be mistaken for the
     system corrected.

     These reasonings prepare us to acquiesce in much of plausible
     objection being admissible against our Church, even in the judgment
     of those who love and defend it. When, however, we proceed to
     examine what its defects really are, we shall find them to differ
     from those of Rome in this all-important respect, which indeed has
     already been in pat hinted, that they are but omissions. Rome
     maintains positive errors, and that under the sanction of an
     anathema; but nothing call be pointed out in the English Church
     which is not true; as far as it goes, and even when it opposes Rome,
     with a truly Apostolical toleration, it utters no ban or
     condemnation against its adherents. On the other hand the omissions,
     such as they are, or rather obscurities of Anglican doctrine, may be
     supplied for the most part by each of us for himself, and thus do
     not interfere with the perfect development of the Christian temper
     in the hearts of individuals, which is the charge fairly adducible
     against Romanism. Such for instance is the phraseology used in
     speaking of the Holy Eucharist, which though on the whole protected
     safe through a dangerous time by the cautious Ridley, yet in one or
     two places was clouded by the interpolations of Bucer, through an
     anxiety in some quarters to unite all the reformed Churches under
     episcopal government against Rome. And such is the omission of any
     direct safeguard in the Articles, against disbelief of the doctrine
     of the Apostolical Succession.

     And again, for specimens of the perverse reception by the nation, as
     above alluded to, of what was piously intended, I would refer to the
     popular sense put upon the eleventh article, which, though clearly
     and soundly explained in the Homily on Justification or Salvation,
     has been taken to countenance the wildest Antinomian doctrine, and
     is now so associated in the minds of many with this wrong
     interpretation, as to render almost hopeless the recovery of the
     true meaning.

     And such again is the mischievous error, in which the Church in her
     formal documents certainly has no share, that we are but one among
     many Protestant bodies, and that the differences between Protestants
     are of little consequence; whereas the English Church, as such, is
     not Protestant, only politically, that is, externally, or so far as
     it has been made an establishment, and subjected to national and
     foreign influences. It claims to be merely Reformed, not Protestant,
     and it repudiates any fellowship with the mixed multitude which
     crowd together, whether at home or abroad, under a mere political
     banner. That this is no novel doctrine, is plain from the emphatic
     omission of the word Protestant in all our Services, even in that
     for the fifth of November, as remodelled in the reign of King
     William; and again from the protest of the Lower House of
     Convocation at that date, on this very subject, which would have had
     no force, except as proceeding upon recognized usages. The
     circumstance here alluded to was as follows. In 1689 the Upper House
     of Convocation agreed on an address to King William, to thank him
     "for the grace and goodness expressed in his message, and the zeal
     shown in it for the Protestant Religion in general, and the Church
     of England in particular." To this phrase the Lower House objected,
     as importing, as Birch in his Life of Tillotson says, "their owning
     common union with the foreign Protestants." A conference between the
     two Houses ensued, when the Bishops supported their wording of the
     address, on the ground that the Protestant Religion was the known
     denomination of the common doctrine of such parts of the West as had
     separated from Rome. The Lower House proposed, with other
     alterations of the passage, the words "Protestant Churches," for
     "Protestant Religion," being unwilling to acknowledge religion as
     separate from the Church. The Upper House in turn amended
     thus,---"the interest of the Protestant Religion in this and all
     other Protestant Churches;" but the Lower House, still jealous of
     any diminution of the English Church by this comparison with foreign
     Protestants, persisted in their opposition, and gained at length
     that the address, after thanking the King for his zeal for the
     Church of England, should proceed to anticipate, that thereby "the
     interest of the Protestant Religion in" [not "this and" but] "all
     other Protestant Churches would be better secured." Birch adds, "the
     King well understood why this address omitted the thanks which the
     Bishops had recommended, for .... the zeal which he had shown for
     the Protestant Religion; and why there was no expression of
     tenderness to the Dissenters, and but a cool regard to the
     Protestant Churches."

     Another great practical error of members of our Church, has been
     their mode of defending its doctrines, and this has arisen, not from
     any direction of the Church itself, but, as it would appear, from
     the mistake, already mentioned of the specific protests contained in
     its Articles for that Catholic system, which is the rightful
     inheritance of it as well as other branch of the Church. We have
     indeed too often fought the Romanists on wrong grounds, and given up
     to them the high principles maintained by the early Church. We have
     tacitly yielded the major premise of our opponents' argument,
     when we should have denied the fact expressed in the minor. For
     instance; they have maintained that Transubstantiation was an
     Apostolical doctrine, a having been ever taught every where in the
     Church. We instead of denying this fact as regards
     Transubstantiation, have acted as if it mattered very little whether
     it were true or not, (whereas the principle is most true and
     valuable,) and have proceeded to oppose Transubstantiation on
     supposed grounds of reason. Again, we have argued for the sole
     Canonicity of the Bible to the exclusion of tradition, not on the
     ground that the Fathers so held it, (which would be an irrefragable
     argument,) but on some supposed internal witness of Scripture to the
     fact, or some abstract and antecedent reasons against the Canonicity
     of unwritten teaching. Once more, we have argued the
     unscripturalness of image worship as its only condemnation; a mode
     of argument, which I am very far indeed from pronouncing untenable,
     but which opens the door to a multitude of refined distinctions and
     pleas; whereas the way lay clear before us to appeal to history, to
     appeal to the usage of the early Church Catholic, to review the
     circumstances of the introduction of image worship, the Iconoclast
     controversy, the Council of Frankfort, and the late reception of the
     corruption in the West.

     So much then, on the objections which may be urged against the
     English Church, which relate either to mere omissions not positive
     errors, or again to faults in the practical working of the system,
     and are in these respects dissimilar from those which lie against
     the Church of Rome, and which relate to clear and direct perversions
     and corruptions of divine truth. Should it, however, be asked,
     whence our knowledge of the truth should be derived, since there is
     so much of meagreness and mistake in our more popular expounders of
     it, it may be replied, first, that the writings of the Fathers
     contain abundant directions how to ascertain it; next, that their
     directions are distinctly propounded and supported by our Divines of
     the seventeenth century, though little comparatively at present is
     known concerning those great authors. Nor could a more acceptable or
     important service be done to our Church at this present moment, than
     the publication of some systematic introduction to theology,
     embodying and illustrating the great and concordant principles and
     doctrines set forth by Hammond, Taylor, and their brethren before
     and after them.

     Lastly, Should it be inquired whether this admission of
     incompleteness in our own system does not lead to projects of change
     and reform, on the part of individuals, it must be answered plainly
     in the negative. Such an admission has but reference to the question
     of abstract perfection; as a practical matter, it will be our wisdom
     as individuals to enjoy what GOD'S good providence has left us,
     lest, striving to obtain more, we lose what we still possess.

     OXFORD.
     The Feast of the Circumcision.
     __________________________________________________________________

   return to [1]Project Canterbury

References

   1. file:///
